                                                                           CHAPTER 6

This chapter describes the interrupt and exception-handling mechanism when operating in protected mode on an
Intel 64 or IA-32 processor. Most of the information provided here also applies to interrupt and exception mecha-
nisms used in real-address, virtual-8086 mode, and 64-bit mode.
Chapter 20, “8086 Emulation,” describes information specific to interrupt and exception mechanisms in real-
address and virtual-8086 mode. Section 6.14, “Exception and Interrupt Handling in 64-bit Mode,” describes infor-
mation specific to interrupt and exception mechanisms in IA-32e mode and 64-bit sub-mode.

6.1         INTERRUPT AND EXCEPTION OVERVIEW
Interrupts and exceptions are events that indicate that a condition exists somewhere in the system, the processor,
or within the currently executing program or task that requires the attention of a processor. They typically result in
a forced transfer of execution from the currently running program or task to a special software routine or task
called an interrupt handler or an exception handler. The action taken by a processor in response to an interrupt or
exception is referred to as servicing or handling the interrupt or exception.
Interrupts occur at random times during the execution of a program, in response to signals from hardware. System
hardware uses interrupts to handle events external to the processor, such as requests to service peripheral devices.
Software can also generate interrupts by executing the INT n instruction.
Exceptions occur when the processor detects an error condition while executing an instruction, such as division by
zero. The processor detects a variety of error conditions including protection violations, page faults, and internal
machine faults. The machine-check architecture of the Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, P6 family, and Pentium processors
also permits a machine-check exception to be generated when internal hardware errors and bus errors are
detected.
When an interrupt is received or an exception is detected, the currently running procedure or task is suspended
while the processor executes an interrupt or exception handler. When execution of the handler is complete, the
processor resumes execution of the interrupted procedure or task. The resumption of the interrupted procedure or
task happens without loss of program continuity, unless recovery from an exception was not possible or an inter-
rupt caused the currently running program to be terminated.
This chapter describes the processor’s interrupt and exception-handling mechanism, when operating in protected
mode. A description of the exceptions and the conditions that cause them to be generated is given at the end of this
chapter.

6.2         EXCEPTION AND INTERRUPT VECTORS
To aid in handling exceptions and interrupts, each architecturally defined exception and each interrupt condition
requiring special handling by the processor is assigned a unique identification number, called a vector number. The
processor uses the vector number assigned to an exception or interrupt as an index into the interrupt descriptor
table (IDT). The table provides the entry point to an exception or interrupt handler (see Section 6.10, “Interrupt
Descriptor Table (IDT)”).
The allowable range for vector numbers is 0 to 255. Vector numbers in the range 0 through 31 are reserved by the
Intel 64 and IA-32 architectures for architecture-defined exceptions and interrupts. Not all of the vector numbers
in this range have a currently defined function. The unassigned vector numbers in this range are reserved. Do not
use the reserved vector numbers.
Vector numbers in the range 32 to 255 are designated as user-defined interrupts and are not reserved by the Intel
64 and IA-32 architecture. These interrupts are generally assigned to external I/O devices to enable those devices
to send interrupts to the processor through one of the external hardware interrupt mechanisms (see Section 6.3,
“Sources of Interrupts”).

Table 6-1 shows vector number assignments for architecturally defined exceptions and for the NMI interrupt. This
table gives the exception type (see Section 6.5, “Exception Classifications”) and indicates whether an error code is
saved on the stack for the exception. The source of each predefined exception and the NMI interrupt is also given.

6.3            SOURCES OF INTERRUPTS
The processor receives interrupts from two sources:
•       External (hardware generated) interrupts.
•       Software-generated interrupts.

6.3.1          External Interrupts
External interrupts are received through pins on the processor or through the local APIC. The primary interrupt pins
on Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, P6 family, and Pentium processors are the LINT[1:0] pins, which are connected to the
local APIC (see Chapter 10, “Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller (APIC)”). When the local APIC is
enabled, the LINT[1:0] pins can be programmed through the APIC’s local vector table (LVT) to be associated with
any of the processor’s exception or interrupt vectors.
When the local APIC is global/hardware disabled, these pins are configured as INTR and NMI pins, respectively.
Asserting the INTR pin signals the processor that an external interrupt has occurred. The processor reads from the
system bus the interrupt vector number provided by an external interrupt controller, such as an 8259A (see Section
6.2, “Exception and Interrupt Vectors”). Asserting the NMI pin signals a non-maskable interrupt (NMI), which is
assigned to interrupt vector 2.

                                    Table 6-1. Protected-Mode Exceptions and Interrupts
 Vector        Mne-      Description                         Type          Error    Source
               monic                                                       Code
    0          #DE       Divide Error                        Fault         No       DIV and IDIV instructions.
    1          #DB       Debug Exception                     Fault/ Trap   No       Instruction, data, and I/O breakpoints;
                                                                                    single-step; and others.
    2          —         NMI Interrupt                       Interrupt     No       Nonmaskable external interrupt.
    3          #BP       Breakpoint                          Trap          No       INT 3 instruction.
    4          #OF       Overflow                            Trap          No       INTO instruction.
    5          #BR       BOUND Range Exceeded                Fault         No       BOUND instruction.
    6          #UD       Invalid Opcode (Undefined Opcode)   Fault         No       UD2 instruction or reserved opcode.1
    7          #NM       Device Not Available (No Math       Fault         No       Floating-point or WAIT/FWAIT instruction.
                         Coprocessor)
    8          #DF       Double Fault                        Abort         Yes      Any instruction that can generate an
                                                                           (zero)   exception, an NMI, or an INTR.
    9                    Coprocessor Segment Overrun         Fault         No       Floating-point instruction.2
                         (reserved)
 10            #TS       Invalid TSS                         Fault         Yes      Task switch or TSS access.
 11            #NP       Segment Not Present                 Fault         Yes      Loading segment registers or accessing
                                                                                    system segments.
 12            #SS       Stack-Segment Fault                 Fault         Yes      Stack operations and SS register loads.
 13            #GP       General Protection                  Fault         Yes      Any memory reference and other
                                                                                    protection checks.
 14            #PF       Page Fault                          Fault         Yes      Any memory reference.

                             Table 6-1. Protected-Mode Exceptions and Interrupts (Contd.)
15          —           (Intel reserved. Do not use.)                          No
16          #MF         x87 FPU Floating-Point Error (Math    Fault            No         x87 FPU floating-point or WAIT/FWAIT
                        Fault)                                                            instruction.
17          #AC         Alignment Check                       Fault            Yes        Any data reference in memory.3
                                                                               (Zero)
18          #MC         Machine Check                         Abort            No         Error codes (if any) and source are model
                                                                                          dependent.4
19          #XM         SIMD Floating-Point Exception         Fault            No         SSE/SSE2/SSE3 floating-point
                                                                                          instructions5
20          #VE         Virtualization Exception              Fault            No         EPT violations6
21-31       —           Intel reserved. Do not use.
32-255      —           User Defined (Non-reserved)           Interrupt                   External interrupt or INT n instruction.
                        Interrupts
NOTES:
1. The UD2 instruction was introduced in the Pentium Pro processor.
2. Processors after the Intel386 processor do not generate this exception.
3. This exception was introduced in the Intel486 processor.
4. This exception was introduced in the Pentium processor and enhanced in the P6 family processors.
5. This exception was introduced in the Pentium III processor.
6. This exception can occur only on processors that support the 1-setting of the “EPT-violation #VE” VM-execution control.

The processor’s local APIC is normally connected to a system-based I/O APIC. Here, external interrupts received at
the I/O APIC’s pins can be directed to the local APIC through the system bus (Pentium 4, Intel Core Duo, Intel Core
2, Intel® Atom™, and Intel Xeon processors) or the APIC serial bus (P6 family and Pentium processors). The I/O
APIC determines the vector number of the interrupt and sends this number to the local APIC. When a system
contains multiple processors, processors can also send interrupts to one another by means of the system bus
(Pentium 4, Intel Core Duo, Intel Core 2, Intel Atom, and Intel Xeon processors) or the APIC serial bus (P6 family
and Pentium processors).
The LINT[1:0] pins are not available on the Intel486 processor and earlier Pentium processors that do not contain
an on-chip local APIC. These processors have dedicated NMI and INTR pins. With these processors, external inter-
rupts are typically generated by a system-based interrupt controller (8259A), with the interrupts being signaled
through the INTR pin.
Note that several other pins on the processor can cause a processor interrupt to occur. However, these interrupts
are not handled by the interrupt and exception mechanism described in this chapter. These pins include the
RESET#, FLUSH#, STPCLK#, SMI#, R/S#, and INIT# pins. Whether they are included on a particular processor is
implementation dependent. Pin functions are described in the data books for the individual processors. The SMI#
pin is described in Chapter 34, “System Management Mode.”

6.3.2        Maskable Hardware Interrupts
Any external interrupt that is delivered to the processor by means of the INTR pin or through the local APIC is called
a maskable hardware interrupt. Maskable hardware interrupts that can be delivered through the INTR pin include
all IA-32 architecture defined interrupt vectors from 0 through 255; those that can be delivered through the local
APIC include interrupt vectors 16 through 255.
The IF flag in the EFLAGS register permits all maskable hardware interrupts to be masked as a group (see Section
6.8.1, “Masking Maskable Hardware Interrupts”). Note that when interrupts 0 through 15 are delivered through the
local APIC, the APIC indicates the receipt of an illegal vector.

6.3.3         Software-Generated Interrupts
The INT n instruction permits interrupts to be generated from within software by supplying an interrupt vector
number as an operand. For example, the INT 35 instruction forces an implicit call to the interrupt handler for inter-
rupt 35.
Any of the interrupt vectors from 0 to 255 can be used as a parameter in this instruction. If the processor’s
predefined NMI vector is used, however, the response of the processor will not be the same as it would be from an
NMI interrupt generated in the normal manner. If vector number 2 (the NMI vector) is used in this instruction, the
NMI interrupt handler is called, but the processor’s NMI-handling hardware is not activated.
Interrupts generated in software with the INT n instruction cannot be masked by the IF flag in the EFLAGS register.

6.4           SOURCES OF EXCEPTIONS
The processor receives exceptions from three sources:
•   Processor-detected program-error exceptions.
•   Software-generated exceptions.
•   Machine-check exceptions.

6.4.1         Program-Error Exceptions
The processor generates one or more exceptions when it detects program errors during the execution in an appli-
cation program or the operating system or executive. Intel 64 and IA-32 architectures define a vector number for
each processor-detectable exception. Exceptions are classified as faults, traps, and aborts (see Section 6.5,
“Exception Classifications”).

6.4.2         Software-Generated Exceptions
The INTO, INT 3, and BOUND instructions permit exceptions to be generated in software. These instructions allow
checks for exception conditions to be performed at points in the instruction stream. For example, INT 3 causes a
breakpoint exception to be generated.
The INT n instruction can be used to emulate exceptions in software; but there is a limitation. If INT n provides a
vector for one of the architecturally-defined exceptions, the processor generates an interrupt to the correct vector
(to access the exception handler) but does not push an error code on the stack. This is true even if the associated
hardware-generated exception normally produces an error code. The exception handler will still attempt to pop an
error code from the stack while handling the exception. Because no error code was pushed, the handler will pop off
and discard the EIP instead (in place of the missing error code). This sends the return to the wrong location.

6.4.3         Machine-Check Exceptions
The P6 family and Pentium processors provide both internal and external machine-check mechanisms for checking
the operation of the internal chip hardware and bus transactions. These mechanisms are implementation depen-
dent. When a machine-check error is detected, the processor signals a machine-check exception (vector 18) and
returns an error code.
See Chapter 6, “Interrupt 18—Machine-Check Exception (#MC)” and Chapter 15, “Machine-Check Architecture,”
for more information about the machine-check mechanism.

6.5           EXCEPTION CLASSIFICATIONS
Exceptions are classified as faults, traps, or aborts depending on the way they are reported and whether the
instruction that caused the exception can be restarted without loss of program or task continuity.

•   Faults — A fault is an exception that can generally be corrected and that, once corrected, allows the program
    to be restarted with no loss of continuity. When a fault is reported, the processor restores the machine state to
    the state prior to the beginning of execution of the faulting instruction. The return address (saved contents of
    the CS and EIP registers) for the fault handler points to the faulting instruction, rather than to the instruction
    following the faulting instruction.
•   Traps — A trap is an exception that is reported immediately following the execution of the trapping instruction.
    Traps allow execution of a program or task to be continued without loss of program continuity. The return
    address for the trap handler points to the instruction to be executed after the trapping instruction.
•   Aborts — An abort is an exception that does not always report the precise location of the instruction causing
    the exception and does not allow a restart of the program or task that caused the exception. Aborts are used
    to report severe errors, such as hardware errors and inconsistent or illegal values in system tables.

                                                        NOTE
        One exception subset normally reported as a fault is not restartable. Such exceptions result in loss
        of some processor state. For example, executing a POPAD instruction where the stack frame
        crosses over the end of the stack segment causes a fault to be reported. In this situation, the
        exception handler sees that the instruction pointer (CS:EIP) has been restored as if the POPAD
        instruction had not been executed. However, internal processor state (the general-purpose
        registers) will have been modified. Such cases are considered programming errors. An application
        causing this class of exceptions should be terminated by the operating system.

6.6         PROGRAM OR TASK RESTART
To allow the restarting of program or task following the handling of an exception or an interrupt, all exceptions
(except aborts) are guaranteed to report exceptions on an instruction boundary. All interrupts are guaranteed to be
taken on an instruction boundary.
For fault-class exceptions, the return instruction pointer (saved when the processor generates an exception) points
to the faulting instruction. So, when a program or task is restarted following the handling of a fault, the faulting
instruction is restarted (re-executed). Restarting the faulting instruction is commonly used to handle exceptions
that are generated when access to an operand is blocked. The most common example of this type of fault is a page-
fault exception (#PF) that occurs when a program or task references an operand located on a page that is not in
memory. When a page-fault exception occurs, the exception handler can load the page into memory and resume
execution of the program or task by restarting the faulting instruction. To insure that the restart is handled trans-
parently to the currently executing program or task, the processor saves the necessary registers and stack pointers
to allow a restart to the state prior to the execution of the faulting instruction.
For trap-class exceptions, the return instruction pointer points to the instruction following the trapping instruction.
If a trap is detected during an instruction which transfers execution, the return instruction pointer reflects the
transfer. For example, if a trap is detected while executing a JMP instruction, the return instruction pointer points
to the destination of the JMP instruction, not to the next address past the JMP instruction. All trap exceptions allow
program or task restart with no loss of continuity. For example, the overflow exception is a trap exception. Here,
the return instruction pointer points to the instruction following the INTO instruction that tested EFLAGS.OF (over-
flow) flag. The trap handler for this exception resolves the overflow condition. Upon return from the trap handler,
program or task execution continues at the instruction following the INTO instruction.
The abort-class exceptions do not support reliable restarting of the program or task. Abort handlers are designed
to collect diagnostic information about the state of the processor when the abort exception occurred and then shut
down the application and system as gracefully as possible.
Interrupts rigorously support restarting of interrupted programs and tasks without loss of continuity. The return
instruction pointer saved for an interrupt points to the next instruction to be executed at the instruction boundary
where the processor took the interrupt. If the instruction just executed has a repeat prefix, the interrupt is taken
at the end of the current iteration with the registers set to execute the next iteration.
The ability of a P6 family processor to speculatively execute instructions does not affect the taking of interrupts by
the processor. Interrupts are taken at instruction boundaries located during the retirement phase of instruction
execution; so they are always taken in the “in-order” instruction stream. See Chapter 2, “Intel® 64 and IA-32

Architectures,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1, for more infor-
mation about the P6 family processors’ microarchitecture and its support for out-of-order instruction execution.
Note that the Pentium processor and earlier IA-32 processors also perform varying amounts of prefetching and
preliminary decoding. With these processors as well, exceptions and interrupts are not signaled until actual “in-
order” execution of the instructions. For a given code sample, the signaling of exceptions occurs uniformly when
the code is executed on any family of IA-32 processors (except where new exceptions or new opcodes have been
defined).

6.7           NONMASKABLE INTERRUPT (NMI)
The nonmaskable interrupt (NMI) can be generated in either of two ways:
•   External hardware asserts the NMI pin.
•   The processor receives a message on the system bus (Pentium 4, Intel Core Duo, Intel Core 2, Intel Atom, and
    Intel Xeon processors) or the APIC serial bus (P6 family and Pentium processors) with a delivery mode NMI.
When the processor receives a NMI from either of these sources, the processor handles it immediately by calling
the NMI handler pointed to by interrupt vector number 2. The processor also invokes certain hardware conditions
to insure that no other interrupts, including NMI interrupts, are received until the NMI handler has completed
executing (see Section 6.7.1, “Handling Multiple NMIs”).
Also, when an NMI is received from either of the above sources, it cannot be masked by the IF flag in the EFLAGS
register.
It is possible to issue a maskable hardware interrupt (through the INTR pin) to vector 2 to invoke the NMI interrupt
handler; however, this interrupt will not truly be an NMI interrupt. A true NMI interrupt that activates the
processor’s NMI-handling hardware can only be delivered through one of the mechanisms listed above.

6.7.1         Handling Multiple NMIs
While an NMI interrupt handler is executing, the processor blocks delivery of subsequent NMIs until the next execu-
tion of the IRET instruction. This blocking of NMIs prevents nested execution of the NMI handler. It is recommended
that the NMI interrupt handler be accessed through an interrupt gate to disable maskable hardware interrupts (see
Section 6.8.1, “Masking Maskable Hardware Interrupts”).
An execution of the IRET instruction unblocks NMIs even if the instruction causes a fault. For example, if the IRET
instruction executes with EFLAGS.VM = 1 and IOPL of less than 3, a general-protection exception is generated (see
Section 20.2.7, “Sensitive Instructions”). In such a case, NMIs are unmasked before the exception handler is
invoked.

6.8           ENABLING AND DISABLING INTERRUPTS
The processor inhibits the generation of some interrupts, depending on the state of the processor and of the IF and
RF flags in the EFLAGS register, as described in the following sections.

6.8.1         Masking Maskable Hardware Interrupts
The IF flag can disable the servicing of maskable hardware interrupts received on the processor’s INTR pin or
through the local APIC (see Section 6.3.2, “Maskable Hardware Interrupts”). When the IF flag is clear, the
processor inhibits interrupts delivered to the INTR pin or through the local APIC from generating an internal inter-
rupt request; when the IF flag is set, interrupts delivered to the INTR or through the local APIC pin are processed
as normal external interrupts.
The IF flag does not affect non-maskable interrupts (NMIs) delivered to the NMI pin or delivery mode NMI
messages delivered through the local APIC, nor does it affect processor generated exceptions. As with the other
flags in the EFLAGS register, the processor clears the IF flag in response to a hardware reset.

The fact that the group of maskable hardware interrupts includes the reserved interrupt and exception vectors 0
through 32 can potentially cause confusion. Architecturally, when the IF flag is set, an interrupt for any of the
vectors from 0 through 32 can be delivered to the processor through the INTR pin and any of the vectors from 16
through 32 can be delivered through the local APIC. The processor will then generate an interrupt and call the
interrupt or exception handler pointed to by the vector number. So for example, it is possible to invoke the page-
fault handler through the INTR pin (by means of vector 14); however, this is not a true page-fault exception. It is
an interrupt. As with the INT n instruction (see Section 6.4.2, “Software-Generated Exceptions”), when an inter-
rupt is generated through the INTR pin to an exception vector, the processor does not push an error code on the
stack, so the exception handler may not operate correctly.
The IF flag can be set or cleared with the STI (set interrupt-enable flag) and CLI (clear interrupt-enable flag)
instructions, respectively. These instructions may be executed only if the CPL is equal to or less than the IOPL. A
general-protection exception (#GP) is generated if they are executed when the CPL is greater than the IOPL. (The
effect of the IOPL on these instructions is modified slightly when the virtual mode extension is enabled by setting
the VME flag in control register CR4: see Section 20.3, “Interrupt and Exception Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode.”
Behavior is also impacted by the PVI flag: see Section 20.4, “Protected-Mode Virtual Interrupts.”
The IF flag is also affected by the following operations:
•   The PUSHF instruction stores all flags on the stack, where they can be examined and modified. The POPF
    instruction can be used to load the modified flags back into the EFLAGS register.
•   Task switches and the POPF and IRET instructions load the EFLAGS register; therefore, they can be used to
    modify the setting of the IF flag.
•   When an interrupt is handled through an interrupt gate, the IF flag is automatically cleared, which disables
    maskable hardware interrupts. (If an interrupt is handled through a trap gate, the IF flag is not cleared.)
See the descriptions of the CLI, STI, PUSHF, POPF, and IRET instructions in Chapter 3, “Instruction Set Reference,
A-L,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2A, and Chapter 4, “Instruc-
tion Set Reference, M-U,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2B, for a
detailed description of the operations these instructions are allowed to perform on the IF flag.

6.8.2        Masking Instruction Breakpoints
The RF (resume) flag in the EFLAGS register controls the response of the processor to instruction-breakpoint condi-
tions (see the description of the RF flag in Section 2.3, “System Flags and Fields in the EFLAGS Register”).
When set, it prevents an instruction breakpoint from generating a debug exception (#DB); when clear, instruction
breakpoints will generate debug exceptions. The primary function of the RF flag is to prevent the processor from
going into a debug exception loop on an instruction-breakpoint. See Section 17.3.1.1, “Instruction-Breakpoint
Exception Condition,” for more information on the use of this flag.

6.8.3        Masking Exceptions and Interrupts When Switching Stacks
To switch to a different stack segment, software often uses a pair of instructions, for example:
    MOV SS, AX
    MOV ESP, StackTop
If an interrupt or exception occurs after the segment selector has been loaded into the SS register but before the
ESP register has been loaded, these two parts of the logical address into the stack space are inconsistent for the
duration of the interrupt or exception handler.
To prevent this situation, the processor inhibits interrupts, debug exceptions, and single-step trap exceptions after
either a MOV to SS instruction or a POP to SS instruction, until the instruction boundary following the next instruc-
tion is reached. All other faults may still be generated. If the LSS instruction is used to modify the contents of the
SS register (which is the recommended method of modifying this register), this problem does not occur.

6.9            PRIORITY AMONG SIMULTANEOUS EXCEPTIONS AND INTERRUPTS
If more than one exception or interrupt is pending at an instruction boundary, the processor services them in a
predictable order. Table 6-2 shows the priority among classes of exception and interrupt sources.

                             Table 6-2. Priority Among Simultaneous Exceptions and Interrupts
 Priority       Description
 1 (Highest)    Hardware Reset and Machine Checks
                - RESET
                - Machine Check
 2              Trap on Task Switch
                - T flag in TSS is set
 3              External Hardware Interventions
                - FLUSH
                - STOPCLK
                - SMI
                - INIT
 4              Traps on the Previous Instruction
                - Breakpoints
                - Debug Trap Exceptions (TF flag set or data/I-O breakpoint)
 5              Nonmaskable Interrupts (NMI) 1
 6              Maskable Hardware Interrupts 1
 7              Code Breakpoint Fault
 8              Faults from Fetching Next Instruction
                - Code-Segment Limit Violation
                - Code Page Fault
 9              Faults from Decoding the Next Instruction
                - Instruction length > 15 bytes
                - Invalid Opcode
                - Coprocessor Not Available
 10 (Lowest)    Faults on Executing an Instruction
                - Overflow
                - Bound error
                - Invalid TSS
                - Segment Not Present
                - Stack fault
                - General Protection
                - Data Page Fault
                - Alignment Check
                - x87 FPU Floating-point exception
                - SIMD floating-point exception
                - Virtualization exception
 NOTE
 1. The Intel® 486 processor and earlier processors group nonmaskable and maskable interrupts in the same priority class.

While priority among these classes listed in Table 6-2 is consistent throughout the architecture, exceptions within
each class are implementation-dependent and may vary from processor to processor. The processor first services

a pending exception or interrupt from the class which has the highest priority, transferring execution to the first
instruction of the handler. Lower priority exceptions are discarded; lower priority interrupts are held pending.
Discarded exceptions are re-generated when the interrupt handler returns execution to the point in the program or
task where the exceptions and/or interrupts occurred.

6.10        INTERRUPT DESCRIPTOR TABLE (IDT)
The interrupt descriptor table (IDT) associates each exception or interrupt vector with a gate descriptor for the
procedure or task used to service the associated exception or interrupt. Like the GDT and LDTs, the IDT is an array
of 8-byte descriptors (in protected mode). Unlike the GDT, the first entry of the IDT may contain a descriptor. To
form an index into the IDT, the processor scales the exception or interrupt vector by eight (the number of bytes in
a gate descriptor). Because there are only 256 interrupt or exception vectors, the IDT need not contain more than
256 descriptors. It can contain fewer than 256 descriptors, because descriptors are required only for the interrupt
and exception vectors that may occur. All empty descriptor slots in the IDT should have the present flag for the
descriptor set to 0.
The base addresses of the IDT should be aligned on an 8-byte boundary to maximize performance of cache line
fills. The limit value is expressed in bytes and is added to the base address to get the address of the last valid byte.
A limit value of 0 results in exactly 1 valid byte. Because IDT entries are always eight bytes long, the limit should
always be one less than an integral multiple of eight (that is, 8N – 1).
The IDT may reside anywhere in the linear address space. As shown in Figure 6-1, the processor locates the IDT
using the IDTR register. This register holds both a 32-bit base address and 16-bit limit for the IDT.
The LIDT (load IDT register) and SIDT (store IDT register) instructions load and store the contents of the IDTR
register, respectively. The LIDT instruction loads the IDTR register with the base address and limit held in a
memory operand. This instruction can be executed only when the CPL is 0. It normally is used by the initialization
code of an operating system when creating an IDT. An operating system also may use it to change from one IDT to
another. The SIDT instruction copies the base and limit value stored in IDTR to memory. This instruction can be
executed at any privilege level.
If a vector references a descriptor beyond the limit of the IDT, a general-protection exception (#GP) is generated.

                                                         NOTE
        Because interrupts are delivered to the processor core only once, an incorrectly configured IDT
        could result in incomplete interrupt handling and/or the blocking of interrupt delivery.
        IA-32 architecture rules need to be followed for setting up IDTR base/limit/access fields and each
        field in the gate descriptors. The same apply for the Intel 64 architecture. This includes implicit
        referencing of the destination code segment through the GDT or LDT and accessing the stack.

                                                  IDTR Register
                             47                                   16 15                  0
                                       IDT Base Address                    IDT Limit

                                                                         Interrupt
                                                                   Descriptor Table (IDT)
                                                          +                 Gate for
                                                                          Interrupt #n       (n−1)∗8

                                                                            Gate for
                                                                          Interrupt #3       16
                                                                            Gate for
                                                                          Interrupt #2       8
                                                                            Gate for
                                                                          Interrupt #1       0
                                                                   31                    0

                                   Figure 6-1. Relationship of the IDTR and IDT

6.11           IDT DESCRIPTORS
The IDT may contain any of three kinds of gate descriptors:
•   Task-gate descriptor
•   Interrupt-gate descriptor
•   Trap-gate descriptor
Figure 6-2 shows the formats for the task-gate, interrupt-gate, and trap-gate descriptors. The format of a task
gate used in an IDT is the same as that of a task gate used in the GDT or an LDT (see Section 7.2.5, “Task-Gate
Descriptor”). The task gate contains the segment selector for a TSS for an exception and/or interrupt handler task.
Interrupt and trap gates are very similar to call gates (see Section 5.8.3, “Call Gates”). They contain a far pointer
(segment selector and offset) that the processor uses to transfer program execution to a handler procedure in an
exception- or interrupt-handler code segment. These gates differ in the way the processor handles the IF flag in the
EFLAGS register (see Section 6.12.1.2, “Flag Usage By Exception- or Interrupt-Handler Procedure”).

                                                            Task Gate
                           31                                  16 15 14 13 12      8 7                    0

                                                                       D
                                                                  P    P   0 0 1 0 1                          4
                                                                       L

                           31                                  16 15                                      0

                                   TSS Segment Selector                                                       0

                                                          Interrupt Gate
                           31                                  16 15 14 13 12      8 7         5 4        0

                                                                       D
                                       Offset 31..16              P    P   0 D 1 1 0   0 0 0                  4
                                                                       L

                           31                                  16 15                                      0

                                    Segment Selector                            Offset 15..0                  0

                                                            Trap Gate
                           31                                  16 15 14 13 12      8 7         5 4        0

                                                                       D
                                       Offset 31..16              P    P   0 D 1 1 1   0 0 0                  4
                                                                       L

                           31                                  16 15                                      0

                                    Segment Selector                            Offset 15..0                  0

                                  DPL          Descriptor Privilege Level
                                  Offset       Offset to procedure entry point
                                  P            Segment Present flag
                                  Selector     Segment Selector for destination code segment
                                  D            Size of gate: 1 = 32 bits; 0 = 16 bits
                                       Reserved

                                             Figure 6-2. IDT Gate Descriptors

6.12        EXCEPTION AND INTERRUPT HANDLING
The processor handles calls to exception- and interrupt-handlers similar to the way it handles calls with a CALL
instruction to a procedure or a task. When responding to an exception or interrupt, the processor uses the excep-
tion or interrupt vector as an index to a descriptor in the IDT. If the index points to an interrupt gate or trap gate,
the processor calls the exception or interrupt handler in a manner similar to a CALL to a call gate (see Section
5.8.2, “Gate Descriptors,” through Section 5.8.6, “Returning from a Called Procedure”). If index points to a task
gate, the processor executes a task switch to the exception- or interrupt-handler task in a manner similar to a CALL
to a task gate (see Section 7.3, “Task Switching”).

6.12.1      Exception- or Interrupt-Handler Procedures
An interrupt gate or trap gate references an exception- or interrupt-handler procedure that runs in the context of
the currently executing task (see Figure 6-3). The segment selector for the gate points to a segment descriptor for
an executable code segment in either the GDT or the current LDT. The offset field of the gate descriptor points to
the beginning of the exception- or interrupt-handling procedure.

                                                                               Destination
                                               IDT                            Code Segment

                                                                                Interrupt
                                                           Offset              Procedure
                          Interrupt
                            Vector
                                            Interrupt or
                                             Trap Gate
                                                                    +

                                        Segment Selector

                                           GDT or LDT
                                                                    Base
                                                                    Address

                                            Segment
                                            Descriptor

                                        Figure 6-3. Interrupt Procedure Call

When the processor performs a call to the exception- or interrupt-handler procedure:
•   If the handler procedure is going to be executed at a numerically lower privilege level, a stack switch occurs.
    When the stack switch occurs:
    a. The segment selector and stack pointer for the stack to be used by the handler are obtained from the TSS
       for the currently executing task. On this new stack, the processor pushes the stack segment selector and
       stack pointer of the interrupted procedure.
    b. The processor then saves the current state of the EFLAGS, CS, and EIP registers on the new stack (see
       Figures 6-4).
    c.   If an exception causes an error code to be saved, it is pushed on the new stack after the EIP value.
•   If the handler procedure is going to be executed at the same privilege level as the interrupted procedure:
    a. The processor saves the current state of the EFLAGS, CS, and EIP registers on the current stack (see
       Figures 6-4).
    b. If an exception causes an error code to be saved, it is pushed on the current stack after the EIP value.

                                                        Stack Usage with No
                                                       Privilege-Level Change
                             Interrupted Procedure’s
                               and Handler’s Stack

                                                         ESP Before
                                    EFLAGS               Transfer to Handler
                                       CS
                                       EIP
                                   Error Code            ESP After
                                                         Transfer to Handler

                                                          Stack Usage with
                                                       Privilege-Level Change
                             Interrupted Procedure’s                            Handler’s Stack
                                       Stack

                                                         ESP Before
                                                         Transfer to Handler         SS
                                                                                     ESP
                                                                                  EFLAGS
                                                                                     CS
                                                                                     EIP
                                                                 ESP After        Error Code
                                                       Transfer to Handler

                Figure 6-4. Stack Usage on Transfers to Interrupt and Exception-Handling Routines

To return from an exception- or interrupt-handler procedure, the handler must use the IRET (or IRETD) instruction.
The IRET instruction is similar to the RET instruction except that it restores the saved flags into the EFLAGS
register. The IOPL field of the EFLAGS register is restored only if the CPL is 0. The IF flag is changed only if the CPL
is less than or equal to the IOPL. See Chapter 3, “Instruction Set Reference, A-L,” of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Archi-
tectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2A, for a description of the complete operation performed by the
IRET instruction.
If a stack switch occurred when calling the handler procedure, the IRET instruction switches back to the interrupted
procedure’s stack on the return.

6.12.1.1     Protection of Exception- and Interrupt-Handler Procedures
The privilege-level protection for exception- and interrupt-handler procedures is similar to that used for ordinary
procedure calls when called through a call gate (see Section 5.8.4, “Accessing a Code Segment Through a Call
Gate”). The processor does not permit transfer of execution to an exception- or interrupt-handler procedure in a
less privileged code segment (numerically greater privilege level) than the CPL.
An attempt to violate this rule results in a general-protection exception (#GP). The protection mechanism for
exception- and interrupt-handler procedures is different in the following ways:
•   Because interrupt and exception vectors have no RPL, the RPL is not checked on implicit calls to exception and
    interrupt handlers.
•   The processor checks the DPL of the interrupt or trap gate only if an exception or interrupt is generated with an
    INT n, INT 3, or INTO instruction. Here, the CPL must be less than or equal to the DPL of the gate. This
    restriction prevents application programs or procedures running at privilege level 3 from using a software
    interrupt to access critical exception handlers, such as the page-fault handler, providing that those handlers are
    placed in more privileged code segments (numerically lower privilege level). For hardware-generated
    interrupts and processor-detected exceptions, the processor ignores the DPL of interrupt and trap gates.

Because exceptions and interrupts generally do not occur at predictable times, these privilege rules effectively
impose restrictions on the privilege levels at which exception and interrupt- handling procedures can run. Either of
the following techniques can be used to avoid privilege-level violations.
•   The exception or interrupt handler can be placed in a conforming code segment. This technique can be used for
    handlers that only need to access data available on the stack (for example, divide error exceptions). If the
    handler needs data from a data segment, the data segment needs to be accessible from privilege level 3, which
    would make it unprotected.
•   The handler can be placed in a nonconforming code segment with privilege level 0. This handler would always
    run, regardless of the CPL that the interrupted program or task is running at.

6.12.1.2       Flag Usage By Exception- or Interrupt-Handler Procedure
When accessing an exception or interrupt handler through either an interrupt gate or a trap gate, the processor
clears the TF flag in the EFLAGS register after it saves the contents of the EFLAGS register on the stack. (On calls
to exception and interrupt handlers, the processor also clears the VM, RF, and NT flags in the EFLAGS register, after
they are saved on the stack.) Clearing the TF flag prevents instruction tracing from affecting interrupt response. A
subsequent IRET instruction restores the TF (and VM, RF, and NT) flags to the values in the saved contents of the
EFLAGS register on the stack.
The only difference between an interrupt gate and a trap gate is the way the processor handles the IF flag in the
EFLAGS register. When accessing an exception- or interrupt-handling procedure through an interrupt gate, the
processor clears the IF flag to prevent other interrupts from interfering with the current interrupt handler. A subse-
quent IRET instruction restores the IF flag to its value in the saved contents of the EFLAGS register on the stack.
Accessing a handler procedure through a trap gate does not affect the IF flag.

6.12.2         Interrupt Tasks
When an exception or interrupt handler is accessed through a task gate in the IDT, a task switch results. Handling
an exception or interrupt with a separate task offers several advantages:
•   The entire context of the interrupted program or task is saved automatically.
•   A new TSS permits the handler to use a new privilege level 0 stack when handling the exception or interrupt. If
    an exception or interrupt occurs when the current privilege level 0 stack is corrupted, accessing the handler
    through a task gate can prevent a system crash by providing the handler with a new privilege level 0 stack.
•   The handler can be further isolated from other tasks by giving it a separate address space. This is done by
    giving it a separate LDT.
The disadvantage of handling an interrupt with a separate task is that the amount of machine state that must be
saved on a task switch makes it slower than using an interrupt gate, resulting in increased interrupt latency.
A task gate in the IDT references a TSS descriptor in the GDT (see Figure 6-5). A switch to the handler task is
handled in the same manner as an ordinary task switch (see Section 7.3, “Task Switching”). The link back to the
interrupted task is stored in the previous task link field of the handler task’s TSS. If an exception caused an error
code to be generated, this error code is copied to the stack of the new task.
When exception- or interrupt-handler tasks are used in an operating system, there are actually two mechanisms
that can be used to dispatch tasks: the software scheduler (part of the operating system) and the hardware sched-
uler (part of the processor's interrupt mechanism). The software scheduler needs to accommodate interrupt tasks
that may be dispatched when interrupts are enabled.

                                                          NOTE
       Because IA-32 architecture tasks are not re-entrant, an interrupt-handler task must disable
       interrupts between the time it completes handling the interrupt and the time it executes the IRET
       instruction. This action prevents another interrupt from occurring while the interrupt task’s TSS is
       still marked busy, which would cause a general-protection (#GP) exception.

                                                                          TSS for Interrupt-
                                              IDT                          Handling Task

                         Interrupt
                           Vector           Task Gate

                                          TSS Selector                TSS
                                                                      Base
                                                                      Address
                                              GDT

                                         TSS Descriptor

                                         Figure 6-5. Interrupt Task Switch

6.13       ERROR CODE
When an exception condition is related to a specific segment selector or IDT vector, the processor pushes an error
code onto the stack of the exception handler (whether it is a procedure or task). The error code has the format
shown in Figure 6-6. The error code resembles a segment selector; however, instead of a TI flag and RPL field, the
error code contains 3 flags:
EXT            External event (bit 0) — When set, indicates that the exception occurred during delivery of an
               event external to the program, such as an interrupt or an earlier exception.
IDT            Descriptor location (bit 1) — When set, indicates that the index portion of the error code refers
               to a gate descriptor in the IDT; when clear, indicates that the index refers to a descriptor in the GDT
               or the current LDT.
TI             GDT/LDT (bit 2) — Only used when the IDT flag is clear. When set, the TI flag indicates that the
               index portion of the error code refers to a segment or gate descriptor in the LDT; when clear, it indi-
               cates that the index refers to a descriptor in the current GDT.

                           31                                                          3 2 1 0
                                                                                         T I E
                                       Reserved               Segment Selector Index     I D X
                                                                                           T T

                                                  Figure 6-6. Error Code

The segment selector index field provides an index into the IDT, GDT, or current LDT to the segment or gate
selector being referenced by the error code. In some cases the error code is null (all bits are clear except possibly
EXT). A null error code indicates that the error was not caused by a reference to a specific segment or that a null
segment selector was referenced in an operation.
The format of the error code is different for page-fault exceptions (#PF). See the “Interrupt 14—Page-Fault Excep-
tion (#PF)” section in this chapter.
The error code is pushed on the stack as a doubleword or word (depending on the default interrupt, trap, or task
gate size). To keep the stack aligned for doubleword pushes, the upper half of the error code is reserved. Note that
the error code is not popped when the IRET instruction is executed to return from an exception handler, so the
handler must remove the error code before executing a return.
Error codes are not pushed on the stack for exceptions that are generated externally (with the INTR or LINT[1:0]
pins) or the INT n instruction, even if an error code is normally produced for those exceptions.

6.14           EXCEPTION AND INTERRUPT HANDLING IN 64-BIT MODE
In 64-bit mode, interrupt and exception handling is similar to what has been described for non-64-bit modes. The
following are the exceptions:
•   All interrupt handlers pointed by the IDT are in 64-bit code (this does not apply to the SMI handler).
•   The size of interrupt-stack pushes is fixed at 64 bits; and the processor uses 8-byte, zero extended stores.
•   The stack pointer (SS:RSP) is pushed unconditionally on interrupts. In legacy modes, this push is conditional
    and based on a change in current privilege level (CPL).
•   The new SS is set to NULL if there is a change in CPL.
•   IRET behavior changes.
•   There is a new interrupt stack-switch mechanism.
•   The alignment of interrupt stack frame is different.

6.14.1         64-Bit Mode IDT
Interrupt and trap gates are 16 bytes in length to provide a 64-bit offset for the instruction pointer (RIP). The 64-
bit RIP referenced by interrupt-gate descriptors allows an interrupt service routine to be located anywhere in the
linear-address space. See Figure 6-7.

                                                        Interrupt/Trap Gate
                             31                                                                                  0

                                                          Reserved                                                   12

                             31                                                                                  0

                                                           Offset 63..32                                             8

                             31                               16 15 14 13 12 11       8 7        5 4   2         0
                                                                      D
                                        Offset 31..16            P    P    0   TYPE      0 0 0 0 0         IST       4
                                                                      L

                            31                                16 15                                              0

                                     Segment Selector                             Offset 15..0                       0

                                      DPL          Descriptor Privilege Level
                                      Offset       Offset to procedure entry point
                                      P            Segment Present flag
                                      Selector     Segment Selector for destination code segment
                                      IST          Interrupt Stack Table

                                       Figure 6-7. 64-Bit IDT Gate Descriptors

In 64-bit mode, the IDT index is formed by scaling the interrupt vector by 16. The first eight bytes (bytes 7:0) of a
64-bit mode interrupt gate are similar but not identical to legacy 32-bit interrupt gates. The type field (bits 11:8 in
bytes 7:4) is described in Table 3-2. The Interrupt Stack Table (IST) field (bits 4:0 in bytes 7:4) is used by the stack
switching mechanisms described in Section 6.14.5, “Interrupt Stack Table.” Bytes 11:8 hold the upper 32 bits of
the target RIP (interrupt segment offset) in canonical form. A general-protection exception (#GP) is generated if
software attempts to reference an interrupt gate with a target RIP that is not in canonical form.
The target code segment referenced by the interrupt gate must be a 64-bit code segment (CS.L = 1, CS.D = 0). If
the target is not a 64-bit code segment, a general-protection exception (#GP) is generated with the IDT vector
number reported as the error code.
Only 64-bit interrupt and trap gates can be referenced in IA-32e mode (64-bit mode and compatibility mode).
Legacy 32-bit interrupt or trap gate types (0EH or 0FH) are redefined in IA-32e mode as 64-bit interrupt and trap
gate types. No 32-bit interrupt or trap gate type exists in IA-32e mode. If a reference is made to a 16-bit interrupt
or trap gate (06H or 07H), a general-protection exception (#GP(0)) is generated.

6.14.2      64-Bit Mode Stack Frame
In legacy mode, the size of an IDT entry (16 bits or 32 bits) determines the size of interrupt-stack-frame pushes.
SS:ESP is pushed only on a CPL change. In 64-bit mode, the size of interrupt stack-frame pushes is fixed at eight
bytes. This is because only 64-bit mode gates can be referenced. 64-bit mode also pushes SS:RSP unconditionally,
rather than only on a CPL change.
Aside from error codes, pushing SS:RSP unconditionally presents operating systems with a consistent interrupt-
stackframe size across all interrupts. Interrupt service-routine entry points that handle interrupts generated by the
INTn instruction or external INTR# signal can push an additional error code place-holder to maintain consistency.
In legacy mode, the stack pointer may be at any alignment when an interrupt or exception causes a stack frame to
be pushed. This causes the stack frame and succeeding pushes done by an interrupt handler to be at arbitrary
alignments. In IA-32e mode, the RSP is aligned to a 16-byte boundary before pushing the stack frame. The stack
frame itself is aligned on a 16-byte boundary when the interrupt handler is called. The processor can arbitrarily
realign the new RSP on interrupts because the previous (possibly unaligned) RSP is unconditionally saved on the
newly aligned stack. The previous RSP will be automatically restored by a subsequent IRET.
Aligning the stack permits exception and interrupt frames to be aligned on a 16-byte boundary before interrupts
are re-enabled. This allows the stack to be formatted for optimal storage of 16-byte XMM registers, which enables

the interrupt handler to use faster 16-byte aligned loads and stores (MOVAPS rather than MOVUPS) to save and
restore XMM registers.
Although the RSP alignment is always performed when LMA = 1, it is only of consequence for the kernel-mode case
where there is no stack switch or IST used. For a stack switch or IST, the OS would have presumably put suitably
aligned RSP values in the TSS.

6.14.3         IRET in IA-32e Mode
In IA-32e mode, IRET executes with an 8-byte operand size. There is nothing that forces this requirement. The
stack is formatted in such a way that for actions where IRET is required, the 8-byte IRET operand size works
correctly.
Because interrupt stack-frame pushes are always eight bytes in IA-32e mode, an IRET must pop eight byte items
off the stack. This is accomplished by preceding the IRET with a 64-bit operand-size prefix. The size of the pop is
determined by the address size of the instruction. The SS/ESP/RSP size adjustment is determined by the stack size.
IRET pops SS:RSP unconditionally off the interrupt stack frame only when it is executed in 64-bit mode. In compat-
ibility mode, IRET pops SS:RSP off the stack only if there is a CPL change. This allows legacy applications to
execute properly in compatibility mode when using the IRET instruction. 64-bit interrupt service routines that exit
with an IRET unconditionally pop SS:RSP off of the interrupt stack frame, even if the target code segment is
running in 64-bit mode or at CPL = 0. This is because the original interrupt always pushes SS:RSP.
In IA-32e mode, IRET is allowed to load a NULL SS under certain conditions. If the target mode is 64-bit mode and
the target CPL ≠ 3, IRET allows SS to be loaded with a NULL selector. As part of the stack switch mechanism, an
interrupt or exception sets the new SS to NULL, instead of fetching a new SS selector from the TSS and loading the
corresponding descriptor from the GDT or LDT. The new SS selector is set to NULL in order to properly handle
returns from subsequent nested far transfers. If the called procedure itself is interrupted, the NULL SS is pushed on
the stack frame. On the subsequent IRET, the NULL SS on the stack acts as a flag to tell the processor not to load
a new SS descriptor.

6.14.4         Stack Switching in IA-32e Mode
The IA-32 architecture provides a mechanism to automatically switch stack frames in response to an interrupt. The
64-bit extensions of Intel 64 architecture implement a modified version of the legacy stack-switching mechanism
and an alternative stack-switching mechanism called the interrupt stack table (IST).
In IA-32 modes, the legacy IA-32 stack-switch mechanism is unchanged. In IA-32e mode, the legacy stack-switch
mechanism is modified. When stacks are switched as part of a 64-bit mode privilege-level change (resulting from
an interrupt), a new SS descriptor is not loaded. IA-32e mode loads only an inner-level RSP from the TSS. The new
SS selector is forced to NULL and the SS selector’s RPL field is set to the new CPL. The new SS is set to NULL in
order to handle nested far transfers (far CALL, INT, interrupts and exceptions). The old SS and RSP are saved on
the new stack (Figure 6-8). On the subsequent IRET, the old SS is popped from the stack and loaded into the SS
register.
In summary, a stack switch in IA-32e mode works like the legacy stack switch, except that a new SS selector is not
loaded from the TSS. Instead, the new SS is forced to NULL.

                                Legacy Mode         Stack Usage with      IA-32e Mode
                                                 Privilege-Level Change

                               Handler’s Stack                            Handler’s Stack

                         +20        SS                                         SS           +40
                         +16        ESP                                        RSP          +32
                         +12     EFLAGS                                     RFLAGS          +24
                         +8         CS                                         CS           +16
                         +4         EIP                                        RIP          +8
                          0      Error Code        Stack Pointer After      Error Code       0
                                                  Transfer to Handler

                        Figure 6-8. IA-32e Mode Stack Usage After Privilege Level Change

6.14.5      Interrupt Stack Table
In IA-32e mode, a new interrupt stack table (IST) mechanism is available as an alternative to the modified legacy
stack-switching mechanism described above. This mechanism unconditionally switches stacks when it is enabled.
It can be enabled on an individual interrupt-vector basis using a field in the IDT entry. This means that some inter-
rupt vectors can use the modified legacy mechanism and others can use the IST mechanism.
The IST mechanism is only available in IA-32e mode. It is part of the 64-bit mode TSS. The motivation for the IST
mechanism is to provide a method for specific interrupts (such as NMI, double-fault, and machine-check) to always
execute on a known good stack. In legacy mode, interrupts can use the task-switch mechanism to set up a known-
good stack by accessing the interrupt service routine through a task gate located in the IDT. However, the legacy
task-switch mechanism is not supported in IA-32e mode.
The IST mechanism provides up to seven IST pointers in the TSS. The pointers are referenced by an interrupt-gate
descriptor in the interrupt-descriptor table (IDT); see Figure 6-7. The gate descriptor contains a 3-bit IST index
field that provides an offset into the IST section of the TSS. Using the IST mechanism, the processor loads the
value pointed by an IST pointer into the RSP.
When an interrupt occurs, the new SS selector is forced to NULL and the SS selector’s RPL field is set to the new
CPL. The old SS, RSP, RFLAGS, CS, and RIP are pushed onto the new stack. Interrupt processing then proceeds as
normal. If the IST index is zero, the modified legacy stack-switching mechanism described above is used.

6.15        EXCEPTION AND INTERRUPT REFERENCE
The following sections describe conditions which generate exceptions and interrupts. They are arranged in the
order of vector numbers. The information contained in these sections are as follows:
•   Exception Class — Indicates whether the exception class is a fault, trap, or abort type. Some exceptions can
    be either a fault or trap type, depending on when the error condition is detected. (This section is not applicable
    to interrupts.)
•   Description — Gives a general description of the purpose of the exception or interrupt type. It also describes
    how the processor handles the exception or interrupt.
•   Exception Error Code — Indicates whether an error code is saved for the exception. If one is saved, the
    contents of the error code are described. (This section is not applicable to interrupts.)
•   Saved Instruction Pointer — Describes which instruction the saved (or return) instruction pointer points to.
    It also indicates whether the pointer can be used to restart a faulting instruction.
•   Program State Change — Describes the effects of the exception or interrupt on the state of the currently
    running program or task and the possibilities of restarting the program or task without loss of continuity.

Interrupt 0—Divide Error Exception (#DE)

Exception Class      Fault.

Description
Indicates the divisor operand for a DIV or IDIV instruction is 0 or that the result cannot be represented in the
number of bits specified for the destination operand.

Exception Error Code
None.

Saved Instruction Pointer
Saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the instruction that generated the exception.

Program State Change
A program-state change does not accompany the divide error, because the exception occurs before the faulting
instruction is executed.

Interrupt 1—Debug Exception (#DB)

Exception Class         Trap or Fault. The exception handler can distinguish between traps or faults by exam-
                        ining the contents of DR6 and the other debug registers.

Description
Indicates that one or more of several debug-exception conditions has been detected. Whether the exception is a
fault or a trap depends on the condition (see Table 6-3). See Chapter 17, “Debug, Branch Profile, TSC, and
Resource Monitoring Features,” for detailed information about the debug exceptions.

                     Table 6-3. Debug Exception Conditions and Corresponding Exception Classes
Exception Condition                                                              Exception Class
Instruction fetch breakpoint                                                     Fault
Data read or write breakpoint                                                    Trap
I/O read or write breakpoint                                                     Trap
General detect condition (in conjunction with in-circuit emulation)              Fault
Single-step                                                                      Trap
Task-switch                                                                      Trap

Exception Error Code
None. An exception handler can examine the debug registers to determine which condition caused the exception.

Saved Instruction Pointer
Fault — Saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the instruction that generated the exception.
Trap — Saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the instruction following the instruction that generated the
exception.

Program State Change
Fault — A program-state change does not accompany the debug exception, because the exception occurs before
the faulting instruction is executed. The program can resume normal execution upon returning from the debug
exception handler.
Trap — A program-state change does accompany the debug exception, because the instruction or task switch being
executed is allowed to complete before the exception is generated. However, the new state of the program is not
corrupted and execution of the program can continue reliably.
Any debug exception inside an RTM region causes a transactional abort and, by default, redirects control flow to the
fallback instruction address. If advanced debugging of RTM transactional regions has been enabled, any transac-
tional abort due to a debug exception instead causes execution to roll back to just before the XBEGIN instruction
and then delivers a #DB. See Section 16.3.7, “RTM-Enabled Debugger Support,” of Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architec-
tures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1.

Interrupt 2—NMI Interrupt

Exception Class     Not applicable.

Description
The nonmaskable interrupt (NMI) is generated externally by asserting the processor’s NMI pin or through an NMI
request set by the I/O APIC to the local APIC. This interrupt causes the NMI interrupt handler to be called.

Exception Error Code
Not applicable.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The processor always takes an NMI interrupt on an instruction boundary. The saved contents of CS and EIP regis-
ters point to the next instruction to be executed at the point the interrupt is taken. See Section 6.5, “Exception
Classifications,” for more information about when the processor takes NMI interrupts.

Program State Change
The instruction executing when an NMI interrupt is received is completed before the NMI is generated. A program
or task can thus be restarted upon returning from an interrupt handler without loss of continuity, provided the
interrupt handler saves the state of the processor before handling the interrupt and restores the processor’s state
prior to a return.

Interrupt 3—Breakpoint Exception (#BP)

Exception Class     Trap.

Description
Indicates that a breakpoint instruction (INT 3, opcode CCH) was executed, causing a breakpoint trap to be gener-
ated. Typically, a debugger sets a breakpoint by replacing the first opcode byte of an instruction with the opcode
for the INT 3 instruction. (The INT 3 instruction is one byte long, which makes it easy to replace an opcode in a
code segment in RAM with the breakpoint opcode.) The operating system or a debugging tool can use a data
segment mapped to the same physical address space as the code segment to place an INT 3 instruction in places
where it is desired to call the debugger.
With the P6 family, Pentium, Intel486, and Intel386 processors, it is more convenient to set breakpoints with the
debug registers. (See Section 17.3.2, “Breakpoint Exception (#BP)—Interrupt Vector 3,” for information about the
breakpoint exception.) If more breakpoints are needed beyond what the debug registers allow, the INT 3 instruc-
tion can be used.
Any breakpoint exception inside an RTM region causes a transactional abort and, by default, redirects control flow
to the fallback instruction address. If advanced debugging of RTM transactional regions has been enabled, any
transactional abort due to a break exception instead causes execution to roll back to just before the XBEGIN
instruction and then delivers a debug exception (#DB) — not a breakpoint exception. See Section 16.3.7, “RTM-
Enabled Debugger Support,” of Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1.
A breakpoint exception can also be generated by executing the INT n instruction with an operand of 3. The action
of this instruction (INT 3) is slightly different than that of the INT 3 instruction (see “INTn/INTO/INT3—Call to
Interrupt Procedure” in Chapter 3 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume
2A).

Exception Error Code
None.

Saved Instruction Pointer
Saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the instruction following the INT 3 instruction.

Program State Change
Even though the EIP points to the instruction following the breakpoint instruction, the state of the program is
essentially unchanged because the INT 3 instruction does not affect any register or memory locations. The
debugger can thus resume the suspended program by replacing the INT 3 instruction that caused the breakpoint
with the original opcode and decrementing the saved contents of the EIP register. Upon returning from the
debugger, program execution resumes with the replaced instruction.

Interrupt 4—Overflow Exception (#OF)

Exception Class      Trap.

Description
Indicates that an overflow trap occurred when an INTO instruction was executed. The INTO instruction checks the
state of the OF flag in the EFLAGS register. If the OF flag is set, an overflow trap is generated.
Some arithmetic instructions (such as the ADD and SUB) perform both signed and unsigned arithmetic. These
instructions set the OF and CF flags in the EFLAGS register to indicate signed overflow and unsigned overflow,
respectively. When performing arithmetic on signed operands, the OF flag can be tested directly or the INTO
instruction can be used. The benefit of using the INTO instruction is that if the overflow exception is detected, an
exception handler can be called automatically to handle the overflow condition.

Exception Error Code
None.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the instruction following the INTO instruction.

Program State Change
Even though the EIP points to the instruction following the INTO instruction, the state of the program is essentially
unchanged because the INTO instruction does not affect any register or memory locations. The program can thus
resume normal execution upon returning from the overflow exception handler.

Interrupt 5—BOUND Range Exceeded Exception (#BR)

Exception Class     Fault.

Description
Indicates that a BOUND-range-exceeded fault occurred when a BOUND instruction was executed. The BOUND
instruction checks that a signed array index is within the upper and lower bounds of an array located in memory. If
the array index is not within the bounds of the array, a BOUND-range-exceeded fault is generated.

Exception Error Code
None.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the BOUND instruction that generated the exception.

Program State Change
A program-state change does not accompany the bounds-check fault, because the operands for the BOUND
instruction are not modified. Returning from the BOUND-range-exceeded exception handler causes the BOUND
instruction to be restarted.

Interrupt 6—Invalid Opcode Exception (#UD)

Exception Class      Fault.

Description
Indicates that the processor did one of the following things:
•   Attempted to execute an invalid or reserved opcode.
•   Attempted to execute an instruction with an operand type that is invalid for its accompanying opcode; for
    example, the source operand for a LES instruction is not a memory location.
•   Attempted to execute an MMX or SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instruction on an Intel 64 or IA-32 processor that does not
    support the MMX technology or SSE/SSE2/SSE3/SSSE3 extensions, respectively. CPUID feature flags MMX (bit
    23), SSE (bit 25), SSE2 (bit 26), SSE3 (ECX, bit 0), SSSE3 (ECX, bit 9) indicate support for these extensions.
•   Attempted to execute an MMX instruction or SSE/SSE2/SSE3/SSSE3 SIMD instruction (with the exception of
    the MOVNTI, PAUSE, PREFETCHh, SFENCE, LFENCE, MFENCE, CLFLUSH, MONITOR, and MWAIT instructions)
    when the EM flag in control register CR0 is set (1).
•   Attempted to execute an SSE/SE2/SSE3/SSSE3 instruction when the OSFXSR bit in control register CR4 is clear
    (0). Note this does not include the following SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instructions: MASKMOVQ, MOVNTQ, MOVNTI,
    PREFETCHh, SFENCE, LFENCE, MFENCE, and CLFLUSH; or the 64-bit versions of the PAVGB, PAVGW, PEXTRW,
    PINSRW, PMAXSW, PMAXUB, PMINSW, PMINUB, PMOVMSKB, PMULHUW, PSADBW, PSHUFW, PADDQ, PSUBQ,
    PALIGNR, PABSB, PABSD, PABSW, PHADDD, PHADDSW, PHADDW, PHSUBD, PHSUBSW, PHSUBW,
    PMADDUBSM, PMULHRSW, PSHUFB, PSIGNB, PSIGND, and PSIGNW.
•   Attempted to execute an SSE/SSE2/SSE3/SSSE3 instruction on an Intel 64 or IA-32 processor that caused a
    SIMD floating-point exception when the OSXMMEXCPT bit in control register CR4 is clear (0).
•   Executed a UD2 instruction. Note that even though it is the execution of the UD2 instruction that causes the
    invalid opcode exception, the saved instruction pointer will still points at the UD2 instruction.
•   Detected a LOCK prefix that precedes an instruction that may not be locked or one that may be locked but the
    destination operand is not a memory location.
•   Attempted to execute an LLDT, SLDT, LTR, STR, LSL, LAR, VERR, VERW, or ARPL instruction while in real-
    address or virtual-8086 mode.
•   Attempted to execute the RSM instruction when not in SMM mode.
In Intel 64 and IA-32 processors that implement out-of-order execution microarchitectures, this exception is not
generated until an attempt is made to retire the result of executing an invalid instruction; that is, decoding and
speculatively attempting to execute an invalid opcode does not generate this exception. Likewise, in the Pentium
processor and earlier IA-32 processors, this exception is not generated as the result of prefetching and preliminary
decoding of an invalid instruction. (See Section 6.5, “Exception Classifications,” for general rules for taking of inter-
rupts and exceptions.)
The opcodes D6 and F1 are undefined opcodes reserved by the Intel 64 and IA-32 architectures. These opcodes,
even though undefined, do not generate an invalid opcode exception.
The UD2 instruction is guaranteed to generate an invalid opcode exception.

Exception Error Code
None.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the instruction that generated the exception.

Program State Change
A program-state change does not accompany an invalid-opcode fault, because the invalid instruction is not
executed.

Interrupt 7—Device Not Available Exception (#NM)

Exception Class      Fault.

Description
Indicates one of the following things:
The device-not-available exception is generated by either of three conditions:
•   The processor executed an x87 FPU floating-point instruction while the EM flag in control register CR0 was set
    (1). See the paragraph below for the special case of the WAIT/FWAIT instruction.
•   The processor executed a WAIT/FWAIT instruction while the MP and TS flags of register CR0 were set,
    regardless of the setting of the EM flag.
•   The processor executed an x87 FPU, MMX, or SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instruction (with the exception of MOVNTI,
    PAUSE, PREFETCHh, SFENCE, LFENCE, MFENCE, and CLFLUSH) while the TS flag in control register CR0 was set
    and the EM flag is clear.
The EM flag is set when the processor does not have an internal x87 FPU floating-point unit. A device-not-available
exception is then generated each time an x87 FPU floating-point instruction is encountered, allowing an exception
handler to call floating-point instruction emulation routines.
The TS flag indicates that a context switch (task switch) has occurred since the last time an x87 floating-point,
MMX, or SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instruction was executed; but that the context of the x87 FPU, XMM, and MXCSR registers
were not saved. When the TS flag is set and the EM flag is clear, the processor generates a device-not-available
exception each time an x87 floating-point, MMX, or SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instruction is encountered (with the exception
of the instructions listed above). The exception handler can then save the context of the x87 FPU, XMM, and MXCSR
registers before it executes the instruction. See Section 2.5, “Control Registers,” for more information about the TS
flag.
The MP flag in control register CR0 is used along with the TS flag to determine if WAIT or FWAIT instructions should
generate a device-not-available exception. It extends the function of the TS flag to the WAIT and FWAIT instruc-
tions, giving the exception handler an opportunity to save the context of the x87 FPU before the WAIT or FWAIT
instruction is executed. The MP flag is provided primarily for use with the Intel 286 and Intel386 DX processors. For
programs running on the Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, P6 family, Pentium, or Intel486 DX processors, or the Intel 487 SX
coprocessors, the MP flag should always be set; for programs running on the Intel486 SX processor, the MP flag
should be clear.

Exception Error Code
None.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the floating-point instruction or the WAIT/FWAIT instruction
that generated the exception.

Program State Change
A program-state change does not accompany a device-not-available fault, because the instruction that generated
the exception is not executed.
If the EM flag is set, the exception handler can then read the floating-point instruction pointed to by the EIP and
call the appropriate emulation routine.
If the MP and TS flags are set or the TS flag alone is set, the exception handler can save the context of the x87 FPU,
clear the TS flag, and continue execution at the interrupted floating-point or WAIT/FWAIT instruction.

Interrupt 8—Double Fault Exception (#DF)

Exception Class        Abort.

Description
Indicates that the processor detected a second exception while calling an exception handler for a prior exception.
Normally, when the processor detects another exception while trying to call an exception handler, the two excep-
tions can be handled serially. If, however, the processor cannot handle them serially, it signals the double-fault
exception. To determine when two faults need to be signalled as a double fault, the processor divides the excep-
tions into three classes: benign exceptions, contributory exceptions, and page faults (see Table 6-4).

                                    Table 6-4. Interrupt and Exception Classes
 Class                                 Vector Number                  Description
 Benign Exceptions and Interrupts      1                              Debug
                                       2                              NMI Interrupt
                                       3                              Breakpoint
                                       4                              Overflow
                                       5                              BOUND Range Exceeded
                                       6                              Invalid Opcode
                                       7                              Device Not Available
                                       9                              Coprocessor Segment Overrun
                                       16                             Floating-Point Error
                                       17                             Alignment Check
                                       18                             Machine Check
                                       19                             SIMD floating-point
                                       All                            INT n
                                       All                            INTR
 Contributory Exceptions               0                              Divide Error
                                       10                             Invalid TSS
                                       11                             Segment Not Present
                                       12                             Stack Fault
                                       13                             General Protection
 Page Faults                           14                             Page Fault
                                       20                             Virtualization Exception

Table 6-5 shows the various combinations of exception classes that cause a double fault to be generated. A double-
fault exception falls in the abort class of exceptions. The program or task cannot be restarted or resumed. The
double-fault handler can be used to collect diagnostic information about the state of the machine and/or, when
possible, to shut the application and/or system down gracefully or restart the system.

A segment or page fault may be encountered while prefetching instructions; however, this behavior is outside the
domain of Table 6-5. Any further faults generated while the processor is attempting to transfer control to the
appropriate fault handler could still lead to a double-fault sequence.

                               Table 6-5. Conditions for Generating a Double Fault
                              Second Exception
First Exception               Benign                       Contributory                     Page Fault
Benign                        Handle Exceptions Serially   Handle Exceptions Serially       Handle Exceptions Serially

Contributory                  Handle Exceptions Serially   Generate a Double Fault          Handle Exceptions Serially

Page Fault                    Handle Exceptions Serially   Generate a Double Fault          Generate a Double Fault

Double Fault                  Handle Exceptions Serially   Enter Shutdown Mode              Enter Shutdown Mode

If another contributory or page fault exception occurs while attempting to call the double-fault handler, the
processor enters shutdown mode. This mode is similar to the state following execution of an HLT instruction. In this
mode, the processor stops executing instructions until an NMI interrupt, SMI interrupt, hardware reset, or INIT# is
received. The processor generates a special bus cycle to indicate that it has entered shutdown mode. Software
designers may need to be aware of the response of hardware when it goes into shutdown mode. For example,
hardware may turn on an indicator light on the front panel, generate an NMI interrupt to record diagnostic informa-
tion, invoke reset initialization, generate an INIT initialization, or generate an SMI. If any events are pending
during shutdown, they will be handled after an wake event from shutdown is processed (for example, A20M# inter-
rupts).
If a shutdown occurs while the processor is executing an NMI interrupt handler, then only a hardware reset can
restart the processor. Likewise, if the shutdown occurs while executing in SMM, a hardware reset must be used to
restart the processor.

Exception Error Code
Zero. The processor always pushes an error code of 0 onto the stack of the double-fault handler.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers are undefined.

Program State Change
A program-state following a double-fault exception is undefined. The program or task cannot be resumed or
restarted. The only available action of the double-fault exception handler is to collect all possible context informa-
tion for use in diagnostics and then close the application and/or shut down or reset the processor.
If the double fault occurs when any portion of the exception handling machine state is corrupted, the handler
cannot be invoked and the processor must be reset.

Interrupt 9—Coprocessor Segment Overrun

Exception Class     Abort. (Intel reserved; do not use. Recent IA-32 processors do not generate this
                    exception.)

Description
Indicates that an Intel386 CPU-based systems with an Intel 387 math coprocessor detected a page or segment
violation while transferring the middle portion of an Intel 387 math coprocessor operand. The P6 family, Pentium,
and Intel486 processors do not generate this exception; instead, this condition is detected with a general protec-
tion exception (#GP), interrupt 13.

Exception Error Code
None.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the instruction that generated the exception.

Program State Change
A program-state following a coprocessor segment-overrun exception is undefined. The program or task cannot
be resumed or restarted. The only available action of the exception handler is to save the instruction pointer and
reinitialize the x87 FPU using the FNINIT instruction.

Interrupt 10—Invalid TSS Exception (#TS)

Exception Class       Fault.

Description
Indicates that there was an error related to a TSS. Such an error might be detected during a task switch or during
the execution of instructions that use information from a TSS. Table 6-6 shows the conditions that cause an invalid
TSS exception to be generated.

                                        Table 6-6. Invalid TSS Conditions
Error Code Index                    Invalid Condition
TSS segment selector index          The TSS segment limit is less than 67H for 32-bit TSS or less than 2CH for 16-bit TSS.
TSS segment selector index          During an IRET task switch, the TI flag in the TSS segment selector indicates the LDT.
TSS segment selector index          During an IRET task switch, the TSS segment selector exceeds descriptor table limit.
TSS segment selector index          During an IRET task switch, the busy flag in the TSS descriptor indicates an inactive task.
TSS segment selector index          During an IRET task switch, an attempt to load the backlink limit faults.
TSS segment selector index          During an IRET task switch, the backlink is a NULL selector.
TSS segment selector index          During an IRET task switch, the backlink points to a descriptor which is not a busy TSS.
TSS segment selector index          The new TSS descriptor is beyond the GDT limit.
TSS segment selector index          The new TSS descriptor is not writable.
TSS segment selector index          Stores to the old TSS encounter a fault condition.
TSS segment selector index          The old TSS descriptor is not writable for a jump or IRET task switch.
TSS segment selector index          The new TSS backlink is not writable for a call or exception task switch.
TSS segment selector index          The new TSS selector is null on an attempt to lock the new TSS.
TSS segment selector index          The new TSS selector has the TI bit set on an attempt to lock the new TSS.
TSS segment selector index          The new TSS descriptor is not an available TSS descriptor on an attempt to lock the new
                                    TSS.
LDT segment selector index          LDT or LDT not present.
Stack segment selector index        The stack segment selector exceeds descriptor table limit.
Stack segment selector index        The stack segment selector is NULL.
Stack segment selector index        The stack segment descriptor is a non-data segment.
Stack segment selector index        The stack segment is not writable.
Stack segment selector index        The stack segment DPL ≠ CPL.
Stack segment selector index        The stack segment selector RPL ≠ CPL.
Code segment selector index         The code segment selector exceeds descriptor table limit.
Code segment selector index         The code segment selector is NULL.
Code segment selector index         The code segment descriptor is not a code segment type.
Code segment selector index         The nonconforming code segment DPL ≠ CPL.
Code segment selector index         The conforming code segment DPL is greater than CPL.
Data segment selector index         The data segment selector exceeds the descriptor table limit.
Data segment selector index         The data segment descriptor is not a readable code or data type.
Data segment selector index         The data segment descriptor is a nonconforming code type and RPL > DPL.

                                     Table 6-6. Invalid TSS Conditions (Contd.)
 Error Code Index                    Invalid Condition
 Data segment selector index         The data segment descriptor is a nonconforming code type and CPL > DPL.
 TSS segment selector index          The TSS segment selector is NULL for LTR.
 TSS segment selector index          The TSS segment selector has the TI bit set for LTR.
 TSS segment selector index          The TSS segment descriptor/upper descriptor is beyond the GDT segment limit.
 TSS segment selector index          The TSS segment descriptor is not an available TSS type.
 TSS segment selector index          The TSS segment descriptor is an available 286 TSS type in IA-32e mode.
 TSS segment selector index          The TSS segment upper descriptor is not the correct type.
 TSS segment selector index          The TSS segment descriptor contains a non-canonical base.
 TSS segment selector index          There is a limit violation in attempting to load SS selector or ESP from a TSS on a call or
                                     exception which changes privilege levels in legacy mode.
 TSS segment selector index          There is a limit violation or canonical fault in attempting to load RSP or IST from a TSS on a
                                     call or exception which changes privilege levels in IA-32e mode.

This exception can generated either in the context of the original task or in the context of the new task (see Section
7.3, “Task Switching”). Until the processor has completely verified the presence of the new TSS, the exception is
generated in the context of the original task. Once the existence of the new TSS is verified, the task switch is
considered complete. Any invalid-TSS conditions detected after this point are handled in the context of the new
task. (A task switch is considered complete when the task register is loaded with the segment selector for the new
TSS and, if the switch is due to a procedure call or interrupt, the previous task link field of the new TSS references
the old TSS.)
The invalid-TSS handler must be a task called using a task gate. Handling this exception inside the faulting TSS
context is not recommended because the processor state may not be consistent.

Exception Error Code
An error code containing the segment selector index for the segment descriptor that caused the violation is pushed
onto the stack of the exception handler. If the EXT flag is set, it indicates that the exception was caused by an event
external to the currently running program (for example, if an external interrupt handler using a task gate
attempted a task switch to an invalid TSS).

Saved Instruction Pointer
If the exception condition was detected before the task switch was carried out, the saved contents of CS and EIP
registers point to the instruction that invoked the task switch. If the exception condition was detected after the task
switch was carried out, the saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the first instruction of the new task.

Program State Change
The ability of the invalid-TSS handler to recover from the fault depends on the error condition than causes the fault.
See Section 7.3, “Task Switching,” for more information on the task switch process and the possible recovery
actions that can be taken.
If an invalid TSS exception occurs during a task switch, it can occur before or after the commit-to-new-task point.
If it occurs before the commit point, no program state change occurs. If it occurs after the commit point (when the
segment descriptor information for the new segment selectors have been loaded in the segment registers), the
processor will load all the state information from the new TSS before it generates the exception. During a task
switch, the processor first loads all the segment registers with segment selectors from the TSS, then checks their
contents for validity. If an invalid TSS exception is discovered, the remaining segment registers are loaded but not
checked for validity and therefore may not be usable for referencing memory. The invalid TSS handler should not
rely on being able to use the segment selectors found in the CS, SS, DS, ES, FS, and GS registers without causing
another exception. The exception handler should load all segment registers before trying to resume the new task;
otherwise, general-protection exceptions (#GP) may result later under conditions that make diagnosis more diffi-

cult. The Intel recommended way of dealing situation is to use a task for the invalid TSS exception handler. The
task switch back to the interrupted task from the invalid-TSS exception-handler task will then cause the processor
to check the registers as it loads them from the TSS.

Interrupt 11—Segment Not Present (#NP)

Exception Class      Fault.

Description
Indicates that the present flag of a segment or gate descriptor is clear. The processor can generate this exception
during any of the following operations:
•   While attempting to load CS, DS, ES, FS, or GS registers. [Detection of a not-present segment while loading the
    SS register causes a stack fault exception (#SS) to be generated.] This situation can occur while performing a
    task switch.
•   While attempting to load the LDTR using an LLDT instruction. Detection of a not-present LDT while loading the
    LDTR during a task switch operation causes an invalid-TSS exception (#TS) to be generated.
•   When executing the LTR instruction and the TSS is marked not present.
•   While attempting to use a gate descriptor or TSS that is marked segment-not-present, but is otherwise valid.
An operating system typically uses the segment-not-present exception to implement virtual memory at the
segment level. If the exception handler loads the segment and returns, the interrupted program or task resumes
execution.
A not-present indication in a gate descriptor, however, does not indicate that a segment is not present (because
gates do not correspond to segments). The operating system may use the present flag for gate descriptors to
trigger exceptions of special significance to the operating system.
A contributory exception or page fault that subsequently referenced a not-present segment would cause a double
fault (#DF) to be generated instead of #NP.

Exception Error Code
An error code containing the segment selector index for the segment descriptor that caused the violation is pushed
onto the stack of the exception handler. If the EXT flag is set, it indicates that the exception resulted from either:
•   an external event (NMI or INTR) that caused an interrupt, which subsequently referenced a not-present
    segment
•   a benign exception that subsequently referenced a not-present segment
The IDT flag is set if the error code refers to an IDT entry. This occurs when the IDT entry for an interrupt being
serviced references a not-present gate. Such an event could be generated by an INT instruction or a hardware
interrupt.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers normally point to the instruction that generated the exception. If the
exception occurred while loading segment descriptors for the segment selectors in a new TSS, the CS and EIP
registers point to the first instruction in the new task. If the exception occurred while accessing a gate descriptor,
the CS and EIP registers point to the instruction that invoked the access (for example a CALL instruction that refer-
ences a call gate).

Program State Change
If the segment-not-present exception occurs as the result of loading a register (CS, DS, SS, ES, FS, GS, or LDTR),
a program-state change does accompany the exception because the register is not loaded. Recovery from this
exception is possible by simply loading the missing segment into memory and setting the present flag in the
segment descriptor.
If the segment-not-present exception occurs while accessing a gate descriptor, a program-state change does not
accompany the exception. Recovery from this exception is possible merely by setting the present flag in the gate
descriptor.
If a segment-not-present exception occurs during a task switch, it can occur before or after the commit-to-new-
task point (see Section 7.3, “Task Switching”). If it occurs before the commit point, no program state change

occurs. If it occurs after the commit point, the processor will load all the state information from the new TSS
(without performing any additional limit, present, or type checks) before it generates the exception. The segment-
not-present exception handler should not rely on being able to use the segment selectors found in the CS, SS, DS,
ES, FS, and GS registers without causing another exception. (See the Program State Change description for “Inter-
rupt 10—Invalid TSS Exception (#TS)” in this chapter for additional information on how to handle this situation.)

Interrupt 12—Stack Fault Exception (#SS)

Exception Class      Fault.

Description
Indicates that one of the following stack related conditions was detected:
•   A limit violation is detected during an operation that refers to the SS register. Operations that can cause a limit
    violation include stack-oriented instructions such as POP, PUSH, CALL, RET, IRET, ENTER, and LEAVE, as well as
    other memory references which implicitly or explicitly use the SS register (for example, MOV AX, [BP+6] or
    MOV AX, SS:[EAX+6]). The ENTER instruction generates this exception when there is not enough stack space
    for allocating local variables.
•   A not-present stack segment is detected when attempting to load the SS register. This violation can occur
    during the execution of a task switch, a CALL instruction to a different privilege level, a return to a different
    privilege level, an LSS instruction, or a MOV or POP instruction to the SS register.
•   A canonical violation is detected in 64-bit mode during an operation that reference memory using the stack
    pointer register containing a non-canonical memory address.
Recovery from this fault is possible by either extending the limit of the stack segment (in the case of a limit viola-
tion) or loading the missing stack segment into memory (in the case of a not-present violation.
In the case of a canonical violation that was caused intentionally by software, recovery is possible by loading the
correct canonical value into RSP. Otherwise, a canonical violation of the address in RSP likely reflects some register
corruption in the software.

Exception Error Code
If the exception is caused by a not-present stack segment or by overflow of the new stack during an inter-privilege-
level call, the error code contains a segment selector for the segment that caused the exception. Here, the excep-
tion handler can test the present flag in the segment descriptor pointed to by the segment selector to determine
the cause of the exception. For a normal limit violation (on a stack segment already in use) the error code is set to
0.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers generally point to the instruction that generated the exception.
However, when the exception results from attempting to load a not-present stack segment during a task switch,
the CS and EIP registers point to the first instruction of the new task.

Program State Change
A program-state change does not generally accompany a stack-fault exception, because the instruction that gener-
ated the fault is not executed. Here, the instruction can be restarted after the exception handler has corrected the
stack fault condition.
If a stack fault occurs during a task switch, it occurs after the commit-to-new-task point (see Section 7.3, “Task
Switching”). Here, the processor loads all the state information from the new TSS (without performing any addi-
tional limit, present, or type checks) before it generates the exception. The stack fault handler should thus not rely
on being able to use the segment selectors found in the CS, SS, DS, ES, FS, and GS registers without causing
another exception. The exception handler should check all segment registers before trying to resume the new
task; otherwise, general protection faults may result later under conditions that are more difficult to diagnose. (See
the Program State Change description for “Interrupt 10—Invalid TSS Exception (#TS)” in this chapter for additional
information on how to handle this situation.)

Interrupt 13—General Protection Exception (#GP)

Exception Class      Fault.

Description
Indicates that the processor detected one of a class of protection violations called “general-protection violations.”
The conditions that cause this exception to be generated comprise all the protection violations that do not cause
other exceptions to be generated (such as, invalid-TSS, segment-not-present, stack-fault, or page-fault excep-
tions). The following conditions cause general-protection exceptions to be generated:
•   Exceeding the segment limit when accessing the CS, DS, ES, FS, or GS segments.
•   Exceeding the segment limit when referencing a descriptor table (except during a task switch or a stack
    switch).
•   Transferring execution to a segment that is not executable.
•   Writing to a code segment or a read-only data segment.
•   Reading from an execute-only code segment.
•   Loading the SS register with a segment selector for a read-only segment (unless the selector comes from a TSS
    during a task switch, in which case an invalid-TSS exception occurs).
•   Loading the SS, DS, ES, FS, or GS register with a segment selector for a system segment.
•   Loading the DS, ES, FS, or GS register with a segment selector for an execute-only code segment.
•   Loading the SS register with the segment selector of an executable segment or a null segment selector.
•   Loading the CS register with a segment selector for a data segment or a null segment selector.
•   Accessing memory using the DS, ES, FS, or GS register when it contains a null segment selector.
•   Switching to a busy task during a call or jump to a TSS.
•   Using a segment selector on a non-IRET task switch that points to a TSS descriptor in the current LDT. TSS
    descriptors can only reside in the GDT. This condition causes a #TS exception during an IRET task switch.
•   Violating any of the privilege rules described in Chapter 5, “Protection.”
•   Exceeding the instruction length limit of 15 bytes (this only can occur when redundant prefixes are placed
    before an instruction).
•   Loading the CR0 register with a set PG flag (paging enabled) and a clear PE flag (protection disabled).
•   Loading the CR0 register with a set NW flag and a clear CD flag.
•   Referencing an entry in the IDT (following an interrupt or exception) that is not an interrupt, trap, or task gate.
•   Attempting to access an interrupt or exception handler through an interrupt or trap gate from virtual-8086
    mode when the handler’s code segment DPL is greater than 0.
•   Attempting to write a 1 into a reserved bit of CR4.
•   Attempting to execute a privileged instruction when the CPL is not equal to 0 (see Section 5.9, “Privileged
    Instructions,” for a list of privileged instructions).
•   Attempting to execute SGDT, SIDT, SLDT, SMSW, or STR when CR4.UMIP = 1 and the CPL is not equal to 0.
•   Writing to a reserved bit in an MSR.
•   Accessing a gate that contains a null segment selector.
•   Executing the INT n instruction when the CPL is greater than the DPL of the referenced interrupt, trap, or task
    gate.
•   The segment selector in a call, interrupt, or trap gate does not point to a code segment.
•   The segment selector operand in the LLDT instruction is a local type (TI flag is set) or does not point to a
    segment descriptor of the LDT type.
•   The segment selector operand in the LTR instruction is local or points to a TSS that is not available.
•   The target code-segment selector for a call, jump, or return is null.

•   If the PAE and/or PSE flag in control register CR4 is set and the processor detects any reserved bits in a page-
    directory-pointer-table entry set to 1. These bits are checked during a write to control registers CR0, CR3, or
    CR4 that causes a reloading of the page-directory-pointer-table entry.
•   Attempting to write a non-zero value into the reserved bits of the MXCSR register.
•   Executing an SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instruction that attempts to access a 128-bit memory location that is not aligned
    on a 16-byte boundary when the instruction requires 16-byte alignment. This condition also applies to the stack
    segment.
A program or task can be restarted following any general-protection exception. If the exception occurs while
attempting to call an interrupt handler, the interrupted program can be restartable, but the interrupt may be lost.

Exception Error Code
The processor pushes an error code onto the exception handler's stack. If the fault condition was detected while
loading a segment descriptor, the error code contains a segment selector to or IDT vector number for the
descriptor; otherwise, the error code is 0. The source of the selector in an error code may be any of the following:
•   An operand of the instruction.
•   A selector from a gate which is the operand of the instruction.
•   A selector from a TSS involved in a task switch.
•   IDT vector number.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the instruction that generated the exception.

Program State Change
In general, a program-state change does not accompany a general-protection exception, because the invalid
instruction or operation is not executed. An exception handler can be designed to correct all of the conditions that
cause general-protection exceptions and restart the program or task without any loss of program continuity.
If a general-protection exception occurs during a task switch, it can occur before or after the commit-to-new-task
point (see Section 7.3, “Task Switching”). If it occurs before the commit point, no program state change occurs. If
it occurs after the commit point, the processor will load all the state information from the new TSS (without
performing any additional limit, present, or type checks) before it generates the exception. The general-protection
exception handler should thus not rely on being able to use the segment selectors found in the CS, SS, DS, ES, FS,
and GS registers without causing another exception. (See the Program State Change description for “Interrupt
10—Invalid TSS Exception (#TS)” in this chapter for additional information on how to handle this situation.)

General Protection Exception in 64-bit Mode
The following conditions cause general-protection exceptions in 64-bit mode:
•   If the memory address is in a non-canonical form.
•   If a segment descriptor memory address is in non-canonical form.
•   If the target offset in a destination operand of a call or jmp is in a non-canonical form.
•   If a code segment or 64-bit call gate overlaps non-canonical space.
•   If the code segment descriptor pointed to by the selector in the 64-bit gate doesn't have the L-bit set and the
    D-bit clear.
•   If the EFLAGS.NT bit is set in IRET.
•   If the stack segment selector of IRET is null when going back to compatibility mode.
•   If the stack segment selector of IRET is null going back to CPL3 and 64-bit mode.
•   If a null stack segment selector RPL of IRET is not equal to CPL going back to non-CPL3 and 64-bit mode.
•   If the proposed new code segment descriptor of IRET has both the D-bit and the L-bit set.

•   If the segment descriptor pointed to by the segment selector in the destination operand is a code segment and
    it has both the D-bit and the L-bit set.
•   If the segment descriptor from a 64-bit call gate is in non-canonical space.
•   If the DPL from a 64-bit call-gate is less than the CPL or than the RPL of the 64-bit call-gate.
•   If the type field of the upper 64 bits of a 64-bit call gate is not 0.
•   If an attempt is made to load a null selector in the SS register in compatibility mode.
•   If an attempt is made to load null selector in the SS register in CPL3 and 64-bit mode.
•   If an attempt is made to load a null selector in the SS register in non-CPL3 and 64-bit mode where RPL is not
    equal to CPL.
•   If an attempt is made to clear CR0.PG while IA-32e mode is enabled.
•   If an attempt is made to set a reserved bit in CR3, CR4 or CR8.

Interrupt 14—Page-Fault Exception (#PF)

Exception Class      Fault.

Description
Indicates that, with paging enabled (the PG flag in the CR0 register is set), the processor detected one of the
following conditions while using the page-translation mechanism to translate a linear address to a physical
address:
•   The P (present) flag in a page-directory or page-table entry needed for the address translation is clear,
    indicating that a page table or the page containing the operand is not present in physical memory.
•   The procedure does not have sufficient privilege to access the indicated page (that is, a procedure running in
    user mode attempts to access a supervisor-mode page). If the SMAP flag is set in CR4, a page fault may also
    be triggered by code running in supervisor mode that tries to access data at a user-mode address. If the PKE
    flag is set in CR4, the PKRU register may cause page faults on data accesses to user-mode addresses with
    certain protection keys.
•   Code running in user mode attempts to write to a read-only page. If the WP flag is set in CR0, the page fault
    will also be triggered by code running in supervisor mode that tries to write to a read-only page.
•   An instruction fetch to a linear address that translates to a physical address in a memory page with the
    execute-disable bit set (for information about the execute-disable bit, see Chapter 4, “Paging”). If the SMEP
    flag is set in CR4, a page fault will also be triggered by code running in supervisor mode that tries to fetch an
    instruction from a user-mode address.
•   One or more reserved bits in paging-structure entry are set to 1. See description below of RSVD error code flag.
•   An enclave access violates one of the specified access-control requirements. See Section 38.3, “Access-control
    Requirements” and Section 38.19, “Enclave Page Cache Map (EPCM)” in Chapter 38, “Enclave Access Control
    and Data Structures.” In this case, the exception is called an SGX-induced page fault. The processor uses the
    error code (below) to distinguish SGX-induced page faults from ordinary page faults.
The exception handler can recover from page-not-present conditions and restart the program or task without any
loss of program continuity. It can also restart the program or task after a privilege violation, but the problem that
caused the privilege violation may be uncorrectable.
See also: Section 4.7, “Page-Fault Exceptions.”

Exception Error Code
Yes (special format). The processor provides the page-fault handler with two items of information to aid in diag-
nosing the exception and recovering from it:
•   An error code on the stack. The error code for a page fault has a format different from that for other exceptions
    (see Figure 6-9). The processor establishes the bits in the error code as follows:
    — P flag (bit 0).
      This flag is 0 if there is no translation for the linear address because the P flag was 0 in one of the paging-
      structure entries used to translate that address.
    — W/R (bit 1).
      If the access causing the page-fault exception was a write, this flag is 1; otherwise, it is 0. This flag
      describes the access causing the page-fault exception, not the access rights specified by paging.
    — U/S (bit 2).
      If a user-mode access caused the page-fault exception, this flag is 1; it is 0 if a supervisor-mode access did
      so. This flag describes the access causing the page-fault exception, not the access rights specified by
      paging.
    — RSVD flag (bit 3).
      This flag is 1 if there is no translation for the linear address because a reserved bit was set in one of the
      paging-structure entries used to translate that address.

    — I/D flag (bit 4).
      This flag is 1 if the access causing the page-fault exception was an instruction fetch. This flag describes the
      access causing the page-fault exception, not the access rights specified by paging.
    — PK flag (bit 5).
      This flag is 1 if the access causing the page-fault exception was a data access to a user-mode address with
      protection key disallowed by the value of the PKRU register.
    — SGX flag (bit 15).
      This flag is 1 if the exception is unrelated to paging and resulted from violation of SGX-specific access-
      control requirements. Because such a violation can occur only if there is no ordinary page fault, this flag is
      set only if the P flag (bit 0) is 1 and the RSVD flag (bit 3) and the PK flag (bit 5) are both 0.
    See Section 4.6, “Access Rights” and Section 4.7, “Page-Fault Exceptions” for more information about page-
    fault exceptions and the error codes that they produce.

                              31                                   15                      5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                                                           PK

                                                                                           RSVD
                                                                                           I/D

                                                                                           U/S
                                                                                           W/R
                                                                                           P
                                                                   SGX
                                                     Reserved              Reserved

                                   P      0 The fault was caused by a non-present page.
                                          1 The fault was caused by a page-level protection violation.

                                   W/R    0 The access causing the fault was a read.
                                          1 The access causing the fault was a write.

                                   U/S    0 A supervisor-mode access caused the fault.
                                          1 A user-mode access caused the fault.

                                   RSVD   0 The fault was not caused by reserved bit violation.
                                          1 The fault was caused by a reserved bit set to 1 in some
                                            paging-structure entry.

                                   I/D    0 The fault was not caused by an instruction fetch.
                                          1 The fault was caused by an instruction fetch.

                                   PK     0 The fault was not caused by protection keys.
                                          1 There was a protection-key violation.

                                   SGX    0 The fault is not related to SGX.
                                          1 The fault resulted from violation of SGX-specific access-control
                                            requirements.

                                               Figure 6-9. Page-Fault Error Code

•   The contents of the CR2 register. The processor loads the CR2 register with the 32-bit linear address that
    generated the exception. The page-fault handler can use this address to locate the corresponding page
    directory and page-table entries. Another page fault can potentially occur during execution of the page-fault
    handler; the handler should save the contents of the CR2 register before a second page fault can occur.1 If a
    page fault is caused by a page-level protection violation, the access flag in the page-directory entry is set when
    the fault occurs. The behavior of IA-32 processors regarding the access flag in the corresponding page-table
    entry is model specific and not architecturally defined.

1. Processors update CR2 whenever a page fault is detected. If a second page fault occurs while an earlier page fault is being deliv-
   ered, the faulting linear address of the second fault will overwrite the contents of CR2 (replacing the previous address). These
   updates to CR2 occur even if the page fault results in a double fault or occurs during the delivery of a double fault.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers generally point to the instruction that generated the exception. If the
page-fault exception occurred during a task switch, the CS and EIP registers may point to the first instruction of the
new task (as described in the following “Program State Change” section).

Program State Change
A program-state change does not normally accompany a page-fault exception, because the instruction that causes
the exception to be generated is not executed. After the page-fault exception handler has corrected the violation
(for example, loaded the missing page into memory), execution of the program or task can be resumed.
When a page-fault exception is generated during a task switch, the program-state may change, as follows. During
a task switch, a page-fault exception can occur during any of following operations:
•   While writing the state of the original task into the TSS of that task.
•   While reading the GDT to locate the TSS descriptor of the new task.
•   While reading the TSS of the new task.
•   While reading segment descriptors associated with segment selectors from the new task.
•   While reading the LDT of the new task to verify the segment registers stored in the new TSS.
In the last two cases the exception occurs in the context of the new task. The instruction pointer refers to the first
instruction of the new task, not to the instruction which caused the task switch (or the last instruction to be
executed, in the case of an interrupt). If the design of the operating system permits page faults to occur during
task-switches, the page-fault handler should be called through a task gate.
If a page fault occurs during a task switch, the processor will load all the state information from the new TSS
(without performing any additional limit, present, or type checks) before it generates the exception. The page-fault
handler should thus not rely on being able to use the segment selectors found in the CS, SS, DS, ES, FS, and GS
registers without causing another exception. (See the Program State Change description for “Interrupt 10—Invalid
TSS Exception (#TS)” in this chapter for additional information on how to handle this situation.)

Additional Exception-Handling Information
Special care should be taken to ensure that an exception that occurs during an explicit stack switch does not cause
the processor to use an invalid stack pointer (SS:ESP). Software written for 16-bit IA-32 processors often use a
pair of instructions to change to a new stack, for example:
    MOV SS, AX
    MOV SP, StackTop
When executing this code on one of the 32-bit IA-32 processors, it is possible to get a page fault, general-protec-
tion fault (#GP), or alignment check fault (#AC) after the segment selector has been loaded into the SS register
but before the ESP register has been loaded. At this point, the two parts of the stack pointer (SS and ESP) are
inconsistent. The new stack segment is being used with the old stack pointer.
The processor does not use the inconsistent stack pointer if the exception handler switches to a well defined stack
(that is, the handler is a task or a more privileged procedure). However, if the exception handler is called at the
same privilege level and from the same task, the processor will attempt to use the inconsistent stack pointer.
In systems that handle page-fault, general-protection, or alignment check exceptions within the faulting task (with
trap or interrupt gates), software executing at the same privilege level as the exception handler should initialize a
new stack by using the LSS instruction rather than a pair of MOV instructions, as described earlier in this note.
When the exception handler is running at privilege level 0 (the normal case), the problem is limited to procedures
or tasks that run at privilege level 0, typically the kernel of the operating system.

Interrupt 16—x87 FPU Floating-Point Error (#MF)

Exception Class      Fault.

Description
Indicates that the x87 FPU has detected a floating-point error. The NE flag in the register CR0 must be set for an
interrupt 16 (floating-point error exception) to be generated. (See Section 2.5, “Control Registers,” for a detailed
description of the NE flag.)

                                                         NOTE
        SIMD floating-point exceptions (#XM) are signaled through interrupt 19.

While executing x87 FPU instructions, the x87 FPU detects and reports six types of floating-point error conditions:
•   Invalid operation (#I)
    — Stack overflow or underflow (#IS)
    — Invalid arithmetic operation (#IA)
•   Divide-by-zero (#Z)
•   Denormalized operand (#D)
•   Numeric overflow (#O)
•   Numeric underflow (#U)
•   Inexact result (precision) (#P)
Each of these error conditions represents an x87 FPU exception type, and for each of exception type, the x87 FPU
provides a flag in the x87 FPU status register and a mask bit in the x87 FPU control register. If the x87 FPU detects
a floating-point error and the mask bit for the exception type is set, the x87 FPU handles the exception automati-
cally by generating a predefined (default) response and continuing program execution. The default responses have
been designed to provide a reasonable result for most floating-point applications.
If the mask for the exception is clear and the NE flag in register CR0 is set, the x87 FPU does the following:
1. Sets the necessary flag in the FPU status register.
2. Waits until the next “waiting” x87 FPU instruction or WAIT/FWAIT instruction is encountered in the program’s
   instruction stream.
3. Generates an internal error signal that cause the processor to generate a floating-point exception (#MF).
Prior to executing a waiting x87 FPU instruction or the WAIT/FWAIT instruction, the x87 FPU checks for pending
x87 FPU floating-point exceptions (as described in step 2 above). Pending x87 FPU floating-point exceptions are
ignored for “non-waiting” x87 FPU instructions, which include the FNINIT, FNCLEX, FNSTSW, FNSTSW AX, FNSTCW,
FNSTENV, and FNSAVE instructions. Pending x87 FPU exceptions are also ignored when executing the state
management instructions FXSAVE and FXRSTOR.
All of the x87 FPU floating-point error conditions can be recovered from. The x87 FPU floating-point-error exception
handler can determine the error condition that caused the exception from the settings of the flags in the x87 FPU
status word. See “Software Exception Handling” in Chapter 8 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software
Developer’s Manual, Volume 1, for more information on handling x87 FPU floating-point exceptions.

Exception Error Code
None. The x87 FPU provides its own error information.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the floating-point or WAIT/FWAIT instruction that was about to
be executed when the floating-point-error exception was generated. This is not the faulting instruction in which the
error condition was detected. The address of the faulting instruction is contained in the x87 FPU instruction pointer

register. See Section 8.1.8, “x87 FPU Instruction and Data (Operand) Pointers” in Chapter 8 of the Intel® 64 and
IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1, for more information about information the FPU saves
for use in handling floating-point-error exceptions.

Program State Change
A program-state change generally accompanies an x87 FPU floating-point exception because the handling of the
exception is delayed until the next waiting x87 FPU floating-point or WAIT/FWAIT instruction following the faulting
instruction. The x87 FPU, however, saves sufficient information about the error condition to allow recovery from the
error and re-execution of the faulting instruction if needed.
In situations where non- x87 FPU floating-point instructions depend on the results of an x87 FPU floating-point
instruction, a WAIT or FWAIT instruction can be inserted in front of a dependent instruction to force a pending x87
FPU floating-point exception to be handled before the dependent instruction is executed. See “x87 FPU Exception
Synchronization” in Chapter 8 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1,
for more information about synchronization of x87 floating-point-error exceptions.

Interrupt 17—Alignment Check Exception (#AC)

Exception Class         Fault.

Description
Indicates that the processor detected an unaligned memory operand when alignment checking was enabled. Align-
ment checks are only carried out in data (or stack) accesses (not in code fetches or system segment accesses). An
example of an alignment-check violation is a word stored at an odd byte address, or a doubleword stored at an
address that is not an integer multiple of 4. Table 6-7 lists the alignment requirements various data types recog-
nized by the processor.

                                       Table 6-7. Alignment Requirements by Data Type
Data Type                                                      Address Must Be Divisible By
Word                                                           2
Doubleword                                                     4
Single-precision floating-point (32-bits)                      4
Double-precision floating-point (64-bits)                      8
Double extended-precision floating-point (80-bits)             8
Quadword                                                       8
Double quadword                                                16
Segment Selector                                               2
32-bit Far Pointer                                             2
48-bit Far Pointer                                             4
32-bit Pointer                                                 4
GDTR, IDTR, LDTR, or Task Register Contents                    4
FSTENV/FLDENV Save Area                                        4 or 2, depending on operand size
FSAVE/FRSTOR Save Area                                         4 or 2, depending on operand size
Bit String                                                     2 or 4 depending on the operand-size attribute.

Note that the alignment check exception (#AC) is generated only for data types that must be aligned on word,
doubleword, and quadword boundaries. A general-protection exception (#GP) is generated 128-bit data types that
are not aligned on a 16-byte boundary.
To enable alignment checking, the following conditions must be true:
•   AM flag in CR0 register is set.
•   AC flag in the EFLAGS register is set.
•   The CPL is 3 (protected mode or virtual-8086 mode).
Alignment-check exceptions (#AC) are generated only when operating at privilege level 3 (user mode). Memory
references that default to privilege level 0, such as segment descriptor loads, do not generate alignment-check
exceptions, even when caused by a memory reference made from privilege level 3.
Storing the contents of the GDTR, IDTR, LDTR, or task register in memory while at privilege level 3 can generate
an alignment-check exception. Although application programs do not normally store these registers, the fault can
be avoided by aligning the information stored on an even word-address.
The FXSAVE/XSAVE and FXRSTOR/XRSTOR instructions save and restore a 512-byte data structure, the first byte
of which must be aligned on a 16-byte boundary. If the alignment-check exception (#AC) is enabled when
executing these instructions (and CPL is 3), a misaligned memory operand can cause either an alignment-check
exception or a general-protection exception (#GP) depending on the processor implementation (see “FXSAVE-
Save x87 FPU, MMX, SSE, and SSE2 State” and “FXRSTOR-Restore x87 FPU, MMX, SSE, and SSE2 State” in

Chapter 3 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2A; see “XSAVE—Save
Processor Extended States” and “XRSTOR—Restore Processor Extended States” in Chapter 5 of the Intel® 64 and
IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2C).
The MOVDQU, MOVUPS, and MOVUPD instructions perform 128-bit unaligned loads or stores. The LDDQU instruc-
tions loads 128-bit unaligned data. They do not generate general-protection exceptions (#GP) when operands are
not aligned on a 16-byte boundary. If alignment checking is enabled, alignment-check exceptions (#AC) may or
may not be generated depending on processor implementation when data addresses are not aligned on an 8-byte
boundary.
FSAVE and FRSTOR instructions can generate unaligned references, which can cause alignment-check faults. These
instructions are rarely needed by application programs.

Exception Error Code
Yes. The error code is null; all bits are clear except possibly bit 0 — EXT; see Section 6.13. EXT is set if the #AC is
recognized during delivery of an event other than a software interrupt (see “INT n/INTO/INT 3—Call to Interrupt
Procedure” in Chapter 3 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2A).

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the instruction that generated the exception.

Program State Change
A program-state change does not accompany an alignment-check fault, because the instruction is not executed.

Interrupt 18—Machine-Check Exception (#MC)

Exception Class     Abort.

Description
Indicates that the processor detected an internal machine error or a bus error, or that an external agent detected
a bus error. The machine-check exception is model-specific, available on the Pentium and later generations of
processors. The implementation of the machine-check exception is different between different processor families,
and these implementations may not be compatible with future Intel 64 or IA-32 processors. (Use the CPUID
instruction to determine whether this feature is present.)
Bus errors detected by external agents are signaled to the processor on dedicated pins: the BINIT# and MCERR#
pins on the Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, and P6 family processors and the BUSCHK# pin on the Pentium processor. When
one of these pins is enabled, asserting the pin causes error information to be loaded into machine-check registers
and a machine-check exception is generated.
The machine-check exception and machine-check architecture are discussed in detail in Chapter 15, “Machine-
Check Architecture.” Also, see the data books for the individual processors for processor-specific hardware infor-
mation.

Exception Error Code
None. Error information is provide by machine-check MSRs.

Saved Instruction Pointer
For the Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processors, the saved contents of extended machine-check state registers are
directly associated with the error that caused the machine-check exception to be generated (see Section 15.3.1.2,
“IA32_MCG_STATUS MSR,” and Section 15.3.2.6, “IA32_MCG Extended Machine Check State MSRs”).
For the P6 family processors, if the EIPV flag in the MCG_STATUS MSR is set, the saved contents of CS and EIP
registers are directly associated with the error that caused the machine-check exception to be generated; if the
flag is clear, the saved instruction pointer may not be associated with the error (see Section 15.3.1.2,
“IA32_MCG_STATUS MSR”).
For the Pentium processor, contents of the CS and EIP registers may not be associated with the error.

Program State Change
The machine-check mechanism is enabled by setting the MCE flag in control register CR4.
For the Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, P6 family, and Pentium processors, a program-state change always accompanies a
machine-check exception, and an abort class exception is generated. For abort exceptions, information about the
exception can be collected from the machine-check MSRs, but the program cannot generally be restarted.
If the machine-check mechanism is not enabled (the MCE flag in control register CR4 is clear), a machine-check
exception causes the processor to enter the shutdown state.

Interrupt 19—SIMD Floating-Point Exception (#XM)

Exception Class     Fault.

Description
Indicates the processor has detected an SSE/SSE2/SSE3 SIMD floating-point exception. The appropriate status
flag in the MXCSR register must be set and the particular exception unmasked for this interrupt to be generated.
There are six classes of numeric exception conditions that can occur while executing an SSE/ SSE2/SSE3 SIMD
floating-point instruction:
•   Invalid operation (#I)
•   Divide-by-zero (#Z)
•   Denormal operand (#D)
•   Numeric overflow (#O)
•   Numeric underflow (#U)
•   Inexact result (Precision) (#P)
The invalid operation, divide-by-zero, and denormal-operand exceptions are pre-computation exceptions; that is,
they are detected before any arithmetic operation occurs. The numeric underflow, numeric overflow, and inexact
result exceptions are post-computational exceptions.
See “SIMD Floating-Point Exceptions” in Chapter 11 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s
Manual, Volume 1, for additional information about the SIMD floating-point exception classes.
When a SIMD floating-point exception occurs, the processor does either of the following things:
•   It handles the exception automatically by producing the most reasonable result and allowing program
    execution to continue undisturbed. This is the response to masked exceptions.
•   It generates a SIMD floating-point exception, which in turn invokes a software exception handler. This is the
    response to unmasked exceptions.
Each of the six SIMD floating-point exception conditions has a corresponding flag bit and mask bit in the MXCSR
register. If an exception is masked (the corresponding mask bit in the MXCSR register is set), the processor takes
an appropriate automatic default action and continues with the computation. If the exception is unmasked (the
corresponding mask bit is clear) and the operating system supports SIMD floating-point exceptions (the OSXM-
MEXCPT flag in control register CR4 is set), a software exception handler is invoked through a SIMD floating-point
exception. If the exception is unmasked and the OSXMMEXCPT bit is clear (indicating that the operating system
does not support unmasked SIMD floating-point exceptions), an invalid opcode exception (#UD) is signaled instead
of a SIMD floating-point exception.
Note that because SIMD floating-point exceptions are precise and occur immediately, the situation does not arise
where an x87 FPU instruction, a WAIT/FWAIT instruction, or another SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instruction will catch a
pending unmasked SIMD floating-point exception.
In situations where a SIMD floating-point exception occurred while the SIMD floating-point exceptions were
masked (causing the corresponding exception flag to be set) and the SIMD floating-point exception was subse-
quently unmasked, then no exception is generated when the exception is unmasked.
When SSE/SSE2/SSE3 SIMD floating-point instructions operate on packed operands (made up of two or four sub-
operands), multiple SIMD floating-point exception conditions may be detected. If no more than one exception
condition is detected for one or more sets of sub-operands, the exception flags are set for each exception condition
detected. For example, an invalid exception detected for one sub-operand will not prevent the reporting of a divide-
by-zero exception for another sub-operand. However, when two or more exceptions conditions are generated for
one sub-operand, only one exception condition is reported, according to the precedences shown in Table 6-8. This
exception precedence sometimes results in the higher priority exception condition being reported and the lower
priority exception conditions being ignored.

                                    Table 6-8. SIMD Floating-Point Exceptions Priority
Priority       Description
1 (Highest)    Invalid operation exception due to SNaN operand (or any NaN operand for maximum, minimum, or certain compare and
               convert operations).
2              QNaN operand1.
3              Any other invalid operation exception not mentioned above or a divide-by-zero exception2.
4              Denormal operand exception2.
5              Numeric overflow and underflow exceptions possibly in conjunction with the inexact result exception2.
6 (Lowest)     Inexact result exception.
NOTES:
1. Though a QNaN this is not an exception, the handling of a QNaN operand has precedence over lower priority exceptions. For exam-
   ple, a QNaN divided by zero results in a QNaN, not a divide-by-zero- exception.
2. If masked, then instruction execution continues, and a lower priority exception can occur as well.

Exception Error Code
None.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instruction that was executed when the
SIMD floating-point exception was generated. This is the faulting instruction in which the error condition was
detected.

Program State Change
A program-state change does not accompany a SIMD floating-point exception because the handling of the excep-
tion is immediate unless the particular exception is masked. The available state information is often sufficient to
allow recovery from the error and re-execution of the faulting instruction if needed.

Interrupt 20—Virtualization Exception (#VE)

Exception Class      Fault.

Description
Indicates that the processor detected an EPT violation in VMX non-root operation. Not all EPT violations cause virtu-
alization exceptions. See Section 25.5.6.2 for details.
The exception handler can recover from EPT violations and restart the program or task without any loss of program
continuity. In some cases, however, the problem that caused the EPT violation may be uncorrectable.

Exception Error Code
None.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers generally point to the instruction that generated the exception.

Program State Change
A program-state change does not normally accompany a virtualization exception, because the instruction that
causes the exception to be generated is not executed. After the virtualization exception handler has corrected the
violation (for example, by executing the EPTP-switching VM function), execution of the program or task can be
resumed.

Additional Exception-Handling Information
The processor saves information about virtualization exceptions in the virtualization-exception information area.
See Section 25.5.6.2 for details.

Interrupts 32 to 255—User Defined Interrupts

Exception Class      Not applicable.

Description
Indicates that the processor did one of the following things:
•   Executed an INT n instruction where the instruction operand is one of the vector numbers from 32 through 255.
•   Responded to an interrupt request at the INTR pin or from the local APIC when the interrupt vector number
    associated with the request is from 32 through 255.

Exception Error Code
Not applicable.

Saved Instruction Pointer
The saved contents of CS and EIP registers point to the instruction that follows the INT n instruction or instruction
following the instruction on which the INTR signal occurred.

Program State Change
A program-state change does not accompany interrupts generated by the INT n instruction or the INTR signal. The
INT n instruction generates the interrupt within the instruction stream. When the processor receives an INTR
signal, it commits all state changes for all previous instructions before it responds to the interrupt; so, program
execution can resume upon returning from the interrupt handler.

