                                                     CHAPTER 13
          SYSTEM PROGRAMMING FOR INSTRUCTION SET EXTENSIONS AND
                                     PROCESSOR EXTENDED STATES

This chapter describes system programming features for instruction set extensions operating on the processor
state extension known as the SSE state (XMM registers, MXCSR) and for other processor extended states. Instruc-
tion set extensions operating on the SSE state include the streaming SIMD extensions (SSE), streaming SIMD
extensions 2 (SSE2), streaming SIMD extensions 3 (SSE3), Supplemental SSE3 (SSSE3), and SSE4. Collectively,
these are called SSE extensions1 and the corresponding instructions SSE instructions. FXSAVE/FXRSTOR
instructions can be used save/restore SSE state along with FP state. See Section 10.5 in the Intel® 64 and IA-32
Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1 for information about FXSAVE and FXRSTOR.
Sections 13.1 through 13.4 cover system programming requirements to enable the SSE extensions, providing
operating system or executive support for the SSE extensions, SIMD floating-point exceptions, exception handling,
and task (context) switching. These sections primarily discuss use of FXSAVE/FXRSTOR to save/restore SSE state.
XSAVE feature set refers to extensions to the Intel architecture that will allow system executives to implement
support for multiple processor extended states along with FP/SSE states that may be introduced over time without
requiring the system executive to be modified each time a new processor state extension is introduced. XSAVE
feature set provide mechanisms to enumerate the supported extended states, enable some or all of them for soft-
ware use, instructions to save/restore the states and enumerate the layout of the states when saved to memory.
XSAVE/XRSTOR instructions are part of the XSAVE feature set. These instructions are introduced after the intro-
duction of FP/SSE states but can be used to manage legacy FP/SSE state along with processor extended states. See
CHAPTER 13 in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1 for information
about XSAVE feature set.
System programming for managing processor extended states is described in sections 13.5 through 13.6. XSAVE
feature set is designed to be compatible with FXSAVE/FXRSTOR and hence much of the material through sections
13.1 to 13.4 related to SSE state also applies to XSAVE feature set with the exception of enumeration and
saving/restoring state.
XSAVE Compaction is an XSAVE feature that allows operating systems to allocate space for only the states saved
to conserve memory usage. A new instruction called XSAVEC is introduced to save extended states in compacted
format and XRSTOR instruction is enhanced to comprehend compacted format. System programming for managing
processor extended states in compacted format is also described in section 13.5.
Supervisor state is an extended state that can only be accessed in ring 0. XSAVE feature set has been enhanced
to manage supervisor states. Two new ring 0 instructions, XSAVES/XRSTORS, are introduced to save/restore
supervisor states along with other XSAVE managed states. They are privileged instruction and only operate in
compacted format. System programming for managing supervisor states in described in section 13.7.
Each XSAVE managed features may have additional feature specific system programming requirements such as
exception handlers etc. Feature specific system programming requirements for XSAVE managed features are
described in section 13.8.

13.1         PROVIDING OPERATING SYSTEM SUPPORT FOR SSE EXTENSIONS
To use SSE extensions, the operating system or executive must provide support for initializing the processor to use
these extensions, for handling SIMD floating-point exceptions, and for using FXSAVE and FXRSTOR (Section 10.5
of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1) to manage context. XSAVE
feature set can also be used to manage SSE state along with other processor extended states as described in 13.5.
This section primarily focuses on using FXSAVE/FXRSTOR to manage SSE state. Because SSE extensions share the
same state, experience the same sets of non-numerical and numerical exception behavior, these guidelines that
apply to SSE also apply to other sets of SIMD extensions that operate on the same processor state and subject to
the same sets of non-numerical and numerical exception behavior.

1. The collection also includes PCLMULQDQ and AES instructions operating on XMM state.

Chapter 11, “Programming with Streaming SIMD Extensions 2 (SSE2)” and Chapter 12, “Programming with SSE3,
SSSE3 and SSE4,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1, provide
details on SSE instruction set.

13.1.1         Adding Support to an Operating System for SSE Extensions
The following guidelines describe functions that an operating system or executive must perform to support SSE
extensions:
1. Check that the processor supports the SSE extensions.
2. Check that the processor supports the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions or the XSAVE feature set.
3. Provide an initialization for the SSE states.
4. Provide support for the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions or the XSAVE feature set.
5. Provide support (if necessary) in non-numeric exception handlers for exceptions generated by the SSE instruc-
   tions.
6. Provide an exception handler for the SIMD floating-point exception (#XM).
The following sections describe how to implement each of these guidelines.

13.1.2         Checking for CPU Support
If the processor attempts to execute an unsupported SSE instruction, the processor generates an invalid-opcode
exception (#UD). Before an operating system or executive attempts to use SSE extensions, it should check that
support is present by confirming the following bit values returned by the CPUID instruction:
•   CPUID.1:EDX.SSE[bit 25] = 1
•   CPUID.1:EDX.SSE2[bit 26] = 1
•   CPUID.1:ECX.SSE3[bit 0] = 1
•   CPUID.1:ECX.SSSE3[bit 9] = 1
•   CPUID.1:ECX.SSE4_1[bit 19] = 1
•   CPUID.1:ECX.SSE4_2[bit 20] = 1
(To use POPCNT instruction, software must check CPUID.1:ECX.POPCNT[bit 23] = 1.)
Separate checks must be made to ensure that the processor supports either FXSAVE and FXRSTOR or the XSAVE
feature set. See Section 10.5 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1 and
Chapter 13 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1, respectively.

13.1.3         Initialization of the SSE Extensions
The operating system or executive should carry out the following steps to set up SSE extensions for use by appli-
cation programs:
1. Set CR4.OSFXSR[bit 9] = 1. Setting this flag implies that the operating system provides facilities for saving
   and restoring SSE state using FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions. These instructions may be used to save the
   SSE state during task switches and when invoking the SIMD floating-point exception (#XM) handler (see
   Section 13.1.5, “Providing a Handler for the SIMD Floating-Point Exception (#XM)”).
    If the processor does not support the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions, attempting to set the OSFXSR flag
    causes a general-protection exception (#GP) to be generated.

2. Set CR4.OSXMMEXCPT[bit 10] = 1. Setting this flag implies that the operating system provides a SIMD
   floating-point exception (#XM) handler (see Section 13.1.5, “Providing a Handler for the SIMD Floating-Point
   Exception (#XM)”).

                                                            NOTE
          The OSFXSR and OSXMMEXCPT bits in control register CR4 must be set by the operating system.
          The processor has no other way of detecting operating-system support for the FXSAVE and
          FXRSTOR instructions or for handling SIMD floating-point exceptions.
3. Clear CR0.EM[bit 2] = 0. This action disables emulation of the x87 FPU, which is required when executing SSE
   instructions (see Section 2.5, “Control Registers”).
4. Set CR0.MP[bit 1] = 1. This setting is required for Intel 64 and IA-32 processors that support the SSE
   extensions (see Section 9.2.1, “Configuring the x87 FPU Environment”).
Table 13-1 and Table 13-2 show the actions of the processor when an SSE instruction is executed, depending on
the following:
•   OSFXSR and OSXMMEXCPT flags in control register CR4
•   SSE/SSE2/SSE3/SSSE3/SSE4 feature flags returned by CPUID
•   EM, MP, and TS flags in control register CR0

     Table 13-1. Action Taken for Combinations of OSFXSR, OSXMMEXCPT, SSE, SSE2, SSE3, EM, MP, and TS1
                CR4                       CPUID             CR0 Flags
    OSFXSR         OSXMMEXCPT           SSE, SSE2,     EM      MP4      TS                         Action
                                          SSE32,
                                         SSE4_13
      0                  X5                 X           X        1       X    #UD exception.
      1                  X                  0           X        1       X    #UD exception.
      1                  X                  1           1        1       X    #UD exception.
      1                  0                  1           0        1       0    Execute instruction; #UD exception if unmasked
                                                                              SIMD floating-point exception is detected.
      1                  1                  1           0        1       0    Execute instruction; #XM exception if unmasked
                                                                              SIMD floating-point exception is detected.
      1                  X                  1           0        1       1    #NM exception.

NOTES:
1. For execution of any SSE instruction except the PAUSE, PREFETCHh, SFENCE, LFENCE, MFENCE, MOVNTI, and CLFLUSH instructions.
2. Exception conditions due to CR4.OSFXSR or CR4.OSXMMEXCPT do not apply to FISTTP.
3. Only applies to DPPS, DPPD, ROUNDPS, ROUNDPD, ROUNDSS, ROUNDSD.
4. For processors that support the MMX instructions, the MP flag should be set.
5. X = Don’t care.

                    Table 13-2. Action Taken for Combinations of OSFXSR, SSSE3, SSE4, EM, and TS
        CR4                CPUID                 CR0 Flags
     OSFXSR                SSSE3            EM               TS                            Action
                          SSE4_11
                          SSE4_22
         0                   X3              X               X    #UD exception.
         1                     0             X               X    #UD exception.
         1                     1             1               X    #UD exception.
         1                     1             0               1    #NM exception.

NOTES:
1. Applies to SSE4_1 instructions except DPPS, DPPD, ROUNDPS, ROUNDPD, ROUNDSS, ROUNDSD.
2. Applies to SSE4_2 instructions except CRC32 and POPCNT.
3. X = Don’t care.

The SIMD floating-point exception mask bits (bits 7 through 12), the flush-to-zero flag (bit 15), the denormals-are-
zero flag (bit 6), and the rounding control field (bits 13 and 14) in the MXCSR register should be left in their default
values of 0. This permits the application to determine how these features are to be used.

13.1.4         Providing Non-Numeric Exception Handlers for Exceptions Generated by the SSE
               Instructions
SSE instructions can generate the same type of memory-access exceptions (such as page faults and limit viola-
tions) and other non-numeric exceptions as other Intel 64 and IA-32 architecture instructions generate.
Ordinarily, existing exception handlers can handle these and other non-numeric exceptions without code modifica-
tion. However, depending on the mechanisms used in existing exception handlers, some modifications might need
to be made.
The SSE extensions can generate the non-numeric exceptions listed below:
•   Memory Access Exceptions:
    — Stack-segment fault (#SS).
    — General protection exception (#GP). Executing most SSE instructions with an unaligned 128-bit memory
      reference generates a general-protection exception. (The MOVUPS and MOVUPD instructions allow
      unaligned a loads or stores of 128-bit memory locations, without generating a general-protection
      exception.) A 128-bit reference within the stack segment that is not aligned to a 16-byte boundary will also
      generate a general-protection exception, instead a stack-segment fault exception (#SS).
    — Page fault (#PF).
    — Alignment check (#AC). When enabled, this type of alignment check operates on operands that are less
      than 128-bits in size: 16-bit, 32-bit, and 64-bit. To enable the generation of alignment check exceptions, do
      the following:
        •      Set the AM flag (bit 18 of control register CR0)
        •      Set the AC flag (bit 18 of the EFLAGS register)
        •      CPL must be 3
         If alignment check exceptions are enabled, 16-bit, 32-bit, and 64-bit misalignment will be detected for the
         MOVUPD and MOVUPS instructions; detection of 128-bit misalignment is not guaranteed and may vary
         with implementation.

•   System Exceptions:
    — Invalid-opcode exception (#UD). This exception is generated when executing SSE instructions under the
      following conditions:
       •   SSE/SSE2/SSE3/SSSE3/SSE4_1/SSE4_2 feature flags returned by CPUID are set to 0. This condition
           does not affect the CLFLUSH instruction, nor POPCNT.
       •   The CLFSH feature flag returned by the CPUID instruction is set to 0. This exception condition only
           pertains to the execution of the CLFLUSH instruction.
       •   The POPCNT feature flag returned by the CPUID instruction is set to 0. This exception condition only
           pertains to the execution of the POPCNT instruction.
       •   The EM flag (bit 2) in control register CR0 is set to 1, regardless of the value of TS flag (bit 3) of CR0.
           This condition does not affect the PAUSE, PREFETCHh, MOVNTI, SFENCE, LFENCE, MFENCE, CLFLUSH,
           CRC32 and POPCNT instructions.
       •   The OSFXSR flag (bit 9) in control register CR4 is set to 0. This condition does not affect the PSHUFW,
           MOVNTQ, MOVNTI, PAUSE, PREFETCHh, SFENCE, LFENCE, MFENCE, CLFLUSH, CRC32 and POPCNT
           instructions.
       •   Executing an instruction that causes a SIMD floating-point exception when the OSXMMEXCPT flag (bit
           10) in control register CR4 is set to 0. See Section 13.4.1, “Using the TS Flag to Control the Saving of
           the x87 FPU and SSE State.”
    — Device not available (#NM). This exception is generated by executing a SSE instruction when the TS flag
      (bit 3) of CR0 is set to 1.
Other exceptions can occur during delivery of the above exceptions.

13.1.5      Providing a Handler for the SIMD Floating-Point Exception (#XM)
SSE instructions do not generate numeric exceptions on packed integer operations. They can generate the
following numeric (SIMD floating-point) exceptions on packed and scalar single-precision and double-precision
floating-point operations.
•   Invalid operation (#I)
•   Divide-by-zero (#Z)
•   Denormal operand (#D)
•   Numeric overflow (#O)
•   Numeric underflow (#U)
•   Inexact result (Precision) (#P)
These SIMD floating-point exceptions (with the exception of the denormal operand exception) are defined in the
IEEE Standard 754 for Binary Floating-Point Arithmetic and represent the same conditions that cause x87 FPU
floating-point error exceptions (#MF) to be generated for x87 FPU instructions.
Each of these exceptions can be masked, in which case the processor returns a reasonable result to the destination
operand without invoking an exception handler. However, if any of these exceptions are left unmasked, detection
of the exception condition results in a SIMD floating-point exception (#XM) being generated. See Chapter 6,
“Interrupt 19—SIMD Floating-Point Exception (#XM).”
To handle unmasked SIMD floating-point exceptions, the operating system or executive must provide an exception
handler. The section titled “SSE and SSE2 SIMD Floating-Point Exceptions” in Chapter 11, “Programming with
Streaming SIMD Extensions 2 (SSE2),” of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual,
Volume 1, describes the SIMD floating-point exception classes and gives suggestions for writing an exception
handler to handle them.
To indicate that the operating system provides a handler for SIMD floating-point exceptions (#XM), the OSXM-
MEXCPT flag (bit 10) must be set in control register CR4.

13.1.5.1       Numeric Error flag and IGNNE#
SSE extensions ignore the NE flag in control register CR0 (that is, they treat it as if it were always set) and the
IGNNE# pin. When an unmasked SIMD floating-point exception is detected, it is always reported by generating a
SIMD floating-point exception (#XM).

13.2           EMULATION OF SSE EXTENSIONS
The Intel 64 and IA-32 architectures do not support emulation of the SSE instructions, as they do for x87 FPU
instructions.
The EM flag in control register CR0 (provided to invoke emulation of x87 FPU instructions) cannot be used to invoke
emulation of SSE instructions. If an SSE instruction is executed when CR0.EM = 1, an invalid opcode exception
(#UD) is generated. See Table 13-1.

13.3           SAVING AND RESTORING SSE STATE
The SSE state consists of the state of the XMM and MXCSR registers. Intel recommends the following method for
saving and restoring this state:
•   Execute the FXSAVE instruction to save the state of the XMM and MXCSR registers to memory.
•   Execute the FXRSTOR instruction to restore the state of the XMM and MXCSR registers from the image saved in
    memory earlier.
This save and restore method is required for all operating systems. XSAVE feature set can also be used to
save/restore SSE state. See Section 13.5, “The XSAVE Feature Set and Processor Extended State Management,”
for using the XSAVE feature set to save/restore SSE state.
In some cases, applications may choose to save only the XMM and MXCSR registers in the following manner:
•   Execute MOVDQ instructions to save the contents of the XMM registers to memory.
•   Execute a STMXCSR instruction to save the state of the MXCSR register to memory.
Such applications must restore the XMM and MXCSR registers as follows:
•   Execute MOVDQ instructions to load the saved contents of the XMM registers from memory into the XMM
    registers.
•   Execute a LDMXCSR instruction to restore the state of the MXCSR register from memory.

13.4           DESIGNING OS FACILITIES FOR SAVING X87 FPU, SSE AND EXTENDED
               STATES ON TASK OR CONTEXT SWITCHES
The x87 FPU and SSE state consist of the state of the x87 FPU, XMM, and MXCSR registers. The FXSAVE and
FXRSTOR instructions provide a fast method for saving and restoring this state. The XSAVE feature set can also be
used to save FP and SSE state along with other extended states (see Section 13.5).
Older operating systems may use FSAVE/FNSAVE and FRSTOR to save the x87 FPU state. These facilities can be
extended to save and restore SSE state by substituting FXSAVE and FXRSTOR or the XSAVE feature set in place of
FSAVE/FNSAVE and FRSTOR.
If task or context switching facilities are written from scratch, any of several approaches may be taken for using the
FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions or the XSAVE feature set to save and restore x87 FPU and SSE state:
•   The operating system can require applications that are intended to be run as tasks take responsibility for saving
    the states prior to a task suspension during a task switch and for restoring the states when the task is resumed.
    This approach is appropriate for cooperative multitasking operating systems, where the application has control
    over (or is able to determine) when a task switch is about to occur and can save state prior to the task switch.

•   The operating system can take the responsibility for saving the states as part of the task switch process and
    restoring the state of the registers when a suspended task is resumed. This approach is appropriate for
    preemptive multitasking operating systems, where the application cannot know when it is going to be
    preempted and cannot prepare in advance for task switching.
•   The operating system can take the responsibility for saving the states as part of the task switch process, but
    delay the restoring of the states until an instruction operating on the states is actually executed by the new
    task. See Section 13.4.1, “Using the TS Flag to Control the Saving of the x87 FPU and SSE State,” for more
    information. This approach is called lazy restore.
    The use of lazy restore mechanism in context switches is not recommended when XSAVE feature set is used to
    save/restore states for the following reasons.
    — With XSAVE feature set, Intel processors have optimizations in place to avoid saving the state components
      that are in their initial configurations or when they have not been modified since they were restored last.
      These optimizations eliminate the need for lazy restore. See section 13.5.4 in Intel® 64 and IA-32 Archi-
      tectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1.
    — Intel processors have power optimizations when state components are in their initial configurations. Use of
      lazy restore retains the non-initial configuration of the last thread and is not power efficient.
    — Not all extended states support lazy restore mechanisms. As such, when one or more such states are
      enabled it becomes very inefficient to use lazy restore as it results in two separate state restore, one in
      context switch for the states that does not support lazy restore and one in the #NM handler for states that
      support lazy restore.

13.4.1      Using the TS Flag to Control the Saving of the x87 FPU and SSE State
The TS flag in control register CR0 is provided to allow the operating system to delay saving/restoring the x87 FPU
and SSE state until an instruction that actually accesses this state is encountered in a new task. When the TS flag
is set, the processor monitors the instruction stream for x87 FPU, MMX, SSE instructions. When the processor
detects one of these instructions, it raises a device-not-available exception (#NM) prior to executing the instruc-
tion. The #NM exception handler can then be used to save the x87 FPU and SSE state for the previous task (using
an FXSAVE, XSAVE, or XSAVEOPT instruction) and load the x87 FPU and SSE state for the current task (using an
FXRSTOR or XRSOTR instruction). If the task never encounters an x87 FPU, MMX, or SSE instruction, the device-
not-available exception will not be raised and a task state will not be saved/restored unnecessarily.

                                                        NOTE
        The CRC32 and POPCNT instructions do not operate on the x87 FPU or SSE state. They operate on
        the general-purpose registers and are not involved with the techniques described above.
The TS flag can be set either explicitly (by executing a MOV instruction to control register CR0) or implicitly (using
the IA-32 architecture’s native task switching mechanism). When the native task switching mechanism is used, the
processor automatically sets the TS flag on a task switch. After the device-not-available handler has saved the x87
FPU and SSE state, it should execute the CLTS instruction to clear the TS flag.

13.5        THE XSAVE FEATURE SET AND PROCESSOR EXTENDED STATE
            MANAGEMENT
The architecture of XSAVE feature set is described in CHAPTER 13 of Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software
Developer’s Manual, Volume 1. The XSAVE feature set includes the following:
•   An extensible data layout for existing and future processor state extensions. The layout of the XSAVE area
    extends from the 512-byte FXSAVE/FXRSTOR layout to provide compatibility and migration path from
    managing the legacy FXSAVE/FXRSTOR area. The XSAVE area is described in more detail in Section 13.4 of the
    Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1.
•   CPUID enhancements for feature enumeration. See Section 13.2 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures
    Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1.

•   Control register enhancement and dedicated register for enabling each processor extended state. See Section
    13.3 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1.
•   Instructions to save state to and restore state from the XSAVE area. See Section 13.7 through Section 13.9 of
    the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1.
Operating systems can utilize XSAVE feature set to manage both FP/SSE state and processor extended states.
CPUID leaf 0DH enumerates XSAVE feature set related information. The following guidelines provide the steps an
operating system needs to take to support legacy FP/SSE states and processor extended states.
1. Check that the processor supports the XSAVE feature set
2. Determine the set of XSAVE managed features that the operating system intends to enable and calculate the
   size of the buffer needed to save/restore the states during context switch and other flows
3. Enable use of XSAVE feature set and XSAVE managed features
4. Provide an initialization for the XSAVE managed feature state components
5. Provide (if necessary) required exception handlers for exceptions generated each of the XSAVE managed
   features.

13.5.1         Checking the Support for XSAVE Feature Set
Support for XSAVE Feature set is enumerated in CPUID.1.ECX.XSAVE[bit 26]. Enumeration of this bit indicates that
the processor supports XSAVE/XRSTOR instructions to manage state and XSETBV/XGETBV on XCR0 to enable and
get enabled states. An operating system needs to enable XSAVE feature set as described later.
Additionally CPUID.(EAX=0DH, ECX=1).EAX enumerates additional XSAVE sub features such as optimized save,
compaction and supervisor state support. The following table summarizes XSAVE sub features. Once an operating
system enables XSAVE feature set, all the sub-features enumerated are also available. There is no need to enable
each additional sub feature.

                           Table 13-3. CPUID.(EAX=0DH, ECX=1) EAX Bit Assignment
      EAX Bit Position                                                    Meaning
                0         If set, indicates availability of the XSAVEOPT instruction.
                1         If set, indicates availability of the XSAVEC instruction and the corresponding compaction enhancements
                          to the legacy XRSTOR instruction.
                2         If set, indicates support for execution of XGETBV with ECX=1. This execution returns the state-compo-
                          nent bitmap XINUSE. If XINUSE[i] = 0, state component i is in its initial configuration. Execution of
                          XSETBV with ECX=1 causes a #GP.
                3         If set, indicates support for XSAVES/XRSTORS and IA32_XSS MSR
               31:4       Reserved

13.5.2         Determining the XSAVE Managed Feature States And The Required Buffer Size
Each XSAVE managed feature has one or more state components associated with it. An operating system policy
needs to determine the XSAVE managed features to support and determine the corresponding state components
to enable. When determining the XSAVE managed features to support, operating system needs to take into account
the dependencies between them (e.g. AVX feature depends on SSE feature). Similarly, when a XSAVE managed
feature has more than one state component, all of them need to be enabled. Each logical processor enumerates
supported XSAVE state components in CPUID.(EAX=0DH, ECX=0).EDX:EAX. An operating system may enable all
or a subset of the state components enumerated by the processor based on the OS policy.
The size of the memory buffer needed to save enabled XSAVE state components depends on whether the OS opts-
in to use compacted format or not. Section 13.4.3 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s
Manual, Volume 1 describes the layout of the extended region of the XSAVE area.

13.5.3      Enable the Use Of XSAVE Feature Set And XSAVE State Components
Operating systems need to enable the use of XSAVE feature set by writing to CR4.OSXSAVE[bit 18] to enable
XSETBV/XGETBV instructions to access XCR0 and to support processor extended state management using
XSAVE/XRSTOR. When XSAVE feature set is enabled, all enumerated XSAVE sub features such as optimized save,
compaction and supervisor state support are also enabled. Operating systems also need to enable the XSAVE state
components in XCR0 using XSETBV instruction.
XSAVE state components can subsequently be disabled in XCR0. However, disabling state components of AVX or
AVX-512 that are not in initial configuration may incur power and performance penalty on SSE and AVX instructions
respectively. If AVX state is disabled when it is not in its initial configuration, subsequent SSE instructions may
incur a penalty. If AVX-512 state is disabled when it is not in its initial configuration, subsequent SSE and AVX
instructions may incur a penalty. It is recommended that the operating systems and VMM set AVX or AVX-512 state
components to their initial configuration before disabling them. This can be achieved by one of the two methods
below.
•   Using XRSTOR: Operating system or VMM can set the state of AVX or AVX-512 state components using XRSTOR
    instruction before disabling them in XCR0.
•   Using VZEROUPPER: Operating system or VMM can set AVX and AVX-512 state components to their initial
    configuration using VZEROUPPER instruction before disabling them in XCR0. Note that this will set both AVX
    and AVX-512 state components to their initial configuration. If the intent is to only disable AVX-512 state,
    Operating system or VMM will need to save AVX state before executing VZEROUPPER and restore it afterwards.

13.5.4      Provide an Initialization for the XSAVE State Components
The XSAVE header of a newly allocated XSAVE area should be initialized to all zeroes before saving context. An
operating system may choose to establish beginning state-component values for a task by executing XRSTOR from
an XSAVE area that the OS has configured. If it is desired to begin state component i in its initial configuration, the
OS should clear bit i in the XSTATE_BV field in the XSAVE header; otherwise, it should set that bit and place the
desired beginning value in the appropriate location in the XSAVE area.
When a buffer is allocated for compacted size, software must ensure that the XCOMP_BV field is setup correctly
before restoring from the buffer. Bit 63 of the XCOMP_BV field indicates that the save area is in the compacted
format and the remaining bits indicate the states that have space allocated in the save area. If the buffer is first
used to save the state in compacted format, then the save instructions will setup the XCOMP_BV field appropri-
ately. If the buffer is first used to restore the state, then software must set up the XCOMP_BV field.

13.5.5      Providing the Required Exception Handlers
Instructions part of each XSAVE managed features may generate exceptions and operating system may need to
enable such exceptions and provide handlers for them. Section 13.8 describes feature specific OS requirements for
each XSAVE managed features.

13.6        INTEROPERABILITY OF THE XSAVE FEATURE SET AND FXSAVE/FXRSTOR
The FXSAVE instruction writes x87 FPU and SSE state information to a 512-byte FXSAVE save area. FXRSTOR
restores the processor’s x87 FPU and SSE states from an FXSAVE area. The XSAVE features set supports x87 FPU
and SSE states using the same layout as the FXSAVE area to provide interoperability of FXSAVE versus XSAVE, and
FXRSTOR versus XRSTOR. The XSAVE feature set allows system software to manage SSE state independent of x87
FPU states. Thus system software that had been using FXSAVE and FXRSTOR to manage x87 FPU and SSE states
can transition to using the XSAVE feature set to manage x87 FPU, SSE and other processor extended states in a
systematic and forward-looking manner. See Section 10.5 and Chapter 13 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures
Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1 for more details.
System software can implement forward-looking processor extended state management using the XSAVE feature
set. In this case, system software must specify the bit vector mask in EDX:EAX appropriately when executing
XSAVE/XRSTOR instructions.

For instance, the OS can supply instructions in the XSAVE feature set with a bit vector in EDX:EAX with the two
least significant bits (corresponding to x87 FPU and SSE state) equal to 0. Then, the XSAVE instruction will not
write the processor’s x87 FPU and SSE state into memory. Similarly, the XRSTOR instruction executed with a value
in EDX:EAX with the least two significant bit equal to 0 will not restore nor initialize the processor’s x87 FPU and
SSE state.
The processor’s action as a result of executing XRSTOR is given in Section 13.8 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Archi-
tectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1. The instruction may be used to initialize x87 FPU or XMM regis-
ters. When the MXCSR register is updated from memory, reserved bit checking is enforced. The saving/restoring of
MXCSR is bound to the SSE state, independent of the x87 FPU state. The action of XSAVE is given in Section 13.7
of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1.

13.7            THE XSAVE FEATURE SET AND PROCESSOR SUPERVISOR STATE
                MANAGEMENT
Supervisor state is a processor state that is only accessible in ring 0. An extension to XSAVE feature set, enumer-
ated by CPUID.(EAX=0DH, ECX=1).EAX[bit 3] allows the management of the supervisor states using XSAVE
feature set. See Chapter 13 of Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1 for the
details of the supervisor state XSAVE feature set extension. The supervisor state extension includes the following:
•   CPUID enhancements to enumerate the set of supervisor states and their sizes that can be managed by XSAVE
    feature set.
•   A new MSR IA32_XSS to enable XSAVE feature set to manage one or more enumerated supervisor states.
•   A new pair of privileged save/restore instructions, XSAVES and XRSTORS, to save/restore supervisor states
    along with other XSAVE managed feature states.
The guidelines to enable XSAVE feature set to manage supervisor state are very similar to the steps outlines in
Section 13.6 with the differences outline below. The set of supervisor states that can be managed by XSAVE feature
set is enumerated in (EAX=0DH, ECX=1).EDX:ECX. XSAVE managed supervisor states are enabled in IA32_XSS
MSR instead of XCR0 control register. There are semantic differences between user states enabled in XCR0 and
supervisor state enabled in IA32_XSS MSR. A supervisor state enabled in IA32_XSS MSR:
•   May be accessed via other mechanisms such as RDMSR/WRMSR even when they are not enabled in IA32_XSS
    MSR. Enabling a supervisor state in the IA32_XSS MSR merely indicates that the state can be saved/restored
    using XSAVES/XRSTORS instructions.
•   May have side effects when saving/restoring the state such as disabling/enabling feature associated with the
    state. This behavior is feature specific and will be documented along with the feature description.
•   May generate faults when saving/restoring the state. XSAVES/XRSTORS will follow the faulting behavior of
    RDMSR/WRMSR respectively if the corresponding state is also accessible using RDMSR/WRMSR.
•   XRSTORS may fault when restoring the state for supervisor features that are already enabled via feature
    specific mechanisms. This behavior is feature specific and will be documented along with the feature
    description.
When a supervisor state is disabled via a feature specific mechanism, the state does not automatically get marked
as INIT. Hence XSAVES/XRSTORS will continue to save/restore the state subject to available optimizations. If the
software does not intend to preserve the state when it disables the feature, it should initialize it to hardware INIT
value with XRSTORS instruction so that XSAVES/XRSTORS perform optimally for that state.

13.8            SYSTEM PROGRAMMING FOR XSAVE MANAGED FEATURES
This section describes system programming requirement for each XSAVE managed features that are feature
specific such as exception handling.

13.8.1      Intel® Advanced Vector Extensions (Intel® AVX)
Intel AVX instructions comprises of 256-bit and 128-bit instructions that operates on 256-bit YMM registers. The
XSAVE feature set allows software to save and restore the state of these registers. See Chapter 13 of the Intel®
64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1.
For processors that support YMM states, the YMM state exists in all operating modes. However, the available
instruction interfaces to access YMM states may vary in different modes.
Operating systems must use the XSAVE feature set for YMM state management. The XSAVE feature set also
provides flexible and efficient interface to manage XMM/MXCSR states and x87 FPU states in conjunction with
newer processor extended states like YMM states. Operating systems may need to be aware of the following when
supporting AVX.
•   Saving/Restoring AVX state in non-compacted format without SSE state will also save/restore MXCSR even
    though MXCSR is not part of AVX state. This does not happen when compacted format is used.
•   Few AVX instructions such as VZEROUPPER/VZEROALL may operate on future expansion of YMM registers.

An operating system must enable its YMM state management to support AVX and any 256-bit extensions that
operate on YMM registers. Otherwise, an attempt to execute an instruction in AVX extensions (including an
enhanced 128-bit SIMD instructions using VEX encoding) will cause a #UD exception.
AVX instructions may generate SIMD floating-point exceptions. An OS must enable SIMD floating-point exception
support by setting CR4.OSXMMEXCPT[bit 10]=1.

13.8.2      Intel® Advanced Vector Extensions 512 (Intel® AVX-512)
Intel AVX-512 instructions are encoded using EVEX prefix. The EVEX encoding scheme can support 512-bit, 256-
bit and 128-bit instructions that operate on opmask, ZMM, YMM and XMM registers.
For processors that support the Intel AVX-512 family of instructions, the extended processor states (ZMM and
opmask registers) exist in all operating modes. However, the access to these states may vary in different modes.
The processor's support for instruction extensions that employ EVEX prefix encoding is independent of the
processor's support for using XSAVE feature set on those states.
Instructions requiring EVEX prefix encoding are generally supported in 64-bit, 32-bit modes, and 16-bit protected
mode. They are not supported in Real mode, Virtual-8086 mode or entering into SMM mode. Note that bits
MAX_VL-1:256 (511:256) of ZMM register state are maintained across transitions into and out of these modes.
Because the XSAVE feature set instruction can operate in all operating modes, it is possible that the processor's
ZMM register state can be modified by software in any operating mode by executing XRSTOR.
Operating systems must use the XSAVE/XRSTOR/XSAVEOPT instructions for ZMM and opmask state management.
An OS must enable its ZMM and opmask state management to support Intel AVX-512 Foundation instructions.
Otherwise, an attempt to execute an instruction in Intel AVX-512 Foundation instructions (including a scalar 128-
bit SIMD instructions using EVEX encoding) will cause a #UD exception. An operating system, which enables the
AVX-512 state to support Intel AVX-512 Foundation instructions, is also sufficient to support the rest of the Intel
AVX-512 family of instructions. Note that even though ZMM8-ZMM31 are not accessible in 32 bit mode, a 32 bit OS
is still required to allocate memory for the entire ZMM state.
Intel AVX-512 Foundation instructions may generate SIMD floating-point exceptions. An OS must enable SIMD
floating point exception support by setting CR4.OSXMMEXCPT[bit 10]=1.

