                                                          CHAPTER 17
                 DEBUG, BRANCH PROFILE, TSC, AND RESOURCE MONITORING
                                                            FEATURES

Intel 64 and IA-32 architectures provide debug facilities for use in debugging code and monitoring performance.
These facilities are valuable for debugging application software, system software, and multitasking operating
systems. Debug support is accessed using debug registers (DR0 through DR7) and model-specific registers
(MSRs):
•   Debug registers hold the addresses of memory and I/O locations called breakpoints. Breakpoints are user-
    selected locations in a program, a data-storage area in memory, or specific I/O ports. They are set where a
    programmer or system designer wishes to halt execution of a program and examine the state of the processor
    by invoking debugger software. A debug exception (#DB) is generated when a memory or I/O access is made
    to a breakpoint address.
•   MSRs monitor branches, interrupts, and exceptions; they record addresses of the last branch, interrupt or
    exception taken and the last branch taken before an interrupt or exception.
•   Time stamp counter is described in Section 17.15, “Time-Stamp Counter”.
•   Features which allow monitoring of shared platform resources such as the L3 cache are described in Section
    17.16, “Intel® Resource Director Technology (Intel® RDT) Monitoring Features”.
•   Features which enable control over shared platform resources are described in Section 17.17, “Intel® Resource
    Director Technology (Intel® RDT) Allocation Features”.

17.1        OVERVIEW OF DEBUG SUPPORT FACILITIES
The following processor facilities support debugging and performance monitoring:
•   Debug exception (#DB) — Transfers program control to a debug procedure or task when a debug event
    occurs.
•   Breakpoint exception (#BP) — See breakpoint instruction (INT 3) below.
•   Breakpoint-address registers (DR0 through DR3) — Specifies the addresses of up to 4 breakpoints.
•   Debug status register (DR6) — Reports the conditions that were in effect when a debug or breakpoint
    exception was generated.
•   Debug control register (DR7) — Specifies the forms of memory or I/O access that cause breakpoints to be
    generated.
•   T (trap) flag, TSS — Generates a debug exception (#DB) when an attempt is made to switch to a task with
    the T flag set in its TSS.
•   RF (resume) flag, EFLAGS register — Suppresses multiple exceptions to the same instruction.
•   TF (trap) flag, EFLAGS register — Generates a debug exception (#DB) after every execution of an
    instruction.
•   Breakpoint instruction (INT 3) — Generates a breakpoint exception (#BP) that transfers program control to
    the debugger procedure or task. This instruction is an alternative way to set code breakpoints. It is especially
    useful when more than four breakpoints are desired, or when breakpoints are being placed in the source code.
•   Last branch recording facilities — Store branch records in the last branch record (LBR) stack MSRs for the
    most recent taken branches, interrupts, and/or exceptions in MSRs. A branch record consist of a branch-from
    and a branch-to instruction address. Send branch records out on the system bus as branch trace messages
    (BTMs).
These facilities allow a debugger to be called as a separate task or as a procedure in the context of the current
program or task. The following conditions can be used to invoke the debugger:
•   Task switch to a specific task.
•   Execution of the breakpoint instruction.

•   Execution of any instruction.
•   Execution of an instruction at a specified address.
•   Read or write to a specified memory address/range.
•   Write to a specified memory address/range.
•   Input from a specified I/O address/range.
•   Output to a specified I/O address/range.
•   Attempt to change the contents of a debug register.

17.2           DEBUG REGISTERS
Eight debug registers (see Figure 17-1 for 32-bit operation and Figure 17-2 for 64-bit operation) control the debug
operation of the processor. These registers can be written to and read using the move to/from debug register form
of the MOV instruction. A debug register may be the source or destination operand for one of these instructions.

                          31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                          LEN R/W LEN R/W LEN R/W LEN R/W 0 0 G 0 R 1 G L G L G L G L G L
                           3   3   2   2   1   1   0   0      D   T   E E 3 3 2 2 1 1 0 0
                                                                                          DR7
                                                                  M

                          31                                       16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                                   R
                                  Reserved (set to 1)              T B B B 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 B B B B DR6
                                                                   MT S D                    3 2 1 0

                          31                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                  DR5

                          31                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                  DR4

                          31                                                                                 0

                                                        Breakpoint 3 Linear Address                               DR3

                          31                                                                                 0

                                                        Breakpoint 2 Linear Address                               DR2

                          31                                                                                 0

                                                        Breakpoint 1 Linear Address                               DR1

                          31                                                                                 0

                                                        Breakpoint 0 Linear Address                               DR0

                                Reserved

                                                 Figure 17-1. Debug Registers

Debug registers are privileged resources; a MOV instruction that accesses these registers can only be executed in
real-address mode, in SMM or in protected mode at a CPL of 0. An attempt to read or write the debug registers
from any other privilege level generates a general-protection exception (#GP).
The primary function of the debug registers is to set up and monitor from 1 to 4 breakpoints, numbered 0 though
3. For each breakpoint, the following information can be specified:
•   The linear address where the breakpoint is to occur.
•   The length of the breakpoint location: 1, 2, 4, or 8 bytes (refer to the notes in Section 17.2.4).
•   The operation that must be performed at the address for a debug exception to be generated.
•   Whether the breakpoint is enabled.
•   Whether the breakpoint condition was present when the debug exception was generated.

The following paragraphs describe the functions of flags and fields in the debug registers.

17.2.1      Debug Address Registers (DR0-DR3)
Each of the debug-address registers (DR0 through DR3) holds the 32-bit linear address of a breakpoint (see
Figure 17-1). Breakpoint comparisons are made before physical address translation occurs. The contents of debug
register DR7 further specifies breakpoint conditions.

17.2.2      Debug Registers DR4 and DR5
Debug registers DR4 and DR5 are reserved when debug extensions are enabled (when the DE flag in control
register CR4 is set) and attempts to reference the DR4 and DR5 registers cause invalid-opcode exceptions (#UD).
When debug extensions are not enabled (when the DE flag is clear), these registers are aliased to debug registers
DR6 and DR7.

17.2.3      Debug Status Register (DR6)
The debug status register (DR6) reports debug conditions that were sampled at the time the last debug exception
was generated (see Figure 17-1). Updates to this register only occur when an exception is generated. The flags in
this register show the following information:
•   B0 through B3 (breakpoint condition detected) flags (bits 0 through 3) — Indicates (when set) that its
    associated breakpoint condition was met when a debug exception was generated. These flags are set if the
    condition described for each breakpoint by the LENn, and R/Wn flags in debug control register DR7 is true.
    They may or may not be set if the breakpoint is not enabled by the Ln or the Gn flags in register DR7. Therefore
    on a #DB, a debug handler should check only those B0-B3 bits which correspond to an enabled breakpoint.
•   BD (debug register access detected) flag (bit 13) — Indicates that the next instruction in the instruction
    stream accesses one of the debug registers (DR0 through DR7). This flag is enabled when the GD (general
    detect) flag in debug control register DR7 is set. See Section 17.2.4, “Debug Control Register (DR7),” for
    further explanation of the purpose of this flag.
•   BS (single step) flag (bit 14) — Indicates (when set) that the debug exception was triggered by the single-
    step execution mode (enabled with the TF flag in the EFLAGS register). The single-step mode is the highest-
    priority debug exception. When the BS flag is set, any of the other debug status bits also may be set.
•   BT (task switch) flag (bit 15) — Indicates (when set) that the debug exception resulted from a task switch
    where the T flag (debug trap flag) in the TSS of the target task was set. See Section 7.2.1, “Task-State
    Segment (TSS),” for the format of a TSS. There is no flag in debug control register DR7 to enable or disable this
    exception; the T flag of the TSS is the only enabling flag.
•   RTM (restricted transactional memory) flag (bit 16) — Indicates (when clear) that a debug exception
    (#DB) or breakpoint exception (#BP) occurred inside an RTM region while advanced debugging of RTM trans-
    actional regions was enabled (see Section 17.3.3). This bit is set for any other debug exception (including all
    those that occur when advanced debugging of RTM transactional regions is not enabled). This bit is always 1 if
    the processor does not support RTM.

Certain debug exceptions may clear bits 0-3. The remaining contents of the DR6 register are never cleared by the
processor. To avoid confusion in identifying debug exceptions, debug handlers should clear the register (except
bit 16, which they should set) before returning to the interrupted task.

17.2.4         Debug Control Register (DR7)
The debug control register (DR7) enables or disables breakpoints and sets breakpoint conditions (see Figure 17-1).
The flags and fields in this register control the following things:
•   L0 through L3 (local breakpoint enable) flags (bits 0, 2, 4, and 6) — Enables (when set) the breakpoint
    condition for the associated breakpoint for the current task. When a breakpoint condition is detected and its
    associated Ln flag is set, a debug exception is generated. The processor automatically clears these flags on
    every task switch to avoid unwanted breakpoint conditions in the new task.
•   G0 through G3 (global breakpoint enable) flags (bits 1, 3, 5, and 7) — Enables (when set) the
    breakpoint condition for the associated breakpoint for all tasks. When a breakpoint condition is detected and its
    associated Gn flag is set, a debug exception is generated. The processor does not clear these flags on a task
    switch, allowing a breakpoint to be enabled for all tasks.
•   LE and GE (local and global exact breakpoint enable) flags (bits 8, 9) — This feature is not supported in
    the P6 family processors, later IA-32 processors, and Intel 64 processors. When set, these flags cause the
    processor to detect the exact instruction that caused a data breakpoint condition. For backward and forward
    compatibility with other Intel processors, we recommend that the LE and GE flags be set to 1 if exact
    breakpoints are required.
•   RTM (restricted transactional memory) flag (bit 11) — Enables (when set) advanced debugging of RTM
    transactional regions (see Section 17.3.3). This advanced debugging is enabled only if IA32_DEBUGCTL.RTM is
    also set.
•   GD (general detect enable) flag (bit 13) — Enables (when set) debug-register protection, which causes a
    debug exception to be generated prior to any MOV instruction that accesses a debug register. When such a
    condition is detected, the BD flag in debug status register DR6 is set prior to generating the exception. This
    condition is provided to support in-circuit emulators.
    When the emulator needs to access the debug registers, emulator software can set the GD flag to prevent
    interference from the program currently executing on the processor.
    The processor clears the GD flag upon entering to the debug exception handler, to allow the handler access to
    the debug registers.
•   R/W0 through R/W3 (read/write) fields (bits 16, 17, 20, 21, 24, 25, 28, and 29) — Specifies the
    breakpoint condition for the corresponding breakpoint. The DE (debug extensions) flag in control register CR4
    determines how the bits in the R/Wn fields are interpreted. When the DE flag is set, the processor interprets
    bits as follows:
               00 — Break on instruction execution only.
               01 — Break on data writes only.
               10 — Break on I/O reads or writes.
               11 — Break on data reads or writes but not instruction fetches.
    When the DE flag is clear, the processor interprets the R/Wn bits the same as for the Intel386™ and Intel486™
    processors, which is as follows:
               00 — Break on instruction execution only.
               01 — Break on data writes only.
               10 — Undefined.
               11 — Break on data reads or writes but not instruction fetches.
•   LEN0 through LEN3 (Length) fields (bits 18, 19, 22, 23, 26, 27, 30, and 31) — Specify the size of the
    memory location at the address specified in the corresponding breakpoint address register (DR0 through DR3).
    These fields are interpreted as follows:
               00 — 1-byte length.
               01 — 2-byte length.
               10 — Undefined (or 8 byte length, see note below).
               11 — 4-byte length.

If the corresponding RWn field in register DR7 is 00 (instruction execution), then the LENn field should also be 00.
The effect of using other lengths is undefined. See Section 17.2.5, “Breakpoint Field Recognition,” below.

                                                       NOTES
         For Pentium® 4 and Intel® Xeon® processors with a CPUID signature corresponding to family 15
         (model 3, 4, and 6), break point conditions permit specifying 8-byte length on data read/write with
         an of encoding 10B in the LENn field.
         Encoding 10B is also supported in processors based on Intel Core microarchitecture or enhanced
         Intel Core microarchitecture, the respective CPUID signatures corresponding to family 6, model 15,
         and family 6, DisplayModel value 23 (see CPUID instruction in Chapter 3, “Instruction Set
         Reference, A-L” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume
         2A). The Encoding 10B is supported in processors based on Intel® Atom™ microarchitecture, with
         CPUID signature of family 6, DisplayModel value 1CH. The encoding 10B is undefined for other
         processors.

17.2.5       Breakpoint Field Recognition
Breakpoint address registers (debug registers DR0 through DR3) and the LENn fields for each breakpoint define a
range of sequential byte addresses for a data or I/O breakpoint. The LENn fields permit specification of a 1-, 2-, 4-
or 8-byte range, beginning at the linear address specified in the corresponding debug register (DRn). Two-byte
ranges must be aligned on word boundaries; 4-byte ranges must be aligned on doubleword boundaries, 8-byte
ranges must be aligned on quadword boundaries. I/O addresses are zero-extended (from 16 to 32 bits, for
comparison with the breakpoint address in the selected debug register). These requirements are enforced by the
processor; it uses LENn field bits to mask the lower address bits in the debug registers. Unaligned data or I/O
breakpoint addresses do not yield valid results.
A data breakpoint for reading or writing data is triggered if any of the bytes participating in an access is within the
range defined by a breakpoint address register and its LENn field. Table 17-1 provides an example setup of debug
registers and data accesses that would subsequently trap or not trap on the breakpoints.
A data breakpoint for an unaligned operand can be constructed using two breakpoints, where each breakpoint is
byte-aligned and the two breakpoints together cover the operand. The breakpoints generate exceptions only for
the operand, not for neighboring bytes.
Instruction breakpoint addresses must have a length specification of 1 byte (the LENn field is set to 00). Code
breakpoints for other operand sizes are undefined. The processor recognizes an instruction breakpoint address
only when it points to the first byte of an instruction. If the instruction has prefixes, the breakpoint address must
point to the first prefix.

                                              Table 17-1. Breakpoint Examples
                                                        Debug Register Setup
 Debug Register                R/Wn                             Breakpoint Address    LENn
 DR0                           R/W0 = 11 (Read/Write)           A0001H                LEN0 = 00 (1 byte)
 DR1                           R/W1 = 01 (Write)                A0002H                LEN1 = 00 (1 byte)
 DR2                           R/W2 = 11 (Read/Write)           B0002H                LEN2 = 01) (2 bytes)
 DR3                           R/W3 = 01 (Write)                C0000H                LEN3 = 11 (4 bytes)
                                                           Data Accesses
                             Operation                                     Address            Access Length
                                                                                                (In Bytes)
 Data operations that trap
 - Read or write                                                A0001H                1
 - Read or write                                                A0001H                2
 - Write                                                        A0002H                1
 - Write                                                        A0002H                2
 - Read or write                                                B0001H                4
 - Read or write                                                B0002H                1
 - Read or write                                                B0002H                2
 - Write                                                        C0000H                4
 - Write                                                        C0001H                2
 - Write                                                        C0003H                1
 Data operations that do not trap
 - Read or write                                                A0000H                1
 - Read                                                         A0002H                1
 - Read or write                                                A0003H                4
 - Read or write                                                B0000H                2
 - Read                                                         C0000H                2
 - Read or write                                                C0004H                4

17.2.6         Debug Registers and Intel® 64 Processors
For Intel 64 architecture processors, debug registers DR0–DR7 are 64 bits. In 16-bit or 32-bit modes (protected
mode and compatibility mode), writes to a debug register fill the upper 32 bits with zeros. Reads from a debug
register return the lower 32 bits. In 64-bit mode, MOV DRn instructions read or write all 64 bits. Operand-size
prefixes are ignored.
In 64-bit mode, the upper 32 bits of DR6 and DR7 are reserved and must be written with zeros. Writing 1 to any of
the upper 32 bits results in a #GP(0) exception (see Figure 17-2). All 64 bits of DR0–DR3 are writable by software.
However, MOV DRn instructions do not check that addresses written to DR0–DR3 are in the linear-address limits of
the processor implementation (address matching is supported only on valid addresses generated by the processor
implementation). Break point conditions for 8-byte memory read/writes are supported in all modes.

17.3           DEBUG EXCEPTIONS
The Intel 64 and IA-32 architectures dedicate two interrupt vectors to handling debug exceptions: vector 1 (debug
exception, #DB) and vector 3 (breakpoint exception, #BP). The following sections describe how these exceptions
are generated and typical exception handler operations.

                         63                                                                                 32

                                                                                                                 DR7

                         31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                          LEN R/W LEN R/W LEN R/W LEN R/W 0 0 G 0 0 1 G L G L G L G L G L
                           3   3   2   2   1   1   0   0      D       E E 3 3 2 2 1 1 0 0
                                                                                          DR7

                         63                                                                                 32

                                                                                                                 DR6

                         31                                     16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                    Reserved (set to 1)            B B B 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 B B B B
                                                                   T S D                     3 2 1 0
                                                                                                     DR6

                         63                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                 DR5

                         63                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                 DR4

                         63                                                                                 0

                                                    Breakpoint 3 Linear Address                                  DR3

                         63                                                                                 0

                                                    Breakpoint 2 Linear Address                                  DR2

                         63                                                                                 0

                                                    Breakpoint 1 Linear Address                                  DR1

                         63                                                                                 0

                                                    Breakpoint 0 Linear Address                                  DR0

                              Reserved

                 Figure 17-2. DR6/DR7 Layout on Processors Supporting Intel® 64 Architecture

17.3.1     Debug Exception (#DB)—Interrupt Vector 1
The debug-exception handler is usually a debugger program or part of a larger software system. The processor
generates a debug exception for any of several conditions. The debugger checks flags in the DR6 and DR7 registers
to determine which condition caused the exception and which other conditions might apply. Table 17-2 shows the
states of these flags following the generation of each kind of breakpoint condition.
Instruction-breakpoint and general-detect condition (see Section 17.3.1.3, “General-Detect Exception Condition”)
result in faults; other debug-exception conditions result in traps. The debug exception may report one or both at
one time. The following sections describe each class of debug exception.

See also: Chapter 6, “Interrupt 1—Debug Exception (#DB),” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software
Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A.

                                               Table 17-2. Debug Exception Conditions
    Debug or Breakpoint Condition                               DR6 Flags Tested   DR7 Flags Tested   Exception Class
    Single-step trap                                            BS = 1                                Trap
    Instruction breakpoint, at addresses defined by DRn and     Bn = 1 and         R/Wn = 0           Fault
    LENn                                                        (Gn or Ln = 1)
    Data write breakpoint, at addresses defined by DRn and      Bn = 1 and         R/Wn = 1           Trap
    LENn                                                        (Gn or Ln = 1)
    I/O read or write breakpoint, at addresses defined by DRn   Bn = 1 and         R/Wn = 2           Trap
    and LENn                                                    (Gn or Ln = 1)
    Data read or write (but not instruction fetches), at        Bn = 1 and         R/Wn = 3           Trap
    addresses defined by DRn and LENn                           (Gn or Ln = 1)
    General detect fault, resulting from an attempt to modify   BD = 1                                Fault
    debug registers (usually in conjunction with in-circuit
    emulation)
    Task switch                                                 BT = 1                                Trap

17.3.1.1          Instruction-Breakpoint Exception Condition
The processor reports an instruction breakpoint when it attempts to execute an instruction at an address specified
in a breakpoint-address register (DR0 through DR3) that has been set up to detect instruction execution (R/W flag
is set to 0). Upon reporting the instruction breakpoint, the processor generates a fault-class, debug exception
(#DB) before it executes the target instruction for the breakpoint.
Instruction breakpoints are the highest priority debug exceptions. They are serviced before any other exceptions
detected during the decoding or execution of an instruction. However, if a code instruction breakpoint is placed on
an instruction located immediately after a POP SS/MOV SS instruction, the breakpoint may not be triggered. In
most situations, POP SS/MOV SS will inhibit such interrupts (see “MOV—Move” and “POP—Pop a Value from the
Stack” in Chapter 4 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2B).

Because the debug exception for an instruction breakpoint is generated before the instruction is executed, if the
instruction breakpoint is not removed by the exception handler; the processor will detect the instruction breakpoint
again when the instruction is restarted and generate another debug exception. To prevent looping on an instruction
breakpoint, the Intel 64 and IA-32 architectures provide the RF flag (resume flag) in the EFLAGS register (see
Section 2.3, “System Flags and Fields in the EFLAGS Register,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software
Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A). When the RF flag is set, the processor ignores instruction breakpoints.
All Intel 64 and IA-32 processors manage the RF flag as follows. The RF Flag is cleared at the start of the instruction
after the check for code breakpoint, CS limit violation and FP exceptions. Task Switches and IRETD/IRETQ instruc-
tions transfer the RF image from the TSS/stack to the EFLAGS register.
When calling an event handler, Intel 64 and IA-32 processors establish the value of the RF flag in the EFLAGS image
pushed on the stack:
•      For any fault-class exception except a debug exception generated in response to an instruction breakpoint, the
       value pushed for RF is 1.
•      For any interrupt arriving after any iteration of a repeated string instruction but the last iteration, the value
       pushed for RF is 1.
•      For any trap-class exception generated by any iteration of a repeated string instruction but the last iteration,
       the value pushed for RF is 1.
•      For other cases, the value pushed for RF is the value that was in EFLAG.RF at the time the event handler was
       called. This includes:
       — Debug exceptions generated in response to instruction breakpoints

   — Hardware-generated interrupts arriving between instructions (including those arriving after the last
     iteration of a repeated string instruction)
   — Trap-class exceptions generated after an instruction completes (including those generated after the last
     iteration of a repeated string instruction)
   — Software-generated interrupts (RF is pushed as 0, since it was cleared at the start of the software interrupt)
As noted above, the processor does not set the RF flag prior to calling the debug exception handler for debug
exceptions resulting from instruction breakpoints. The debug exception handler can prevent recurrence of the
instruction breakpoint by setting the RF flag in the EFLAGS image on the stack. If the RF flag in the EFLAGS image
is set when the processor returns from the exception handler, it is copied into the RF flag in the EFLAGS register by
IRETD/IRETQ or a task switch that causes the return. The processor then ignores instruction breakpoints for the
duration of the next instruction. (Note that the POPF, POPFD, and IRET instructions do not transfer the RF image
into the EFLAGS register.) Setting the RF flag does not prevent other types of debug-exception conditions (such as,
I/O or data breakpoints) from being detected, nor does it prevent non-debug exceptions from being generated.
For the Pentium processor, when an instruction breakpoint coincides with another fault-type exception (such as a
page fault), the processor may generate one spurious debug exception after the second exception has been
handled, even though the debug exception handler set the RF flag in the EFLAGS image. To prevent a spurious
exception with Pentium processors, all fault-class exception handlers should set the RF flag in the EFLAGS image.

17.3.1.2     Data Memory and I/O Breakpoint Exception Conditions
Data memory and I/O breakpoints are reported when the processor attempts to access a memory or I/O address
specified in a breakpoint-address register (DR0 through DR3) that has been set up to detect data or I/O accesses
(R/W flag is set to 1, 2, or 3). The processor generates the exception after it executes the instruction that made the
access, so these breakpoint condition causes a trap-class exception to be generated.
Because data breakpoints are traps, an instruction that writes memory overwrites the original data before the
debug exception generated by a data breakpoint is generated. If a debugger needs to save the contents of a write
breakpoint location, it should save the original contents before setting the breakpoint. The handler can report the
saved value after the breakpoint is triggered. The address in the debug registers can be used to locate the new
value stored by the instruction that triggered the breakpoint.
If a data breakpoint is detected during an iteration of a string instruction executed with fast-string operation (see
Section 7.3.9.3 of Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1), delivery of the
resulting debug exception may be delayed until completion of the corresponding group of iterations.
Intel486 and later processors ignore the GE and LE flags in DR7. In Intel386 processors, exact data breakpoint
matching does not occur unless it is enabled by setting the LE and/or the GE flags.
For repeated INS and OUTS instructions that generate an I/O-breakpoint debug exception, the processor gener-
ates the exception after the completion of the first iteration. Repeated INS and OUTS instructions generate a data-
breakpoint debug exception after the iteration in which the memory address breakpoint location is accessed.

17.3.1.3     General-Detect Exception Condition
When the GD flag in DR7 is set, the general-detect debug exception occurs when a program attempts to access any
of the debug registers (DR0 through DR7) at the same time they are being used by another application, such as an
emulator or debugger. This protection feature guarantees full control over the debug registers when required. The
debug exception handler can detect this condition by checking the state of the BD flag in the DR6 register. The
processor generates the exception before it executes the MOV instruction that accesses a debug register, which
causes a fault-class exception to be generated.

17.3.1.4     Single-Step Exception Condition
The processor generates a single-step debug exception if (while an instruction is being executed) it detects that the
TF flag in the EFLAGS register is set. The exception is a trap-class exception, because the exception is generated
after the instruction is executed. The processor will not generate this exception after the instruction that sets the
TF flag. For example, if the POPF instruction is used to set the TF flag, a single-step trap does not occur until after
the instruction that follows the POPF instruction.

The processor clears the TF flag before calling the exception handler. If the TF flag was set in a TSS at the time of
a task switch, the exception occurs after the first instruction is executed in the new task.
The TF flag normally is not cleared by privilege changes inside a task. The INT n and INTO instructions, however,
do clear this flag. Therefore, software debuggers that single-step code must recognize and emulate INT n or INTO
instructions rather than executing them directly. To maintain protection, the operating system should check the
CPL after any single-step trap to see if single stepping should continue at the current privilege level.
The interrupt priorities guarantee that, if an external interrupt occurs, single stepping stops. When both an external
interrupt and a single-step interrupt occur together, the single-step interrupt is processed first. This operation
clears the TF flag. After saving the return address or switching tasks, the external interrupt input is examined
before the first instruction of the single-step handler executes. If the external interrupt is still pending, then it is
serviced. The external interrupt handler does not run in single-step mode. To single step an interrupt handler,
single step an INT n instruction that calls the interrupt handler.

17.3.1.5        Task-Switch Exception Condition
The processor generates a debug exception after a task switch if the T flag of the new task's TSS is set. This excep-
tion is generated after program control has passed to the new task, and prior to the execution of the first instruc-
tion of that task. The exception handler can detect this condition by examining the BT flag of the DR6 register.
If entry 1 (#DB) in the IDT is a task gate, the T bit of the corresponding TSS should not be set. Failure to observe
this rule will put the processor in a loop.

17.3.2          Breakpoint Exception (#BP)—Interrupt Vector 3
The breakpoint exception (interrupt 3) is caused by execution of an INT 3 instruction. See Chapter 6, “Interrupt
3—Breakpoint Exception (#BP).” Debuggers use break exceptions in the same way that they use the breakpoint
registers; that is, as a mechanism for suspending program execution to examine registers and memory locations.
With earlier IA-32 processors, breakpoint exceptions are used extensively for setting instruction breakpoints.
With the Intel386 and later IA-32 processors, it is more convenient to set breakpoints with the breakpoint-address
registers (DR0 through DR3). However, the breakpoint exception still is useful for breakpointing debuggers,
because a breakpoint exception can call a separate exception handler. The breakpoint exception is also useful when
it is necessary to set more breakpoints than there are debug registers or when breakpoints are being placed in the
source code of a program under development.

17.3.3          Debug Exceptions, Breakpoint Exceptions, and Restricted Transactional Memory
                (RTM)
Chapter 16, “Programming with Intel® Transactional Synchronization Extensions,” of Intel® 64 and IA-32 Archi-
tectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1 describes Restricted Transactional Memory (RTM). This is an
instruction-set interface that allows software to identify transactional regions (or critical sections) using the
XBEGIN and XEND instructions.
Execution of an RTM transactional region begins with an XBEGIN instruction. If execution of the region successfully
reaches an XEND instruction, the processor ensures that all memory operations performed within the region
appear to have occurred instantaneously when viewed from other logical processors. Execution of an RTM transac-
tion region does not succeed if the processor cannot commit the updates atomically. When this happens, the
processor rolls back the execution, a process referred to as a transactional abort. In this case, the processor
discards all updates performed in the region, restores architectural state to appear as if the execution had not
occurred, and resumes execution at a fallback instruction address that was specified with the XBEGIN instruction.
If debug exception (#DB) or breakpoint exception (#BP) occurs within an RTM transaction region, a transactional
abort occurs, the processor sets EAX[4], and no exception is delivered.
Software can enable advanced debugging of RTM transactional regions by setting DR7.RTM[bit 11] and
IA32_DEBUGCTL.RTM[bit 15]. If these bits are both set, the transactional abort caused by a #DB or #BP within an
RTM transaction region does not resume execution at the fallback instruction address specified with the XBEGIN
instruction that begin the region. Instead, execution is resumed at that XBEGIN instruction, and a #DB is delivered.

(A #DB is delivered even if the transactional abort was caused by a #BP.) Such a #DB will clear DR6.RTM[bit 16]
(all other debug exceptions set DR6[16]).

17.4        LAST BRANCH, INTERRUPT, AND EXCEPTION RECORDING OVERVIEW
P6 family processors introduced the ability to set breakpoints on taken branches, interrupts, and exceptions, and
to single-step from one branch to the next. This capability has been modified and extended in the Pentium 4, Intel
Xeon, Pentium M, Intel® Core™ Solo, Intel® Core™ Duo, Intel® Core™2 Duo, Intel® Core™ i7 and Intel® Atom™
processors to allow logging of branch trace messages in a branch trace store (BTS) buffer in memory.
See the following sections for processor specific implementation of last branch, interrupt and exception recording:
    — Section 17.5, “Last Branch, Interrupt, and Exception Recording (Intel® Core™ 2 Duo and Intel® Atom™
      Processors)”
    — Section 17.6, “Last Branch, Call Stack, Interrupt, and Exception Recording for Processors based on
      Goldmont Microarchitecture”
    — Section 17.7, “Last Branch, Interrupt, and Exception Recording for Processors based on Intel® Microarchi-
      tecture code name Nehalem”
    — Section 17.8, “Last Branch, Interrupt, and Exception Recording for Processors based on Intel® Microarchi-
      tecture code name Sandy Bridge”
    — Section 17.9, “Last Branch, Call Stack, Interrupt, and Exception Recording for Processors based on Haswell
      Microarchitecture”
    — Section 17.10, “Last Branch, Call Stack, Interrupt, and Exception Recording for Processors based on
      Skylake Microarchitecture”
    — Section 17.12, “Last Branch, Interrupt, and Exception Recording (Intel® Core™ Solo and Intel® Core™
      Duo Processors)”
    — Section 17.13, “Last Branch, Interrupt, and Exception Recording (Pentium M Processors)”
    — Section 17.14, “Last Branch, Interrupt, and Exception Recording (P6 Family Processors)”
The following subsections of Section 17.4 describe common features of profiling branches. These features are
generally enabled using the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR (older processor may have implemented a subset or model-
specific features, see definitions of MSR_DEBUGCTLA, MSR_DEBUGCTLB, MSR_DEBUGCTL).

17.4.1      IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR
The IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR provides bit field controls to enable debug trace interrupts, debug trace stores, trace
messages enable, single stepping on branches, last branch record recording, and to control freezing of LBR stack
or performance counters on a PMI request. IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR is located at register address 01D9H.
See Figure 17-3 for the MSR layout and the bullets below for a description of the flags:
•   LBR (last branch/interrupt/exception) flag (bit 0) — When set, the processor records a running trace of
    the most recent branches, interrupts, and/or exceptions taken by the processor (prior to a debug exception
    being generated) in the last branch record (LBR) stack. For more information, see the Section 17.5.1, “LBR
    Stack” (Intel® Core™2 Duo and Intel® Atom™ Processor Family) and Section 17.7.1, “LBR Stack” (processors
    based on Intel® Microarchitecture code name Nehalem).
•   BTF (single-step on branches) flag (bit 1) — When set, the processor treats the TF flag in the EFLAGS
    register as a “single-step on branches” flag rather than a “single-step on instructions” flag. This mechanism
    allows single-stepping the processor on taken branches. See Section 17.4.3, “Single-Stepping on Branches,”
    for more information about the BTF flag.
•   TR (trace message enable) flag (bit 6) — When set, branch trace messages are enabled. When the
    processor detects a taken branch, interrupt, or exception; it sends the branch record out on the system bus as
    a branch trace message (BTM). See Section 17.4.4, “Branch Trace Messages,” for more information about the
    TR flag.

•   BTS (branch trace store) flag (bit 7) — When set, the flag enables BTS facilities to log BTMs to a memory-
    resident BTS buffer that is part of the DS save area. See Section 17.4.9, “BTS and DS Save Area.”
•   BTINT (branch trace interrupt) flag (bit 8) — When set, the BTS facilities generate an interrupt when the
    BTS buffer is full. When clear, BTMs are logged to the BTS buffer in a circular fashion. See Section 17.4.5, “Branch
    Trace Store (BTS),” for a description of this mechanism.

                            31                                       15 14   12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                            Reserved

                             RTM
                             FREEZE_WHILE_SMM_EN
                             FREEZE_PERFMON_ON_PMI
                             FREEZE_LBRS_ON_PMI
                             BTS_OFF_USR — BTS off in user code
                             BTS_OFF_OS — BTS off in OS
                             BTINT — Branch trace interrupt
                             BTS — Branch trace store
                             TR — Trace messages enable
                             Reserved
                             BTF — Single-step on branches
                             LBR — Last branch/interrupt/exception

                              Figure 17-3. IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR for Processors based
                                          on Intel Core microarchitecture

•   BTS_OFF_OS (branch trace off in privileged code) flag (bit 9) — When set, BTS or BTM is skipped if CPL
    is 0. See Section 17.11.2.
•   BTS_OFF_USR (branch trace off in user code) flag (bit 10) — When set, BTS or BTM is skipped if CPL is
    greater than 0. See Section 17.11.2.
•   FREEZE_LBRS_ON_PMI flag (bit 11) — When set, the LBR stack is frozen on a hardware PMI request (e.g.
    when a counter overflows and is configured to trigger PMI). See Section 17.4.7 for details.
•   FREEZE_PERFMON_ON_PMI flag (bit 12) — When set, the performance counters (IA32_PMCx and
    IA32_FIXED_CTRx) are frozen on a PMI request. See Section 17.4.7 for details.
•   FREEZE_WHILE_SMM_EN (bit 14) — If this bit is set, upon the delivery of an SMI, the processor will clear all
    the enable bits of IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL, save a copy of the content of IA32_DEBUGCTL and disable LBR,
    BTF, TR, and BTS fields of IA32_DEBUGCTL before transferring control to the SMI handler. Subsequently, the
    enable bits of IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL will be set to 1, the saved copy of IA32_DEBUGCTL prior to SMI
    delivery will be restored, after the SMI handler issues RSM to complete its service. Note that system software
    must check if the processor supports the IA32_DEBUGCTL.FREEZE_WHILE_SMM_EN control bit.
    IA32_DEBUGCTL.FREEZE_WHILE_SMM_EN is supported if
    IA32_PERF_CAPABILITIES.FREEZE_WHILE_SMM[Bit 12] is reporting 1. See Section 18.19 for details of
    detecting the presence of IA32_PERF_CAPABILITIES MSR.
•   RTM (bit 15) — If this bit is set, advanced debugging of RTM transactional regions is enabled if DR7.RTM is
    also set. See Section 17.3.3.

17.4.2          Monitoring Branches, Exceptions, and Interrupts
When the LBR flag (bit 0) in the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR is set, the processor automatically begins recording branch
records for taken branches, interrupts, and exceptions (except for debug exceptions) in the LBR stack MSRs.
When the processor generates a debug exception (#DB), it automatically clears the LBR flag before executing the
exception handler. This action does not clear previously stored LBR stack MSRs.
A debugger can use the linear addresses in the LBR stack to re-set breakpoints in the breakpoint address registers
(DR0 through DR3). This allows a backward trace from the manifestation of a particular bug toward its source.

On some processors, if the LBR flag is cleared and TR flag in the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR remains set, the processor
will continue to update LBR stack MSRs. This is because those processors use the entries in the LBR stack in the
process of generating BTM/BTS records. A #DB does not automatically clear the TR flag.

17.4.3        Single-Stepping on Branches
When software sets both the BTF flag (bit 1) in the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR and the TF flag in the EFLAGS register,
the processor generates a single-step debug exception only after instructions that cause a branch.1 This mecha-
nism allows a debugger to single-step on control transfers caused by branches. This “branch single stepping” helps
isolate a bug to a particular block of code before instruction single-stepping further narrows the search. The
processor clears the BTF flag when it generates a debug exception. The debugger must set the BTF flag before
resuming program execution to continue single-stepping on branches.

17.4.4        Branch Trace Messages
Setting the TR flag (bit 6) in the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR enables branch trace messages (BTMs). Thereafter, when
the processor detects a branch, exception, or interrupt, it sends a branch record out on the system bus as a BTM.
A debugging device that is monitoring the system bus can read these messages and synchronize operations with
taken branch, interrupt, and exception events.
When interrupts or exceptions occur in conjunction with a taken branch, additional BTMs are sent out on the bus,
as described in Section 17.4.2, “Monitoring Branches, Exceptions, and Interrupts.”
For P6 processor family, Pentium M processor family, processors based on Intel Core microarchitecture, TR and LBR
bits can not be set at the same time due to hardware limitation. The content of LBR stack is undefined when TR is
set.
For processors with Intel NetBurst microarchitecture, Intel Atom processors, and Intel Core and related Intel Xeon
processors both starting with the Nehalem microarchitecture, the processor can collect branch records in the LBR
stack and at the same time send/store BTMs when both the TR and LBR flags are set in the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR
(or the equivalent MSR_DEBUGCTLA, MSR_DEBUGCTLB).
The following exception applies:
•   BTM may not be observable on Intel Atom processor families that do not provide an externally visible system
    bus (i.e., processors based on the Silvermont microarchitecture or later).

17.4.4.1       Branch Trace Message Visibility
Branch trace message (BTM) visibility is implementation specific and limited to systems with a front side bus
(FSB). BTMs may not be visible to newer system link interfaces or a system bus that deviates from a traditional
FSB.

17.4.5        Branch Trace Store (BTS)
A trace of taken branches, interrupts, and exceptions is useful for debugging code by providing a method of deter-
mining the decision path taken to reach a particular code location. The LBR flag (bit 0) of IA32_DEBUGCTL provides
a mechanism for capturing records of taken branches, interrupts, and exceptions and saving them in the last
branch record (LBR) stack MSRs, setting the TR flag for sending them out onto the system bus as BTMs. The branch
trace store (BTS) mechanism provides the additional capability of saving the branch records in a memory-resident
BTS buffer, which is part of the DS save area. The BTS buffer can be configured to be circular so that the most
recent branch records are always available or it can be configured to generate an interrupt when the buffer is
nearly full so that all the branch records can be saved. The BTINT flag (bit 8) can be used to enable the generation
of interrupt when the BTS buffer is full. See Section 17.4.9.2, “Setting Up the DS Save Area.” for additional details.

1. Executions of CALL, IRET, and JMP that cause task switches never cause single-step debug exceptions (regardless of the value of the
   BTF flag). A debugger desiring debug exceptions on switches to a task should set the T flag (debug trap flag) in the TSS of that task.
   See Section 7.2.1, “Task-State Segment (TSS).”

Setting this flag (BTS) alone can greatly reduce the performance of the processor. CPL-qualified branch trace
storing mechanism can help mitigate the performance impact of sending/logging branch trace messages.

17.4.6          CPL-Qualified Branch Trace Mechanism
CPL-qualified branch trace mechanism is available to a subset of Intel 64 and IA-32 processors that support the
branch trace storing mechanism. The processor supports the CPL-qualified branch trace mechanism if
CPUID.01H:ECX[bit 4] = 1.
The CPL-qualified branch trace mechanism is described in Section 17.4.9.4. System software can selectively specify
CPL qualification to not send/store Branch Trace Messages associated with a specified privilege level. Two bit fields,
BTS_OFF_USR (bit 10) and BTS_OFF_OS (bit 9), are provided in the debug control register to specify the CPL of
BTMs that will not be logged in the BTS buffer or sent on the bus.

17.4.7          Freezing LBR and Performance Counters on PMI
Many issues may generate a performance monitoring interrupt (PMI); a PMI service handler will need to determine
cause to handle the situation. Two capabilities that allow a PMI service routine to improve branch tracing and
performance monitoring are available for processors supporting architectural performance monitoring version 2 or
greater (i.e. CPUID.0AH:EAX[7:0] > 1). These capabilities provides the following interface in IA32_DEBUGCTL to
reduce runtime overhead of PMI servicing, profiler-contributed skew effects on analysis or counter metrics:
•   Freezing LBRs on PMI (bit 11)— Allows the PMI service routine to ensure the content in the LBR stack are
    associated with the target workload and not polluted by the branch flows of handling the PMI. Depending on the
    version ID enumerated by CPUID.0AH:EAX.ArchPerfMonVerID[bits 7:0], two flavors are supported:
    — Legacy Freeze_LBR_on_PMI is supported for ArchPerfMonVerID <= 3 and ArchPerfMonVerID >1. If
      IA32_DEBUGCTL.Freeze_LBR_On_PMI = 1, the LBR is frozen on the overflowed condition of the buffer
      area, the processor clears the LBR bit (bit 0) in IA32_DEBUGCTL. Software must then re-enable
      IA32_DEBUGCTL.LBR to resume recording branches. When using this feature, software should be careful
      about writes to IA32_DEBUGCTL to avoid re-enabling LBRs by accident if they were just disabled.
    — Streamlined Freeze_LBR_on_PMI is supported for ArchPerfMonVerID >= 4. If
      IA32_DEBUGCTL.Freeze_LBR_On_PMI = 1, the processor behaves as follows:
         •   sets IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_STATUS.LBR_Frz =1 to disable recording, but does not change the LBR bit
             (bit 0) in IA32_DEBUGCTL. The LBRs are frozen on the overflowed condition of the buffer area.
•   Freezing PMCs on PMI (bit 12) — Allows the PMI service routine to ensure the content in the performance
    counters are associated with the target workload and not polluted by the PMI and activities within the PMI
    service routine. Depending on the version ID enumerated by CPUID.0AH:EAX.ArchPerfMonVerID[bits 7:0], two
    flavors are supported:
    — Legacy Freeze_Perfmon_on_PMI is supported for ArchPerfMonVerID <= 3 and ArchPerfMonVerID >1. If
      IA32_DEBUGCTL.Freeze_Perfmon_On_PMI = 1, the performance counters are frozen on the counter
      overflowed condition when the processor clears the IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL MSR (see Figure 18-3). The
      PMCs affected include both general-purpose counters and fixed-function counters (see Section 18.4.1,
      “Fixed-function Performance Counters”). Software must re-enable counts by writing 1s to the corre-
      sponding enable bits in IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL before leaving a PMI service routine to continue counter
      operation.
    — Streamlined Freeze_Perfmon_on_PMI is supported for ArchPerfMonVerID >= 4. The processor behaves as
      follows:
         •   sets IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_STATUS.CTR_Frz =1 to disable counting on a counter overflow condition, but
             does not change the IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL MSR.
Freezing LBRs and PMCs on PMIs (both legacy and streamlined operation) occur when one of the following applies:
•   A performance counter had an overflow and was programmed to signal a PMI in case of an overflow.
    — For the general-purpose counters; enabling PMI is done by setting bit 20 of the IA32_PERFEVTSELx
      register.

       — For the fixed-function counters; enabling PMI is done by setting the 3rd bit in the corresponding 4-bit
         control field of the MSR_PERF_FIXED_CTR_CTRL register (see Figure 18-1) or IA32_FIXED_CTR_CTRL MSR
         (see Figure 18-2).
 •     The PEBS buffer is almost full and reaches the interrupt threshold.
 •     The BTS buffer is almost full and reaches the interrupt threshold.
 Table 17-3 compares the interaction of the processor with the PMI handler using the legacy versus streamlined
 Freeza_Perfmon_On_PMI interface.

         Table 17-3. Legacy and Streamlined Operation with Freeze_Perfmon_On_PMI = 1, Counter Overflowed

Legacy Freeze_Perfmon_On_PMI                  Streamlined Freeze_Perfmon_On_PMI            Comment
Processor freezes the counters on overflow    Processor freezes the counters on overflow   Unchanged
Processor clears IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL        Processor set
                                              IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_STATUS.CTR_FTZ
Handler reads IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_STATUS          mask = RDMSR(0x38E)                         Similar
(0x38E) to examine which counter(s) overflowed
Handler services the PMI                      Handler services the PMI                     Unchanged
Handler writes 1s to                          Handler writes mask into
IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_OVF_CTL (0x390)              IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_OVF_RESET (0x390)
Processor clears IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_STATUS     Processor clears IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_STATUS Unchanged
Handler re-enables IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL      None                                         Reduced software overhead

 17.4.8        LBR Stack
 The last branch record stack and top-of-stack (TOS) pointer MSRs are supported across Intel 64 and IA-32
 processor families. However, the number of MSRs in the LBR stack and the valid range of TOS pointer value can
 vary between different processor families. Table 17-4 lists the LBR stack size and TOS pointer range for several
 processor families according to the CPUID signatures of DisplayFamily_DisplayModel encoding (see CPUID instruc-
 tion in Chapter 3 of Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2A).

                                    Table 17-4. LBR Stack Size and TOS Pointer Range
     DisplayFamily_DisplayModel                      Size of LBR Stack   Component of an LBR Entry     Range of TOS Pointer
     06_5CH, 06_5FH                                  32                  FROM_IP, TO_IP                0 to 31
                                                                                                 1
     06_4EH, 06_5EH, 06_8EH, 06_9EH                  32                  FROM_IP, TO_IP, LBR_INFO      0 to 31
     06_3DH, 06_47H, 06_4FH, 06_56H                  16                  FROM_IP, TO_IP                0 to 15
     06_3CH, 06_45H, 06_46H, 06_3FH                  16                  FROM_IP, TO_IP                0 to 15
     06_2AH, 06_2DH, 06_3AH, 06_3EH                  16                  FROM_IP, TO_IP                0 to 15
     06_1AH, 06_1EH, 06_1FH, 06_2EH, 06_25H,         16                  FROM_IP, TO_IP                0 to 15
     06_2CH, 06_2FH
     06_17H, 06_1DH                                  4                   FROM_IP, TO_IP                0 to 3
     06_0FH                                          4                   FROM_IP, TO_IP                0 to 3
     06_37H, 06_4AH, 06_4CH, 06_4DH, 06_5AH,         8                   FROM_IP, TO_IP                0 to 7
     06_5DH
     06_1CH, 06_26H, 06_27H, 06_35H, 06_36H          8                   FROM_IP, TO_IP                0 to 7

  NOTES:
  1. See Section 17.10.

The last branch recording mechanism tracks not only branch instructions (like JMP, Jcc, LOOP and CALL instruc-
tions), but also other operations that cause a change in the instruction pointer (like external interrupts, traps and
faults). The branch recording mechanisms generally employs a set of MSRs, referred to as last branch record (LBR)
stack. The size and exact locations of the LBR stack are generally model-specific (see Chapter 35, “Model-Specific
Registers (MSRs)” of Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3C for model-
specific MSR addresses).
•   Last Branch Record (LBR) Stack — The LBR consists of N pairs of MSRs (N is listed in the LBR stack size
    column of Table 17-4) that store source and destination address of recent branches (see Figure 17-3):
    — MSR_LASTBRANCH_0_FROM_IP (address is model specific) through the next consecutive (N-1) MSR
      address store source addresses.
    — MSR_LASTBRANCH_0_TO_IP (address is model specific ) through the next consecutive (N-1) MSR address
      store destination addresses.
•   Last Branch Record Top-of-Stack (TOS) Pointer — The lowest significant M bits of the TOS Pointer MSR
    (MSR_LASTBRANCH_TOS, address is model specific) contains an M-bit pointer to the MSR in the LBR stack that
    contains the most recent branch, interrupt, or exception recorded. The valid range of the M-bit POS pointer is
    given in Table 17-4.

17.4.8.1        LBR Stack and Intel® 64 Processors
LBR MSRs are 64-bits. In 64-bit mode, last branch records store the full address. Outside of 64-bit mode, the upper
32-bits of branch addresses will be stored as 0.

                           MSR_LASTBRANCH_0_FROM_IP through MSR_LASTBRANCH_(N-1)_FROM_IP
                           63                                                          0

                                                                 Source Address

                           MSR_LASTBRANCH_0_TO_IP through MSR_LASTBRANCH_(N-1)_TO_IP
                           63                                                          0
                                                                 Destination Address

                                  Figure 17-4. 64-bit Address Layout of LBR MSR

Software should query an architectural MSR IA32_PERF_CAPABILITIES[5:0] about the format of the address that
is stored in the LBR stack. Four formats are defined by the following encoding:
    — 000000B (32-bit record format) — Stores 32-bit offset in current CS of respective source/destination,
    — 000001B (64-bit LIP record format) — Stores 64-bit linear address of respective source/destination,
    — 000010B (64-bit EIP record format) — Stores 64-bit offset (effective address) of respective
      source/destination.
    — 000011B (64-bit EIP record format) and Flags — Stores 64-bit offset (effective address) of respective
      source/destination. Misprediction info is reported in the upper bit of 'FROM' registers in the LBR stack. See
      LBR stack details below for flag support and definition.
    — 000100B (64-bit EIP record format), Flags and TSX — Stores 64-bit offset (effective address) of
      respective source/destination. Misprediction and TSX info are reported in the upper bits of ‘FROM’ registers
      in the LBR stack.
    — 000101B (64-bit EIP record format), Flags, TSX, LBR_INFO — Stores 64-bit offset (effective
      address) of respective source/destination. Misprediction, TSX, and elapsed cycles since the last LBR update
      are reported in the LBR_INFO MSR stack.
    — 000110B (64-bit EIP record format), Flags, Cycles — Stores 64-bit linear address (CS.Base +
      effective address) of respective source/destination. Misprediction info is reported in the upper bits of

         'FROM' registers in the LBR stack. Elapsed cycles since the last LBR update are reported in the upper 16 bits
         of the 'TO' registers in the LBR stack (see Section 17.6).
Processor’s support for the architectural MSR IA32_PERF_CAPABILITIES is provided by
CPUID.01H:ECX[PERF_CAPAB_MSR] (bit 15).

17.4.8.2      LBR Stack and IA-32 Processors
The LBR MSRs in IA-32 processors introduced prior to Intel 64 architecture store the 32-bit “To Linear Address” and
“From Linear Address“ using the high and low half of each 64-bit MSR.

17.4.8.3      Last Exception Records and Intel 64 Architecture
Intel 64 and IA-32 processors also provide MSRs that store the branch record for the last branch taken prior to an
exception or an interrupt. The location of the last exception record (LER) MSRs are model specific. The MSRs that
store last exception records are 64-bits. If IA-32e mode is disabled, only the lower 32-bits of the address is
recorded. If IA-32e mode is enabled, the processor writes 64-bit values into the MSR. In 64-bit mode, last excep-
tion records store 64-bit addresses; in compatibility mode, the upper 32-bits of last exception records are cleared.

17.4.9       BTS and DS Save Area
The Debug store (DS) feature flag (bit 21), returned by CPUID.1:EDX[21] indicates that the processor provides
the debug store (DS) mechanism. The DS mechanism allows:
•   BTMs to be stored in a memory-resident BTS buffer. See Section 17.4.5, “Branch Trace Store (BTS).”
•   Processor event-based sampling (PEBS) also uses the DS save area provided by debug store mechanism. The
    capability of PEBS varies across different microarchitectures. See Section 18.4.4, “Processor Event Based
    Sampling (PEBS),” and the relevant PEBS sub-sections across the core PMU sections in Chapter 18, “Perfor-
    mance Monitoring.”.
When CPUID.1:EDX[21] is set:
•   The BTS_UNAVAILABLE and PEBS_UNAVAILABLE flags in the IA32_MISC_ENABLE MSR indicate (when clear)
    the availability of the BTS and PEBS facilities, including the ability to set the BTS and BTINT bits in the
    appropriate DEBUGCTL MSR.
•   The IA32_DS_AREA MSR exists and points to the DS save area.
The debug store (DS) save area is a software-designated area of memory that is used to collect the following two
types of information:
•   Branch records — When the BTS flag in the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR is set, a branch record is stored in the BTS
    buffer in the DS save area whenever a taken branch, interrupt, or exception is detected.
•   PEBS records — When a performance counter is configured for PEBS, a PEBS record is stored in the PEBS
    buffer in the DS save area after the counter overflow occurs. This record contains the architectural state of the
    processor (state of the 8 general purpose registers, EIP register, and EFLAGS register) at the next occurrence
    of the PEBS event that caused the counter to overflow. When the state information has been logged, the
    counter is automatically reset to a specified value, and event counting begins again. The content layout of a
    PEBS record varies across different implementations that support PEBS. See Section 18.4.4.2 for details of
    enumerating PEBS record format.

                                                        NOTES
        Prior to processors based on the Goldmont microarchitecture, PEBS facility only supports a subset
        of implementation-specific precise events. See Section 18.7.1 for a PEBS enhancement that can
        generate records for both precise and non-precise events.

        The DS save area and recording mechanism are disabled on INIT, processor Reset or transition to
        system-management mode (SMM) or IA-32e mode. It is similarly disabled on the generation of a
        machine-check exception on 45nm and 32nm Intel Atom processors and on processors with
        Netburst or Intel Core microarchitecture.

        The BTS and PEBS facilities may not be available on all processors. The availability of these facilities
        is indicated by the BTS_UNAVAILABLE and PEBS_UNAVAILABLE flags, respectively, in the
        IA32_MISC_ENABLE MSR (see Chapter 35).

The DS save area is divided into three parts (see Figure 17-5): buffer management area, branch trace store (BTS)
buffer, and PEBS buffer. The buffer management area is used to define the location and size of the BTS and PEBS
buffers. The processor then uses the buffer management area to keep track of the branch and/or PEBS records in
their respective buffers and to record the performance counter reset value. The linear address of the first byte of
the DS buffer management area is specified with the IA32_DS_AREA MSR.
The fields in the buffer management area are as follows:
•   BTS buffer base — Linear address of the first byte of the BTS buffer. This address should point to a natural
    doubleword boundary.
•   BTS index — Linear address of the first byte of the next BTS record to be written to. Initially, this address
    should be the same as the address in the BTS buffer base field.
•   BTS absolute maximum — Linear address of the next byte past the end of the BTS buffer. This address should
    be a multiple of the BTS record size (12 bytes) plus 1.
•   BTS interrupt threshold — Linear address of the BTS record on which an interrupt is to be generated. This
    address must point to an offset from the BTS buffer base that is a multiple of the BTS record size. Also, it must
    be several records short of the BTS absolute maximum address to allow a pending interrupt to be handled prior
    to processor writing the BTS absolute maximum record.
•   PEBS buffer base — Linear address of the first byte of the PEBS buffer. This address should point to a natural
    doubleword boundary.
•   PEBS index — Linear address of the first byte of the next PEBS record to be written to. Initially, this address
    should be the same as the address in the PEBS buffer base field.
•   PEBS absolute maximum — Linear address of the next byte past the end of the PEBS buffer. This address
    should be a multiple of the PEBS record size (40 bytes) plus 1.
•   PEBS interrupt threshold — Linear address of the PEBS record on which an interrupt is to be generated. This
    address must point to an offset from the PEBS buffer base that is a multiple of the PEBS record size. Also, it
    must be several records short of the PEBS absolute maximum address to allow a pending interrupt to be
    handled prior to processor writing the PEBS absolute maximum record.
•   PEBS counter reset value — A 40-bit value that the counter is to be reset to after state information has
    collected following counter overflow. This value allows state information to be collected after a preset number
    of events have been counted.

                                                               IA32_DS_AREA MSR

                               DS Buffer Management Area                         BTS Buffer
                                     BTS Buffer Base     0H
                                                                           Branch Record 0
                                       BTS Index         4H
                                      BTS Absolute
                                                         8H
                                       Maximum
                                      BTS Interrupt                         Branch Record 1
                                       Threshold         CH

                                     PEBS Buffer Base 10H

                                       PEBS Index       14H
                                     PEBS Absolute
                                       Maximum          18H
                                                                           Branch Record n
                                     PEBS Interrupt     1CH
                                       Threshold
                                                        20H
                                        PEBS
                                     Counter Reset                           PEBS Buffer
                                                        24H

                                        Reserved        30H                 PEBS Record 0

                                                                            PEBS Record 1

                                                                            PEBS Record n

                                              Figure 17-5. DS Save Area

Figures 17-6 shows the structure of a 12-byte branch record in the BTS buffer. The fields in each record are as
follows:
•   Last branch from — Linear address of the instruction from which the branch, interrupt, or exception was
    taken.
•   Last branch to — Linear address of the branch target or the first instruction in the interrupt or exception
    service routine.
•   Branch predicted — Bit 4 of field indicates whether the branch that was taken was predicted (set) or not
    predicted (clear).

                              31                                                         4    0
                                                       Last Branch From                           0H

                                                        Last Branch To                            4H

                                                                                                  8H

                                                              Branch Predicted

                                   Figure 17-6. 32-bit Branch Trace Record Format

Figure 17-7 shows the structure of the 40-byte PEBS records. Nominally the register values are those at the begin-
ning of the instruction that caused the event. However, there are cases where the registers may be logged in a
partially modified state. The linear IP field shows the value in the EIP register translated from an offset into the
current code segment to a linear address.

                              31                                                  0
                                                     EFLAGS                           0H

                                                    Linear IP                         4H

                                                      EAX                             8H

                                                      EBX                             CH

                                                      ECX                             10H

                                                      EDX                             14H

                                                       ESI                            18H

                                                       EDI                         1CH

                                                      EBP                             20H

                                                      ESP                             24H

                                        Figure 17-7. PEBS Record Format

17.4.9.1        64 Bit Format of the DS Save Area
When DTES64 = 1 (CPUID.1.ECX[2] = 1), the structure of the DS save area is shown in Figure 17-8.
When DTES64 = 0 (CPUID.1.ECX[2] = 0) and IA-32e mode is active, the structure of the DS save area is shown in
Figure 17-8. If IA-32e mode is not active the structure of the DS save area is as shown in Figure 17-6.

                                                            IA32_DS_AREA MSR

                              DS Buffer Management Area                       BTS Buffer
                                  BTS Buffer Base     0H
                                                                        Branch Record 0
                                     BTS Index        8H
                                    BTS Absolute
                                                     10H
                                     Maximum
                                    BTS Interrupt                       Branch Record 1
                                     Threshold       18H

                                  PEBS Buffer Base 20H

                                    PEBS Index       28H
                                   PEBS Absolute
                                     Maximum         30H
                                                                        Branch Record n
                                   PEBS Interrupt    38H
                                     Threshold
                                                     40H
                                      PEBS
                                   Counter Reset                          PEBS Buffer
                                                     48H

                                     Reserved        50H                PEBS Record 0

                                                                        PEBS Record 1

                                                                         PEBS Record n

                                      Figure 17-8. IA-32e Mode DS Save Area

The IA32_DS_AREA MSR holds the 64-bit linear address of the first byte of the DS buffer management area. The
structure of a branch trace record is similar to that shown in Figure 17-6, but each field is 8 bytes in length. This
makes each BTS record 24 bytes (see Figure 17-9). The structure of a PEBS record is similar to that shown in
Figure 17-7, but each field is 8 bytes in length and architectural states include register R8 through R15. This makes
the size of a PEBS record in 64-bit mode 144 bytes (see Figure 17-10).

                            63                                                        4    0
                                                    Last Branch From                           0H

                                                     Last Branch To                            8H

                                                                                               10H

                                                           Branch Predicted

                                  Figure 17-9. 64-bit Branch Trace Record Format

                             63                                                 0
                                                   RFLAGS                           0H

                                                     RIP                            8H
                                                    RAX                          10H
                                                    RBX                          18H
                                                    RCX                          20H
                                                    RDX                          28H
                                                     RSI                         30H
                                                     RDI                         38H
                                                    RBP                          40H
                                                    RSP                          48H
                                                     R8                          50H
                                                     ...                            ...
                                                     R15                         88H

                                    Figure 17-10. 64-bit PEBS Record Format

Fields in the buffer management area of a DS save area are described in Section 17.4.9.
The format of a branch trace record and a PEBS record are the same as the 64-bit record formats shown in Figures
17-9 and Figures 17-10, with the exception that the branch predicted bit is not supported by Intel Core microarchi-
tecture or Intel Atom microarchitecture. The 64-bit record formats for BTS and PEBS apply to DS save area for all
operating modes.
The procedures used to program IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR to set up a BTS buffer or a CPL-qualified BTS are described
in Section 17.4.9.3 and Section 17.4.9.4.
Required elements for writing a DS interrupt service routine are largely the same on processors that support using
DS Save area for BTS or PEBS records. However, on processors based on Intel NetBurst® microarchitecture, re-
enabling counting requires writing to CCCRs. But a DS interrupt service routine on processors supporting architec-
tural performance monitoring should:
•   Re-enable the enable bits in IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL MSR if it is servicing an overflow PMI due to PEBS.
•   Clear overflow indications by writing to IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_OVF_CTRL when a counting configuration is
    changed. This includes bit 62 (ClrOvfBuffer) and the overflow indication of counters used in either PEBS or
    general-purpose counting (specifically: bits 0 or 1; see Figures 18-3).

17.4.9.2        Setting Up the DS Save Area
To save branch records with the BTS buffer, the DS save area must first be set up in memory as described in the
following procedure (See Section 18.4.4.1, “Setting up the PEBS Buffer,” for instructions for setting up a PEBS
buffer, respectively, in the DS save area):
1. Create the DS buffer management information area in memory (see Section 17.4.9, “BTS and DS Save Area,”
   and Section 17.4.9.1, “64 Bit Format of the DS Save Area”). Also see the additional notes in this section.
2. Write the base linear address of the DS buffer management area into the IA32_DS_AREA MSR.
3. Set up the performance counter entry in the xAPIC LVT for fixed delivery and edge sensitive. See Section
   10.5.1, “Local Vector Table.”
4. Establish an interrupt handler in the IDT for the vector associated with the performance counter entry in the
   xAPIC LVT.

5. Write an interrupt service routine to handle the interrupt. See Section 17.4.9.5, “Writing the DS Interrupt
   Service Routine.”
The following restrictions should be applied to the DS save area.
•     The three DS save area sections should be allocated from a non-paged pool, and marked accessed and dirty. It
      is the responsibility of the operating system to keep the pages that contain the buffer present and to mark
      them accessed and dirty. The implication is that the operating system cannot do “lazy” page-table entry
      propagation for these pages.
•     The DS save area can be larger than a page, but the pages must be mapped to contiguous linear addresses.
      The buffer may share a page, so it need not be aligned on a 4-KByte boundary. For performance reasons, the
      base of the buffer must be aligned on a doubleword boundary and should be aligned on a cache line boundary.
•     It is recommended that the buffer size for the BTS buffer and the PEBS buffer be an integer multiple of the
      corresponding record sizes.
•     The precise event records buffer should be large enough to hold the number of precise event records that can
      occur while waiting for the interrupt to be serviced.
•     The DS save area should be in kernel space. It must not be on the same page as code, to avoid triggering self-
      modifying code actions.
•     There are no memory type restrictions on the buffers, although it is recommended that the buffers be
      designated as WB memory type for performance considerations.
•     Either the system must be prevented from entering A20M mode while DS save area is active, or bit 20 of all
      addresses within buffer bounds must be 0.
•     Pages that contain buffers must be mapped to the same physical addresses for all processes, such that any
      change to control register CR3 will not change the DS addresses.
•     The DS save area is expected to used only on systems with an enabled APIC. The LVT Performance Counter
      entry in the APCI must be initialized to use an interrupt gate instead of the trap gate.

17.4.9.3      Setting Up the BTS Buffer
Three flags in the MSR_DEBUGCTLA MSR (see Table 17-5), IA32_DEBUGCTL (see Figure 17-3), or
MSR_DEBUGCTLB (see Figure 17-16) control the generation of branch records and storing of them in the BTS
buffer; these are TR, BTS, and BTINT. The TR flag enables the generation of BTMs. The BTS flag determines
whether the BTMs are sent out on the system bus (clear) or stored in the BTS buffer (set). BTMs cannot be simul-
taneously sent to the system bus and logged in the BTS buffer. The BTINT flag enables the generation of an inter-
rupt when the BTS buffer is full. When this flag is clear, the BTS buffer is a circular buffer.
                                    Table 17-5. IA32_DEBUGCTL Flag Encodings
 TR             BTS         BTINT         Description
 0              X           X             Branch trace messages (BTMs) off
 1              0           X             Generate BTMs
 1              1           0             Store BTMs in the BTS buffer, used here as a circular buffer
 1              1           1             Store BTMs in the BTS buffer, and generate an interrupt when the buffer is nearly full

The following procedure describes how to set up a DS Save area to collect branch records in the BTS buffer:
1. Place values in the BTS buffer base, BTS index, BTS absolute maximum, and BTS interrupt threshold fields of
   the DS buffer management area to set up the BTS buffer in memory.
2. Set the TR and BTS flags in the IA32_DEBUGCTL for Intel Core Solo and Intel Core Duo processors or later
   processors (or MSR_DEBUGCTLA MSR for processors based on Intel NetBurst Microarchitecture; or
   MSR_DEBUGCTLB for Pentium M processors).
3. Clear the BTINT flag in the corresponding IA32_DEBUGCTL (or MSR_DEBUGCTLA MSR; or MSR_DEBUGCTLB)
   if a circular BTS buffer is desired.

                                                          NOTES
          If the buffer size is set to less than the minimum allowable value (i.e. BTS absolute maximum < 1
          + size of BTS record), the results of BTS is undefined.
          In order to prevent generating an interrupt, when working with circular BTS buffer, SW need to set
          BTS interrupt threshold to a value greater than BTS absolute maximum (fields of the DS buffer
          management area). It's not enough to clear the BTINT flag itself only.

17.4.9.4         Setting Up CPL-Qualified BTS
If the processor supports CPL-qualified last branch recording mechanism, the generation of branch records and
storing of them in the BTS buffer are determined by: TR, BTS, BTS_OFF_OS, BTS_OFF_USR, and BTINT. The
encoding of these five bits are shown in Table 17-6.
                                 Table 17-6. CPL-Qualified Branch Trace Store Encodings
 TR        BTS      BTS_OFF_OS     BTS_OFF_USR    BTINT      Description
 0         X        X              X              X          Branch trace messages (BTMs) off
 1         0        X              X              X          Generates BTMs but do not store BTMs
 1         1        0              0              0          Store all BTMs in the BTS buffer, used here as a circular buffer
 1         1        1              0              0          Store BTMs with CPL > 0 in the BTS buffer
 1         1        0              1              0          Store BTMs with CPL = 0 in the BTS buffer
 1         1        1              1              X          Generate BTMs but do not store BTMs
 1         1        0              0              1          Store all BTMs in the BTS buffer; generate an interrupt when the
                                                             buffer is nearly full
 1         1        1              0              1          Store BTMs with CPL > 0 in the BTS buffer; generate an interrupt
                                                             when the buffer is nearly full
 1         1        0              1              1          Store BTMs with CPL = 0 in the BTS buffer; generate an interrupt
                                                             when the buffer is nearly full

17.4.9.5         Writing the DS Interrupt Service Routine
The BTS, non-precise event-based sampling, and PEBS facilities share the same interrupt vector and interrupt
service routine (called the debug store interrupt service routine or DS ISR). To handle BTS, non-precise event-
based sampling, and PEBS interrupts: separate handler routines must be included in the DS ISR. Use the following
guidelines when writing a DS ISR to handle BTS, non-precise event-based sampling, and/or PEBS interrupts.
•     The DS interrupt service routine (ISR) must be part of a kernel driver and operate at a current privilege level of
      0 to secure the buffer storage area.
•     Because the BTS, non-precise event-based sampling, and PEBS facilities share the same interrupt vector, the
      DS ISR must check for all the possible causes of interrupts from these facilities and pass control on to the
      appropriate handler.

      BTS and PEBS buffer overflow would be the sources of the interrupt if the buffer index matches/exceeds the
      interrupt threshold specified. Detection of non-precise event-based sampling as the source of the interrupt is
      accomplished by checking for counter overflow.
•     There must be separate save areas, buffers, and state for each processor in an MP system.
•     Upon entering the ISR, branch trace messages and PEBS should be disabled to prevent race conditions during
      access to the DS save area. This is done by clearing TR flag in the IA32_DEBUGCTL (or MSR_DEBUGCTLA MSR)
      and by clearing the precise event enable flag in the MSR_PEBS_ENABLE MSR. These settings should be
      restored to their original values when exiting the ISR.
•     The processor will not disable the DS save area when the buffer is full and the circular mode has not been
      selected. The current DS setting must be retained and restored by the ISR on exit.

•   After reading the data in the appropriate buffer, up to but not including the current index into the buffer, the ISR
    must reset the buffer index to the beginning of the buffer. Otherwise, everything up to the index will look like
    new entries upon the next invocation of the ISR.
•   The ISR must clear the mask bit in the performance counter LVT entry.
•   The ISR must re-enable the counters to count via IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL/IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_OVF_CTRL
    if it is servicing an overflow PMI due to PEBS (or via CCCR's ENABLE bit on processor based on Intel NetBurst
    microarchitecture).
•   The Pentium 4 Processor and Intel Xeon Processor mask PMIs upon receiving an interrupt. Clear this condition
    before leaving the interrupt handler.

17.5        LAST BRANCH, INTERRUPT, AND EXCEPTION RECORDING (INTEL® CORE™ 2
            DUO AND INTEL® ATOM™ PROCESSORS)
The Intel Core 2 Duo processor family and Intel Xeon processors based on Intel Core microarchitecture or
enhanced Intel Core microarchitecture provide last branch interrupt and exception recording. The facilities
described in this section also apply to 45 nm and 32 nm Intel Atom processors. These capabilities are similar to
those found in Pentium 4 processors, including support for the following facilities:
•   Debug Trace and Branch Recording Control — The IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR provide bit fields for software to
    configure mechanisms related to debug trace, branch recording, branch trace store, and performance counter
    operations. See Section 17.4.1 for a description of the flags. See Figure 17-3 for the MSR layout.
•   Last branch record (LBR) stack — There are a collection of MSR pairs that store the source and destination
    addresses related to recently executed branches. See Section 17.5.1.
•   Monitoring and single-stepping of branches, exceptions, and interrupts
    — See Section 17.4.2 and Section 17.4.3. In addition, the ability to freeze the LBR stack on a PMI request is
      available.
    — 45 nm and 32 nm Intel Atom processors clear the TR flag when the FREEZE_LBRS_ON_PMI flag is set.
•   Branch trace messages — See Section 17.4.4.
•   Last exception records — See Section 17.11.3.
•   Branch trace store and CPL-qualified BTS — See Section 17.4.5.
•   FREEZE_LBRS_ON_PMI flag (bit 11) — see Section 17.4.7 for legacy Freeze_LBRs_On_PMI operation.
•   FREEZE_PERFMON_ON_PMI flag (bit 12) — see Section 17.4.7 for legacy Freeze_Perfmon_On_PMI
    operation.
•   FREEZE_WHILE_SMM_EN (bit 14) — FREEZE_WHILE_SMM_EN is supported if
    IA32_PERF_CAPABILITIES.FREEZE_WHILE_SMM[Bit 12] is reporting 1. See Section 17.4.1.

17.5.1      LBR Stack
The last branch record stack and top-of-stack (TOS) pointer MSRs are supported across Intel Core 2, Intel Atom
processor families, and Intel processors based on Intel NetBurst microarchitecture.
Four pairs of MSRs are supported in the LBR stack for Intel Core 2 processors families and Intel processors based
on Intel NetBurst microarchitecture:
•   Last Branch Record (LBR) Stack
    — MSR_LASTBRANCH_0_FROM_IP (address 40H) through MSR_LASTBRANCH_3_FROM_IP (address 43H)
      store source addresses
    — MSR_LASTBRANCH_0_TO_IP (address 60H) through MSR_LASTBRANCH_3_TO_IP (address 63H) store
      destination addresses

•   Last Branch Record Top-of-Stack (TOS) Pointer — The lowest significant 2 bits of the TOS Pointer MSR
    (MSR_LASTBRANCH_TOS, address 1C9H) contains a pointer to the MSR in the LBR stack that contains the most
    recent branch, interrupt, or exception recorded.
Eight pairs of MSRs are supported in the LBR stack for 45 nm and 32 nm Intel Atom processors:
•   Last Branch Record (LBR) Stack
    — MSR_LASTBRANCH_0_FROM_IP (address 40H) through MSR_LASTBRANCH_7_FROM_IP (address 47H)
      store source addresses
    — MSR_LASTBRANCH_0_TO_IP (address 60H) through MSR_LASTBRANCH_7_TO_IP (address 67H) store
      destination addresses
•   Last Branch Record Top-of-Stack (TOS) Pointer — The lowest significant 3 bits of the TOS Pointer MSR
    (MSR_LASTBRANCH_TOS, address 1C9H) contains a pointer to the MSR in the LBR stack that contains the most
    recent branch, interrupt, or exception recorded.
The address format written in the FROM_IP/TO_IP MSRS may differ between processors. Software should query
IA32_PERF_CAPABILITIES[5:0] and consult Section 17.4.8.1. The behavior of the MSR_LER_TO_LIP and the
MSR_LER_FROM_LIP MSRs corresponds to that of the LastExceptionToIP and LastExceptionFromIP MSRs found in
P6 family processors.

17.5.2          LBR Stack in Intel Atom Processors based on the Silvermont Microarchitecture
The last branch record stack and top-of-stack (TOS) pointer MSRs are supported in Intel Atom processors based on
the Silvermont and Airmont microarchitectures. Eight pairs of MSRs are supported in the LBR stack.
LBR filtering is supported. Filtering of LBRs based on a combination of CPL and branch type conditions is supported.
When LBR filtering is enabled, the LBR stack only captures the subset of branches that are specified by
MSR_LBR_SELECT. The layout of MSR_LBR_SELECT is described in Table 17-11.

17.6            LAST BRANCH, CALL STACK, INTERRUPT, AND EXCEPTION RECORDING
                FOR PROCESSORS BASED ON GOLDMONT MICROARCHITECTURE
Next generation Intel Atom processors are based on the Goldmont microarchitecture. Processors based on the
Goldmont microarchitecture extend the capabilities described in Section 17.5.2 with the following enhancements:
•   Supports new LBR format encoding 00110b in IA32_PERF_CAPABILITIES[5:0].
•   Size of LBR stack increased to 32. Each entry includes MSR_LASTBRANCH_x_FROM_IP (address 0x680..0x69f)
    and MSR_LASTBRANCH_x_TO_IP (address 0x6c0..0x6df).

•   LBR call stack filtering supported. The layout of MSR_LBR_SELECT is described in Table 17-13.
•   Elapsed cycle information is added to MSR_LASTBRANCH_x_TO_IP. Format is shown in Table 17-7.
•   Misprediction info is reported in the upper bits of MSR_LASTBRANCH_x_FROM_IP. MISPRED bit format is
    shown in Table 17-8.

•   Streamlined Freeze_LBRs_On_PMI operation; see Section 17.10.2.
• LBR MSRs may be cleared when MWAIT is used to request a C-state that is numerically higher than C1; see
Section 17.10.3.

                     Table 17-7. MSR_LASTBRANCH_x_TO_IP for the Goldmont Microarchitecture
Bit Field            Bit Offset   Access   Description
Data                 47:0         R/O      This is the “branch to“ address. See Section 17.4.8.1 for address format.
Cycle Count          63:48        R/0      Elapsed core clocks since last update to the LBR stack.
(Saturating)

17.7       LAST BRANCH, INTERRUPT, AND EXCEPTION RECORDING FOR
           PROCESSORS BASED ON INTEL® MICROARCHITECTURE CODE NAME
           NEHALEM
The processors based on Intel® microarchitecture code name Nehalem and Intel® microarchitecture code name
Westmere support last branch interrupt and exception recording. These capabilities are similar to those found in
Intel Core 2 processors and adds additional capabilities:
•   Debug Trace and Branch Recording Control — The IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR provides bit fields for software to
    configure mechanisms related to debug trace, branch recording, branch trace store, and performance counter
    operations. See Section 17.4.1 for a description of the flags. See Figure 17-11 for the MSR layout.
•   Last branch record (LBR) stack — There are 16 MSR pairs that store the source and destination addresses
    related to recently executed branches. See Section 17.7.1.
•   Monitoring and single-stepping of branches, exceptions, and interrupts — See Section 17.4.2 and
    Section 17.4.3. In addition, the ability to freeze the LBR stack on a PMI request is available.
•   Branch trace messages — The IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR provides bit fields for software to enable each logical
    processor to generate branch trace messages. See Section 17.4.4. However, not all BTM messages are
    observable using the Intel® QPI link.
•   Last exception records — See Section 17.11.3.
•   Branch trace store and CPL-qualified BTS — See Section 17.4.6 and Section 17.4.5.
•   FREEZE_LBRS_ON_PMI flag (bit 11) — see Section 17.4.7 for legacy Freeze_LBRs_On_PMI operation.
•   FREEZE_PERFMON_ON_PMI flag (bit 12) — see Section 17.4.7 for legacy Freeze_Perfmon_On_PMI
    operation.
•   UNCORE_PMI_EN (bit 13) — When set. this logical processor is enabled to receive an counter overflow
    interrupt form the uncore.
•   FREEZE_WHILE_SMM_EN (bit 14) — FREEZE_WHILE_SMM_EN is supported if
    IA32_PERF_CAPABILITIES.FREEZE_WHILE_SMM[Bit 12] is reporting 1. See Section 17.4.1.
Processors based on Intel microarchitecture code name Nehalem provide additional capabilities:
•   Independent control of uncore PMI — The IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR provides a bit field (see Figure 17-11) for
    software to enable each logical processor to receive an uncore counter overflow interrupt.
•   LBR filtering — Processors based on Intel microarchitecture code name Nehalem support filtering of LBR
    based on combination of CPL and branch type conditions. When LBR filtering is enabled, the LBR stack only
    captures the subset of branches that are specified by MSR_LBR_SELECT.

                           31                                      14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                           Reserved

                           FREEZE_WHILE_SMM_EN
                           UNCORE_PMI_EN
                           FREEZE_PERFMON_ON_PMI
                           FREEZE_LBRS_ON_PMI
                           BTS_OFF_USR — BTS off in user code
                           BTS_OFF_OS — BTS off in OS
                           BTINT — Branch trace interrupt
                           BTS — Branch trace store
                           TR — Trace messages enable
                           Reserved
                           BTF — Single-step on branches
                           LBR — Last branch/interrupt/exception

                            Figure 17-11. IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR for Processors based
                                 on Intel microarchitecture code name Nehalem

17.7.1          LBR Stack
Processors based on Intel microarchitecture code name Nehalem provide 16 pairs of MSR to record last branch
record information. The layout of each MSR pair is shown in Table 17-8 and Table 17-9.

                                        Table 17-8. MSR_LASTBRANCH_x_FROM_IP
Bit Field            Bit Offset   Access    Description
Data                 47:0         R/O       This is the “branch from“ address. See Section 17.4.8.1 for address format.
SIGN_EXt             62:48        R/0       Signed extension of bit 47 of this register.
MISPRED              63           R/O       When set, indicates either the target of the branch was mispredicted and/or the
                                            direction (taken/non-taken) was mispredicted; otherwise, the target branch was
                                            predicted.

                                         Table 17-9. MSR_LASTBRANCH_x_TO_IP
Bit Field            Bit Offset   Access    Description
Data                 47:0         R/O       This is the “branch to“ address. See Section 17.4.8.1 for address format
SIGN_EXt             63:48        R/0       Signed extension of bit 47 of this register.

Processors based on Intel microarchitecture code name Nehalem have an LBR MSR Stack as shown in Table 17-10.

                                   Table 17-10. LBR Stack Size and TOS Pointer Range

 DisplayFamily_DisplayModel                 Size of LBR Stack                              Range of TOS Pointer
 06_1AH                                     16                                             0 to 15

17.7.2          Filtering of Last Branch Records
MSR_LBR_SELECT is cleared to zero at RESET, and LBR filtering is disabled, i.e. all branches will be captured.
MSR_LBR_SELECT provides bit fields to specify the conditions of subsets of branches that will not be captured in
the LBR. The layout of MSR_LBR_SELECT is shown in Table 17-11.

                    Table 17-11. MSR_LBR_SELECT for Intel microarchitecture code name Nehalem
 Bit Field           Bit Offset   Access    Description
 CPL_EQ_0            0            R/W       When set, do not capture branches occurring in ring 0
 CPL_NEQ_0           1            R/W       When set, do not capture branches occurring in ring >0
 JCC                 2            R/W       When set, do not capture conditional branches
 NEAR_REL_CALL       3            R/W       When set, do not capture near relative calls
 NEAR_IND_CALL       4            R/W       When set, do not capture near indirect calls
 NEAR_RET            5            R/W       When set, do not capture near returns
 NEAR_IND_JMP        6            R/W       When set, do not capture near indirect jumps
 NEAR_REL_JMP        7            R/W       When set, do not capture near relative jumps
 FAR_BRANCH          8            R/W       When set, do not capture far branches
 Reserved            63:9                   Must be zero

17.8        LAST BRANCH, INTERRUPT, AND EXCEPTION RECORDING FOR
            PROCESSORS BASED ON INTEL® MICROARCHITECTURE CODE NAME
            SANDY BRIDGE
Generally, all of the last branch record, interrupt and exception recording facility described in Section 17.7, “Last
Branch, Interrupt, and Exception Recording for Processors based on Intel® Microarchitecture code name
Nehalem”, apply to processors based on Intel microarchitecture code name Sandy Bridge. For processors based on
Intel microarchitecture code name Ivy Bridge, the same holds true.
One difference of note is that MSR_LBR_SELECT is shared between two logical processors in the same core. In Intel
microarchitecture code name Sandy Bridge, each logical processor has its own MSR_LBR_SELECT. The filtering
semantics for “Near_ind_jmp” and “Near_rel_jmp” has been enhanced, see Table 17-12.

              Table 17-12. MSR_LBR_SELECT for Intel® microarchitecture code name Sandy Bridge
Bit Field          Bit Offset   Access   Description
CPL_EQ_0           0            R/W      When set, do not capture branches occurring in ring 0
CPL_NEQ_0          1            R/W      When set, do not capture branches occurring in ring >0
JCC                2            R/W      When set, do not capture conditional branches
NEAR_REL_CALL      3            R/W      When set, do not capture near relative calls
NEAR_IND_CALL      4            R/W      When set, do not capture near indirect calls
NEAR_RET           5            R/W      When set, do not capture near returns
NEAR_IND_JMP       6            R/W      When set, do not capture near indirect jumps except near indirect calls and near returns
NEAR_REL_JMP       7            R/W      When set, do not capture near relative jumps except near relative calls.
FAR_BRANCH         8            R/W      When set, do not capture far branches
Reserved           63:9                  Must be zero

17.9        LAST BRANCH, CALL STACK, INTERRUPT, AND EXCEPTION RECORDING
            FOR PROCESSORS BASED ON HASWELL MICROARCHITECTURE
Generally, all of the last branch record, interrupt and exception recording facility described in Section 17.8, “Last
Branch, Interrupt, and Exception Recording for Processors based on Intel® Microarchitecture code name Sandy
Bridge”, apply to next generation processors based on Intel microarchitecture code name Haswell.
The LBR facility also supports an alternate capability to profile call stack profiles. Configuring the LBR facility to
conduct call stack profiling is by writing 1 to the MSR_LBR_SELECT.EN_CALLSTACK[bit 9]; see Table 17-13. If
MSR_LBR_SELECT.EN_CALLSTACK is clear, the LBR facility will capture branches normally as described in Section
17.8.

                 Table 17-13. MSR_LBR_SELECT for Intel® microarchitecture code name Haswell
Bit Field          Bit Offset   Access   Description
CPL_EQ_0           0            R/W      When set, do not capture branches occurring in ring 0
CPL_NEQ_0          1            R/W      When set, do not capture branches occurring in ring >0
JCC                2            R/W      When set, do not capture conditional branches
NEAR_REL_CALL      3            R/W      When set, do not capture near relative calls
NEAR_IND_CALL      4            R/W      When set, do not capture near indirect calls
NEAR_RET           5            R/W      When set, do not capture near returns
NEAR_IND_JMP       6            R/W      When set, do not capture near indirect jumps except near indirect calls and near returns
NEAR_REL_JMP       7            R/W      When set, do not capture near relative jumps except near relative calls.

                     Table 17-13. MSR_LBR_SELECT for Intel® microarchitecture code name Haswell
Bit Field             Bit Offset   Access     Description
FAR_BRANCH            8            R/W        When set, do not capture far branches
                 1
EN_CALLSTACK          9                       Enable LBR stack to use LIFO filtering to capture Call stack profile
Reserved              63:10                   Must be zero
NOTES:
1. Must set valid combination of bits 0-8 in conjunction with bit 9 (as described below), otherwise the contents of the LBR MSRs are
   undefined.

The call stack profiling capability is an enhancement of the LBR facility. The LBR stack is a ring buffer typically used
to profile control flow transitions resulting from branches. However, the finite depth of the LBR stack often become
less effective when profiling certain high-level languages (e.g. C++), where a transition of the execution flow is
accompanied by a large number of leaf function calls, each of which returns an individual parameter to form the list
of parameters for the main execution function call. A long list of such parameters returned by the leaf functions
would serve to flush the data captured in the LBR stack, often losing the main execution context.
When the call stack feature is enabled, the LBR stack will capture unfiltered call data normally, but as return
instructions are executed the last captured branch record is flushed from the on-chip registers in a last-in first-out
(LIFO) manner. Thus, branch information relative to leaf functions will not be captured, while preserving the call
stack information of the main line execution path.
The configuration of the call stack facility is summarized below:
•   Set IA32_DEBUGCTL.LBR (bit 0) to enable the LBR stack to capture branch records. The source and target
    addresses of the call branches will be captured in the 16 pairs of From/To LBR MSRs that form the LBR stack.
•   Program the Top of Stack (TOS) MSR that points to the last valid from/to pair. This register is incremented by
    1, modulo 16, before recording the next pair of addresses.
•   Program the branch filtering bits of MSR_LBR_SELECT (bits 0:8) as desired.
•   Program the MSR_LBR_SELECT to enable LIFO filtering of return instructions with:
    — The following bits in MSR_LBR_SELECT must be set to ‘1’: JCC, NEAR_IND_JMP, NEAR_REL_JMP,
      FAR_BRANCH, EN_CALLSTACK;
    — The following bits in MSR_LBR_SELECT must be cleared: NEAR_REL_CALL, NEAR-IND_CALL, NEAR_RET;
    — At most one of CPL_EQ_0, CPL_NEQ_0 is set.
Note that when call stack profiling is enabled, “zero length calls” are excluded from writing into the LBRs. (A “zero
length call” uses the attribute of the call instruction to push the immediate instruction pointer on to the stack and
then pops off that address into a register. This is accomplished without any matching return on the call.)

17.9.1          LBR Stack Enhancement
Processors based on Intel microarchitecture code name Haswell provide 16 pairs of MSR to record last branch
record information. The layout of each MSR pair is enumerated by IA32_PERF_CAPABILITIES[5:0] = 04H, and is
shown in Table 17-14 and Table 17-9.

                             Table 17-14. MSR_LASTBRANCH_x_FROM_IP with TSX Information
Bit Field             Bit Offset   Access     Description
Data                  47:0         R/O        This is the “branch from“ address. See Section 17.4.8.1 for address format.
SIGN_EXT              60:48        R/0        Signed extension of bit 47 of this register.
TSX_ABORT             61           R/0        When set, indicates a TSX Abort entry
                                              LBR_FROM: EIP at the time of the TSX Abort
                                              LBR_TO: EIP of the start of HLE region, or EIP of the RTM Abort Handler
IN_TSX                62           R/0        When set, indicates the entry occurred in a TSX region

                   Table 17-14. MSR_LASTBRANCH_x_FROM_IP with TSX Information (Contd.)
Bit Field          Bit Offset   Access   Description
MISPRED            63           R/O      When set, indicates either the target of the branch was mispredicted and/or the
                                         direction (taken/non-taken) was mispredicted; otherwise, the target branch was
                                         predicted.

17.10          LAST BRANCH, CALL STACK, INTERRUPT, AND EXCEPTION RECORDING
               FOR PROCESSORS BASED ON SKYLAKE MICROARCHITECTURE
Processors based on the Skylake microarchitecture provide a number of enhancement with storing last branch
records:
•   enumeration of new LBR format: encoding 00101b in IA32_PERF_CAPABILITIES[5:0] is supported, see Section
    17.4.8.1.
•   Each LBR stack entry consists of a triplets of MSRs:
    — MSR_LASTBRANCH_x_FROM_IP, the layout is simplified, see Table 17-9.
    — MSR_LASTBRANCH_x_TO_IP, the layout is the same as Table 17-9.
    — MSR_LBR_INFO_x, stores branch prediction flag, TSX info, and elapsed cycle data.
•   Size of LBR stack increased to 32.

Processors based on the Skylake microarchitecture supports the same LBR filtering capabilities as described in
Table 17-13.

                                Table 17-15. LBR Stack Size and TOS Pointer Range

DisplayFamily_DisplayModel               Size of LBR Stack                           Range of TOS Pointer
06_4EH, 06_5EH                           32                                           0 to 31

17.10.1        MSR_LBR_INFO_x MSR
The layout of each MSR_LBR_INFO_x MSR is shown in Table 17-16.

                                          Table 17-16. MSR_LBR_INFO_x
Bit Field          Bit Offset   Access   Description
Cycle Count        15:0         R/O      Elapsed core clocks since last update to the LBR stack
(saturating)
Reserved           60:16        R/O      Reserved
TSX_ABORT          61           R/0      When set, indicates a TSX Abort entry
                                         LBR_FROM: EIP at the time of the TSX Abort
                                         LBR_TO: EIP of the start of HLE region OR
                                                 EIP of the RTM Abort Handler
IN_TSX             62           R/0      When set, indicates the entry occurred in a TSX region.
MISPRED            63           R/O      When set, indicates either the target of the branch was mispredicted and/or the
                                         direction (taken/non-taken) was mispredicted; otherwise, the target branch was
                                         predicted.

17.10.2         Streamlined Freeze_LBRs_On_PMI Operation
The FREEZE_LBRS_ON_PMI feature causes the LBRs to be frozen on a hardware request for a PMI. This prevents
the LBRs from being overwritten by new branches, allowing the PMI handler to examine the control flow that
preceded the PMI generation. Architectural performance monitoring version 4 and above supports a streamlined
FREEZE_LBRs_ON_PMI operation for PMI service routine that replaces the legacy FREEZE_LBRs_ON_PMI operation
(see Section 17.4.7).
While the legacy FREEZE_LBRS_ON_PMI clear the LBR bit in the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR on a PMI request, the
streamlined FREEZE_LBRS_ON_PMI will set the LBR_FRZ bit in IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_STATUS. Branches will not
cause the LBRs to be updated when LBR_FRZ is set. Software can clear LBR_FRZ at the same time as it clears over-
flow bits by setting the LBR_FRZ bit as well as the needed overflow bit when writing to
IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_STATUS_RESET MSR.
This streamlined behavior avoids race conditions between software and processor writes to IA32_DEBUGCTL that
are possible with FREEZE_LBRS_ON_PMI clearing of the LBR enable.

17.10.3         LBR Behavior and Deep C-State
When MWAIT is used to request a C-state that is numerically higher than C1, then LBR state may be initialized to
zero depending on optimized “waiting” state that is selected by the processor The affected LBR states include the
FROM, TO, INFO, LAST_BRANCH, LER and LBR_TOS registers. The LBR enable bit and LBR_FROZEN bit are not
affected. The LBR-time of the first LBR record inserted after an exit from such a C-state request will be zero.

17.11           LAST BRANCH, INTERRUPT, AND EXCEPTION RECORDING (PROCESSORS
                BASED ON INTEL NETBURST® MICROARCHITECTURE)
Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processors based on Intel NetBurst microarchitecture provide the following methods for
recording taken branches, interrupts and exceptions:
•   Store branch records in the last branch record (LBR) stack MSRs for the most recent taken branches,
    interrupts, and/or exceptions in MSRs. A branch record consist of a branch-from and a branch-to instruction
    address.
•   Send the branch records out on the system bus as branch trace messages (BTMs).
•   Log BTMs in a memory-resident branch trace store (BTS) buffer.
To support these functions, the processor provides the following MSRs and related facilities:
•   MSR_DEBUGCTLA MSR — Enables last branch, interrupt, and exception recording; single-stepping on taken
    branches; branch trace messages (BTMs); and branch trace store (BTS). This register is named DebugCtlMSR
    in the P6 family processors.
•   Debug store (DS) feature flag (CPUID.1:EDX.DS[bit 21]) — Indicates that the processor provides the
    debug store (DS) mechanism, which allows BTMs to be stored in a memory-resident BTS buffer.
•   CPL-qualified debug store (DS) feature flag (CPUID.1:ECX.DS-CPL[bit 4]) — Indicates that the
    processor provides a CPL-qualified debug store (DS) mechanism, which allows software to selectively skip
    sending and storing BTMs, according to specified current privilege level settings, into a memory-resident BTS
    buffer.
•   IA32_MISC_ENABLE MSR — Indicates that the processor provides the BTS facilities.
•   Last branch record (LBR) stack — The LBR stack is a circular stack that consists of four MSRs
    (MSR_LASTBRANCH_0 through MSR_LASTBRANCH_3) for the Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processor family
    [CPUID family 0FH, models 0H-02H]. The LBR stack consists of 16 MSR pairs
    (MSR_LASTBRANCH_0_FROM_IP through MSR_LASTBRANCH_15_FROM_IP and
    MSR_LASTBRANCH_0_TO_IP through MSR_LASTBRANCH_15_TO_IP) for the Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon
    processor family [CPUID family 0FH, model 03H].
•   Last branch record top-of-stack (TOS) pointer — The TOS Pointer MSR contains a 2-bit pointer (0-3) to
    the MSR in the LBR stack that contains the most recent branch, interrupt, or exception recorded for the Pentium

    4 and Intel Xeon processor family [CPUID family 0FH, models 0H-02H]. This pointer becomes a 4-bit pointer
    (0-15) for the Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processor family [CPUID family 0FH, model 03H]. See also: Table
    17-17, Figure 17-12, and Section 17.11.2, “LBR Stack for Processors Based on Intel NetBurst® Microarchi-
    tecture.”
•   Last exception record — See Section 17.11.3, “Last Exception Records.”

17.11.1     MSR_DEBUGCTLA MSR
The MSR_DEBUGCTLA MSR enables and disables the various last branch recording mechanisms described in the
previous section. This register can be written to using the WRMSR instruction, when operating at privilege level 0
or when in real-address mode. A protected-mode operating system procedure is required to provide user access to
this register. Figure 17-12 shows the flags in the MSR_DEBUGCTLA MSR. The functions of these flags are as
follows:
•   LBR (last branch/interrupt/exception) flag (bit 0) — When set, the processor records a running trace of
    the most recent branches, interrupts, and/or exceptions taken by the processor (prior to a debug exception
    being generated) in the last branch record (LBR) stack. Each branch, interrupt, or exception is recorded as a
    64-bit branch record. The processor clears this flag whenever a debug exception is generated (for example,
    when an instruction or data breakpoint or a single-step trap occurs). See Section 17.11.2, “LBR Stack for
    Processors Based on Intel NetBurst® Microarchitecture.”
•   BTF (single-step on branches) flag (bit 1) — When set, the processor treats the TF flag in the EFLAGS
    register as a “single-step on branches” flag rather than a “single-step on instructions” flag. This mechanism
    allows single-stepping the processor on taken branches. See Section 17.4.3, “Single-Stepping on Branches.”
•   TR (trace message enable) flag (bit 2) — When set, branch trace messages are enabled. Thereafter, when
    the processor detects a taken branch, interrupt, or exception, it sends the branch record out on the system bus
    as a branch trace message (BTM). See Section 17.4.4, “Branch Trace Messages.”

                            31                                                 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                    Reserved

                                 BTS_OFF_USR — Disable storing non-CPL_0 BTS
                                 BTS_OFF_OS — Disable storing CPL_0 BTS
                                 BTINT — Branch trace interrupt
                                 BTS — Branch trace store
                                 TR — Trace messages enable
                                 BTF — Single-step on branches
                                 LBR — Last branch/interrupt/exception

                   Figure 17-12. MSR_DEBUGCTLA MSR for Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon Processors

•   BTS (branch trace store) flag (bit 3) — When set, enables the BTS facilities to log BTMs to a memory-
    resident BTS buffer that is part of the DS save area. See Section 17.4.9, “BTS and DS Save Area.”
•   BTINT (branch trace interrupt) flag (bits 4) — When set, the BTS facilities generate an interrupt when the
    BTS buffer is full. When clear, BTMs are logged to the BTS buffer in a circular fashion. See Section 17.4.5, “Branch
    Trace Store (BTS).”
•   BTS_OFF_OS (disable ring 0 branch trace store) flag (bit 5) — When set, enables the BTS facilities to
    skip sending/logging CPL_0 BTMs to the memory-resident BTS buffer. See Section 17.11.2, “LBR Stack for
    Processors Based on Intel NetBurst® Microarchitecture.”
•   BTS_OFF_USR (disable ring 0 branch trace store) flag (bit 6) — When set, enables the BTS facilities to
    skip sending/logging non-CPL_0 BTMs to the memory-resident BTS buffer. See Section 17.11.2, “LBR Stack for
    Processors Based on Intel NetBurst® Microarchitecture.”

                                                          NOTE
         The initial implementation of BTS_OFF_USR and BTS_OFF_OS in MSR_DEBUGCTLA is shown in
         Figure 17-12. The BTS_OFF_USR and BTS_OFF_OS fields may be implemented on other model-
         specific debug control register at different locations.

See Chapter 35, “Model-Specific Registers (MSRs),” for a detailed description of each of the last branch recording
MSRs.

17.11.2         LBR Stack for Processors Based on Intel NetBurst® Microarchitecture
The LBR stack is made up of LBR MSRs that are treated by the processor as a circular stack. The TOS pointer
(MSR_LASTBRANCH_TOS MSR) points to the LBR MSR (or LBR MSR pair) that contains the most recent (last)
branch record placed on the stack. Prior to placing a new branch record on the stack, the TOS is incremented by 1.
When the TOS pointer reaches it maximum value, it wraps around to 0. See Table 17-17 and Figure 17-12.

Table 17-17. LBR MSR Stack Size and TOS Pointer Range for the Pentium® 4 and the Intel® Xeon® Processor Family

    DisplayFamily_DisplayModel                                             Size of LBR Stack    Range of TOS Pointer
    Family 0FH, Models 0H-02H; MSRs at locations 1DBH-1DEH.                4                    0 to 3
    Family 0FH, Models; MSRs at locations 680H-68FH.                       16                   0 to 15
    Family 0FH, Model 03H; MSRs at locations 6C0H-6CFH.                    16                   0 to 15

The registers in the LBR MSR stack and the MSR_LASTBRANCH_TOS MSR are read-only and can be read using the
RDMSR instruction.
Figure 17-13 shows the layout of a branch record in an LBR MSR (or MSR pair). Each branch record consists of two
linear addresses, which represent the “from” and “to” instruction pointers for a branch, interrupt, or exception. The
contents of the from and to addresses differ, depending on the source of the branch:
•    Taken branch — If the record is for a taken branch, the “from” address is the address of the branch instruction
     and the “to” address is the target instruction of the branch.
•    Interrupt — If the record is for an interrupt, the “from” address the return instruction pointer (RIP) saved for
     the interrupt and the “to” address is the address of the first instruction in the interrupt handler routine. The RIP
     is the linear address of the next instruction to be executed upon returning from the interrupt handler.
•    Exception — If the record is for an exception, the “from” address is the linear address of the instruction that
     caused the exception to be generated and the “to” address is the address of the first instruction in the exception
     handler routine.

                        CPUID Family 0FH, Models 0H-02H
                        MSR_LASTBRANCH_0 through MSR_LASTBRANCH_3
                        63                           32 - 31                          0

                                To Linear Address               From Linear Address

                        CPUID Family 0FH, Model 03H-04H
                        MSR_LASTBRANCH_0_FROM_IP through MSR_LASTBRANCH_15_FROM_IP
                        63                           32 - 31                          0

                                Reserved                        From Linear Address

                        MSR_LASTBRANCH_0_TO_IP through MSR_LASTBRANCH_15_TO_IP
                        63                           32 - 31                          0
                                Reserved                        To Linear Address

                         Figure 17-13. LBR MSR Branch Record Layout for the Pentium 4
                                        and Intel Xeon Processor Family

Additional information is saved if an exception or interrupt occurs in conjunction with a branch instruction. If a
branch instruction generates a trap type exception, two branch records are stored in the LBR stack: a branch
record for the branch instruction followed by a branch record for the exception.
If a branch instruction is immediately followed by an interrupt, a branch record is stored in the LBR stack for the
branch instruction followed by a record for the interrupt.

17.11.3     Last Exception Records
The Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, Pentium M, Intel® Core™ Solo, Intel® Core™ Duo, Intel® Core™2 Duo, Intel® Core™ i7
and Intel® Atom™ processors provide two MSRs (the MSR_LER_TO_LIP and the MSR_LER_FROM_LIP MSRs) that
duplicate the functions of the LastExceptionToIP and LastExceptionFromIP MSRs found in the P6 family processors.
The MSR_LER_TO_LIP and MSR_LER_FROM_LIP MSRs contain a branch record for the last branch that the
processor took prior to an exception or interrupt being generated.

17.12       LAST BRANCH, INTERRUPT, AND EXCEPTION RECORDING (INTEL® CORE™
            SOLO AND INTEL® CORE™ DUO PROCESSORS)
Intel Core Solo and Intel Core Duo processors provide last branch interrupt and exception recording. This capability
is almost identical to that found in Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processors. There are differences in the stack and in
some MSR names and locations.
Note the following:
•   IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR — Enables debug trace interrupt, debug trace store, trace messages enable,
    performance monitoring breakpoint flags, single stepping on branches, and last branch. IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR
    is located at register address 01D9H.
    See Figure 17-14 for the layout and the entries below for a description of the flags:
    — LBR (last branch/interrupt/exception) flag (bit 0) — When set, the processor records a running trace
      of the most recent branches, interrupts, and/or exceptions taken by the processor (prior to a debug
      exception being generated) in the last branch record (LBR) stack. For more information, see the “Last
      Branch Record (LBR) Stack” below.
    — BTF (single-step on branches) flag (bit 1) — When set, the processor treats the TF flag in the EFLAGS
      register as a “single-step on branches” flag rather than a “single-step on instructions” flag. This mechanism

        allows single-stepping the processor on taken branches. See Section 17.4.3, “Single-Stepping on
        Branches,” for more information about the BTF flag.
    — TR (trace message enable) flag (bit 6) — When set, branch trace messages are enabled. When the
      processor detects a taken branch, interrupt, or exception; it sends the branch record out on the system bus
      as a branch trace message (BTM). See Section 17.4.4, “Branch Trace Messages,” for more information
      about the TR flag.
    — BTS (branch trace store) flag (bit 7) — When set, the flag enables BTS facilities to log BTMs to a
      memory-resident BTS buffer that is part of the DS save area. See Section 17.4.9, “BTS and DS Save Area.”
    — BTINT (branch trace interrupt) flag (bits 8) — When set, the BTS facilities generate an interrupt when
      the BTS buffer is full. When clear, BTMs are logged to the BTS buffer in a circular fashion. See Section 17.4.5,
      “Branch Trace Store (BTS),” for a description of this mechanism.

                               31                                                    8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                           Reserved

                                    BTINT — Branch trace interrupt
                                    BTS — Branch trace store
                                    TR — Trace messages enable
                                    Reserved
                                    BTF — Single-step on branches
                                    LBR — Last branch/interrupt/exception

                                    Figure 17-14. IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR for Intel Core Solo
                                                and Intel Core Duo Processors

•   Debug store (DS) feature flag (bit 21), returned by the CPUID instruction — Indicates that the
    processor provides the debug store (DS) mechanism, which allows BTMs to be stored in a memory-resident
    BTS buffer. See Section 17.4.5, “Branch Trace Store (BTS).”
•   Last Branch Record (LBR) Stack — The LBR stack consists of 8 MSRs (MSR_LASTBRANCH_0 through
    MSR_LASTBRANCH_7); bits 31-0 hold the ‘from’ address, bits 63-32 hold the ‘to’ address (MSR addresses start
    at 40H). See Figure 17-15.
•   Last Branch Record Top-of-Stack (TOS) Pointer — The TOS Pointer MSR contains a 3-bit pointer (bits 2-0)
    to the MSR in the LBR stack that contains the most recent branch, interrupt, or exception recorded. For Intel
    Core Solo and Intel Core Duo processors, this MSR is located at register address 01C9H.
For compatibility, the Intel Core Solo and Intel Core Duo processors provide two 32-bit MSRs (the
MSR_LER_TO_LIP and the MSR_LER_FROM_LIP MSRs) that duplicate functions of the LastExceptionToIP and Last-
ExceptionFromIP MSRs found in P6 family processors.
For details, see Section 17.10, “Last Branch, Call Stack, Interrupt, and Exception Recording for Processors based
on Skylake Microarchitecture,” and Section 35.19, “MSRs In Intel® Core™ Solo and Intel® Core™ Duo Processors”

                          MSR_LASTBRANCH_0 through MSR_LASTBRANCH_7

                          63                                    32 - 31                            0
                                       To Linear Address                    From Linear Address

                          Figure 17-15. LBR Branch Record Layout for the Intel Core Solo
                                          and Intel Core Duo Processor

17.13       LAST BRANCH, INTERRUPT, AND EXCEPTION
            RECORDING (PENTIUM M PROCESSORS)
Like the Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processor family, Pentium M processors provide last branch interrupt and excep-
tion recording. The capability operates almost identically to that found in Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processors.
There are differences in the shape of the stack and in some MSR names and locations. Note the following:
•   MSR_DEBUGCTLB MSR — Enables debug trace interrupt, debug trace store, trace messages enable,
    performance monitoring breakpoint flags, single stepping on branches, and last branch. For Pentium M
    processors, this MSR is located at register address 01D9H. See Figure 17-16 and the entries below for a
    description of the flags.
    — LBR (last branch/interrupt/exception) flag (bit 0) — When set, the processor records a running trace
      of the most recent branches, interrupts, and/or exceptions taken by the processor (prior to a debug
      exception being generated) in the last branch record (LBR) stack. For more information, see the “Last
      Branch Record (LBR) Stack” bullet below.
    — BTF (single-step on branches) flag (bit 1) — When set, the processor treats the TF flag in the EFLAGS
      register as a “single-step on branches” flag rather than a “single-step on instructions” flag. This mechanism
      allows single-stepping the processor on taken branches. See Section 17.4.3, “Single-Stepping on
      Branches,” for more information about the BTF flag.
    — PBi (performance monitoring/breakpoint pins) flags (bits 5-2) — When these flags are set, the
      performance monitoring/breakpoint pins on the processor (BP0#, BP1#, BP2#, and BP3#) report
      breakpoint matches in the corresponding breakpoint-address registers (DR0 through DR3). The processor
      asserts then deasserts the corresponding BPi# pin when a breakpoint match occurs. When a PBi flag is
      clear, the performance monitoring/breakpoint pins report performance events. Processor execution is not
      affected by reporting performance events.
    — TR (trace message enable) flag (bit 6) — When set, branch trace messages are enabled. When the
      processor detects a taken branch, interrupt, or exception, it sends the branch record out on the system bus
      as a branch trace message (BTM). See Section 17.4.4, “Branch Trace Messages,” for more information
      about the TR flag.
    — BTS (branch trace store) flag (bit 7) — When set, enables the BTS facilities to log BTMs to a memory-
      resident BTS buffer that is part of the DS save area. See Section 17.4.9, “BTS and DS Save Area.”
    — BTINT (branch trace interrupt) flag (bits 8) — When set, the BTS facilities generate an interrupt when
      the BTS buffer is full. When clear, BTMs are logged to the BTS buffer in a circular fashion. See Section 17.4.5,
      “Branch Trace Store (BTS),” for a description of this mechanism.

                           31                                                     8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                       Reserved

                                BTINT — Branch trace interrupt
                                BTS — Branch trace store
                                TR — Trace messages enable
                                PB3/2/1/0 — Performance monitoring breakpoint flags
                                BTF — Single-step on branches
                                LBR — Last branch/interrupt/exception

                          Figure 17-16. MSR_DEBUGCTLB MSR for Pentium M Processors

•   Debug store (DS) feature flag (bit 21), returned by the CPUID instruction — Indicates that the
    processor provides the debug store (DS) mechanism, which allows BTMs to be stored in a memory-resident
    BTS buffer. See Section 17.4.5, “Branch Trace Store (BTS).”

•   Last Branch Record (LBR) Stack — The LBR stack consists of 8 MSRs (MSR_LASTBRANCH_0 through
    MSR_LASTBRANCH_7); bits 31-0 hold the ‘from’ address, bits 63-32 hold the ‘to’ address. For Pentium M
    Processors, these pairs are located at register addresses 040H-047H. See Figure 17-17.
•   Last Branch Record Top-of-Stack (TOS) Pointer — The TOS Pointer MSR contains a 3-bit pointer (bits 2-0)
    to the MSR in the LBR stack that contains the most recent branch, interrupt, or exception recorded. For Pentium
    M Processors, this MSR is located at register address 01C9H.

                         MSR_LASTBRANCH_0            through MSR_LASTBRANCH_7

                         63                              32 - 31                         0
                                 To Linear Address                 From Linear Address

                       Figure 17-17. LBR Branch Record Layout for the Pentium M Processor

For more detail on these capabilities, see Section 17.11.3, “Last Exception Records,” and Section 35.20, “MSRs In
the Pentium M Processor.”

17.14           LAST BRANCH, INTERRUPT, AND EXCEPTION
                RECORDING (P6 FAMILY PROCESSORS)
The P6 family processors provide five MSRs for recording the last branch, interrupt, or exception taken by the
processor: DEBUGCTLMSR, LastBranchToIP, LastBranchFromIP, LastExceptionToIP, and LastExceptionFromIP.
These registers can be used to collect last branch records, to set breakpoints on branches, interrupts, and excep-
tions, and to single-step from one branch to the next.
See Chapter 35, “Model-Specific Registers (MSRs),” for a detailed description of each of the last branch recording
MSRs.

17.14.1         DEBUGCTLMSR Register
The version of the DEBUGCTLMSR register found in the P6 family processors enables last branch, interrupt, and
exception recording; taken branch breakpoints; the breakpoint reporting pins; and trace messages. This register
can be written to using the WRMSR instruction, when operating at privilege level 0 or when in real-address mode.
A protected-mode operating system procedure is required to provide user access to this register. Figure 17-18
shows the flags in the DEBUGCTLMSR register for the P6 family processors. The functions of these flags are as
follows:
•   LBR (last branch/interrupt/exception) flag (bit 0) — When set, the processor records the source and
    target addresses (in the LastBranchToIP, LastBranchFromIP, LastExceptionToIP, and LastExceptionFromIP
    MSRs) for the last branch and the last exception or interrupt taken by the processor prior to a debug exception
    being generated. The processor clears this flag whenever a debug exception, such as an instruction or data
    breakpoint or single-step trap occurs.

                           31                                                  7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
                                                                                  P P P P B L
                                                      Reserved                  T B B B B T B
                                                                                R 3 2 1 0 F R

                                TR — Trace messages enable
                                PBi — Performance monitoring/breakpoint pins
                                BTF — Single-step on branches
                                LBR — Last branch/interrupt/exception

                          Figure 17-18. DEBUGCTLMSR Register (P6 Family Processors)

•   BTF (single-step on branches) flag (bit 1) — When set, the processor treats the TF flag in the EFLAGS
    register as a “single-step on branches” flag. See Section 17.4.3, “Single-Stepping on Branches.”
•   PBi (performance monitoring/breakpoint pins) flags (bits 2 through 5) — When these flags are set,
    the performance monitoring/breakpoint pins on the processor (BP0#, BP1#, BP2#, and BP3#) report
    breakpoint matches in the corresponding breakpoint-address registers (DR0 through DR3). The processor
    asserts then deasserts the corresponding BPi# pin when a breakpoint match occurs. When a PBi flag is clear,
    the performance monitoring/breakpoint pins report performance events. Processor execution is not affected by
    reporting performance events.
•   TR (trace message enable) flag (bit 6) — When set, trace messages are enabled as described in Section
    17.4.4, “Branch Trace Messages.” Setting this flag greatly reduces the performance of the processor. When
    trace messages are enabled, the values stored in the LastBranchToIP, LastBranchFromIP, LastExceptionToIP,
    and LastExceptionFromIP MSRs are undefined.

17.14.2     Last Branch and Last Exception MSRs
The LastBranchToIP and LastBranchFromIP MSRs are 32-bit registers for recording the instruction pointers for the
last branch, interrupt, or exception that the processor took prior to a debug exception being generated. When a
branch occurs, the processor loads the address of the branch instruction into the LastBranchFromIP MSR and loads
the target address for the branch into the LastBranchToIP MSR.
When an interrupt or exception occurs (other than a debug exception), the address of the instruction that was
interrupted by the exception or interrupt is loaded into the LastBranchFromIP MSR and the address of the excep-
tion or interrupt handler that is called is loaded into the LastBranchToIP MSR.
The LastExceptionToIP and LastExceptionFromIP MSRs (also 32-bit registers) record the instruction pointers for
the last branch that the processor took prior to an exception or interrupt being generated. When an exception or
interrupt occurs, the contents of the LastBranchToIP and LastBranchFromIP MSRs are copied into these registers
before the to and from addresses of the exception or interrupt are recorded in the LastBranchToIP and LastBranch-
FromIP MSRs.
These registers can be read using the RDMSR instruction.
Note that the values stored in the LastBranchToIP, LastBranchFromIP, LastExceptionToIP, and LastExceptionFromIP
MSRs are offsets into the current code segment, as opposed to linear addresses, which are saved in last branch
records for the Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processors.

17.14.3     Monitoring Branches, Exceptions, and Interrupts
When the LBR flag in the DEBUGCTLMSR register is set, the processor automatically begins recording branches
that it takes, exceptions that are generated (except for debug exceptions), and interrupts that are serviced. Each
time a branch, exception, or interrupt occurs, the processor records the to and from instruction pointers in the
LastBranchToIP and LastBranchFromIP MSRs. In addition, for interrupts and exceptions, the processor copies the
contents of the LastBranchToIP and LastBranchFromIP MSRs into the LastExceptionToIP and LastExceptionFromIP
MSRs prior to recording the to and from addresses of the interrupt or exception.

When the processor generates a debug exception (#DB), it automatically clears the LBR flag before executing the
exception handler, but does not touch the last branch and last exception MSRs. The addresses for the last branch,
interrupt, or exception taken are thus retained in the LastBranchToIP and LastBranchFromIP MSRs and the
addresses of the last branch prior to an interrupt or exception are retained in the LastExceptionToIP, and LastEx-
ceptionFromIP MSRs.
The debugger can use the last branch, interrupt, and/or exception addresses in combination with code-segment
selectors retrieved from the stack to reset breakpoints in the breakpoint-address registers (DR0 through DR3),
allowing a backward trace from the manifestation of a particular bug toward its source. Because the instruction
pointers recorded in the LastBranchToIP, LastBranchFromIP, LastExceptionToIP, and LastExceptionFromIP MSRs are
offsets into a code segment, software must determine the segment base address of the code segment associated
with the control transfer to calculate the linear address to be placed in the breakpoint-address registers. The
segment base address can be determined by reading the segment selector for the code segment from the stack
and using it to locate the segment descriptor for the segment in the GDT or LDT. The segment base address can
then be read from the segment descriptor.
Before resuming program execution from a debug-exception handler, the handler must set the LBR flag again to re-
enable last branch and last exception/interrupt recording.

17.15           TIME-STAMP COUNTER
The Intel 64 and IA-32 architectures (beginning with the Pentium processor) define a time-stamp counter mecha-
nism that can be used to monitor and identify the relative time occurrence of processor events. The counter’s archi-
tecture includes the following components:
•   TSC flag — A feature bit that indicates the availability of the time-stamp counter. The counter is available in an
    if the function CPUID.1:EDX.TSC[bit 4] = 1.
•   IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR (called TSC MSR in P6 family and Pentium processors) — The MSR used
    as the counter.
•   RDTSC instruction — An instruction used to read the time-stamp counter.
•   TSD flag — A control register flag is used to enable or disable the time-stamp counter (enabled if
    CR4.TSD[bit 2] = 1).
The time-stamp counter (as implemented in the P6 family, Pentium, Pentium M, Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, Intel Core
Solo and Intel Core Duo processors and later processors) is a 64-bit counter that is set to 0 following a RESET of
the processor. Following a RESET, the counter increments even when the processor is halted by the HLT instruction
or the external STPCLK# pin. Note that the assertion of the external DPSLP# pin may cause the time-stamp
counter to stop.
Processor families increment the time-stamp counter differently:
•   For Pentium M processors (family [06H], models [09H, 0DH]); for Pentium 4 processors, Intel Xeon processors
    (family [0FH], models [00H, 01H, or 02H]); and for P6 family processors: the time-stamp counter increments
    with every internal processor clock cycle.
    The internal processor clock cycle is determined by the current core-clock to bus-clock ratio. Intel®
    SpeedStep® technology transitions may also impact the processor clock.
•   For Pentium 4 processors, Intel Xeon processors (family [0FH], models [03H and higher]); for Intel Core Solo
    and Intel Core Duo processors (family [06H], model [0EH]); for the Intel Xeon processor 5100 series and Intel
    Core 2 Duo processors (family [06H], model [0FH]); for Intel Core 2 and Intel Xeon processors (family [06H],
    DisplayModel [17H]); for Intel Atom processors (family [06H],
    DisplayModel [1CH]): the time-stamp counter increments at a constant rate. That rate may be set by the
    maximum core-clock to bus-clock ratio of the processor or may be set by the maximum resolved frequency at
    which the processor is booted. The maximum resolved frequency may differ from the processor base
    frequency, see Section 18.18.2 for more detail. On certain processors, the TSC frequency may not be the same
    as the frequency in the brand string.
    The specific processor configuration determines the behavior. Constant TSC behavior ensures that the duration
    of each clock tick is uniform and supports the use of the TSC as a wall clock timer even if the processor core
    changes frequency. This is the architectural behavior moving forward.

                                                      NOTE
       To determine average processor clock frequency, Intel recommends the use of performance
       monitoring logic to count processor core clocks over the period of time for which the average is
       required. See Section 18.17, “Counting Clocks on systems with Intel Hyper-Threading Technology
       in Processors Based on Intel NetBurst® Microarchitecture,” and Chapter 19, “Performance-
       Monitoring Events,” for more information.

The RDTSC instruction reads the time-stamp counter and is guaranteed to return a monotonically increasing
unique value whenever executed, except for a 64-bit counter wraparound. Intel guarantees that the time-stamp
counter will not wraparound within 10 years after being reset. The period for counter wrap is longer for Pentium 4,
Intel Xeon, P6 family, and Pentium processors.
Normally, the RDTSC instruction can be executed by programs and procedures running at any privilege level and in
virtual-8086 mode. The TSD flag allows use of this instruction to be restricted to programs and procedures running
at privilege level 0. A secure operating system would set the TSD flag during system initialization to disable user
access to the time-stamp counter. An operating system that disables user access to the time-stamp counter should
emulate the instruction through a user-accessible programming interface.
The RDTSC instruction is not serializing or ordered with other instructions. It does not necessarily wait until all
previous instructions have been executed before reading the counter. Similarly, subsequent instructions may begin
execution before the RDTSC instruction operation is performed.
The RDMSR and WRMSR instructions read and write the time-stamp counter, treating the time-stamp counter as
an ordinary MSR (address 10H). In the Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, and P6 family processors, all 64-bits of the time-
stamp counter are read using RDMSR (just as with RDTSC). When WRMSR is used to write the time-stamp counter
on processors before family [0FH], models [03H, 04H]: only the low-order 32-bits of the time-stamp counter can
be written (the high-order 32 bits are cleared to 0). For family [0FH], models [03H, 04H, 06H]; for family [06H]],
model [0EH, 0FH]; for family [06H]], DisplayModel [17H, 1AH, 1CH, 1DH]: all 64 bits are writable.

17.15.1     Invariant TSC
The time stamp counter in newer processors may support an enhancement, referred to as invariant TSC.
Processor’s support for invariant TSC is indicated by CPUID.80000007H:EDX[8].
The invariant TSC will run at a constant rate in all ACPI P-, C-. and T-states. This is the architectural behavior
moving forward. On processors with invariant TSC support, the OS may use the TSC for wall clock timer services
(instead of ACPI or HPET timers). TSC reads are much more efficient and do not incur the overhead associated with
a ring transition or access to a platform resource.

17.15.2     IA32_TSC_AUX Register and RDTSCP Support
Processors based on Intel microarchitecture code name Nehalem provide an auxiliary TSC register, IA32_TSC_AUX
that is designed to be used in conjunction with IA32_TSC. IA32_TSC_AUX provides a 32-bit field that is initialized
by privileged software with a signature value (for example, a logical processor ID).
The primary usage of IA32_TSC_AUX in conjunction with IA32_TSC is to allow software to read the 64-bit time
stamp in IA32_TSC and signature value in IA32_TSC_AUX with the instruction RDTSCP in an atomic operation.
RDTSCP returns the 64-bit time stamp in EDX:EAX and the 32-bit TSC_AUX signature value in ECX. The atomicity
of RDTSCP ensures that no context switch can occur between the reads of the TSC and TSC_AUX values.
Support for RDTSCP is indicated by CPUID.80000001H:EDX[27]. As with RDTSC instruction, non-ring 0 access is
controlled by CR4.TSD (Time Stamp Disable flag).
User mode software can use RDTSCP to detect if CPU migration has occurred between successive reads of the TSC.
It can also be used to adjust for per-CPU differences in TSC values in a NUMA system.

17.15.3         Time-Stamp Counter Adjustment
Software can modify the value of the time-stamp counter (TSC) of a logical processor by using the WRMSR instruc-
tion to write to the IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR (address 10H). Because such a write applies only to that
logical processor, software seeking to synchronize the TSC values of multiple logical processors must perform these
writes on each logical processor. It may be difficult for software to do this in a way than ensures that all logical
processors will have the same value for the TSC at a given point in time.
The synchronization of TSC adjustment can be simplified by using the 64-bit IA32_TSC_ADJUST MSR (address
3BH). Like the IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR, the IA32_TSC_ADJUST MSR is maintained separately for each
logical processor. A logical processor maintains and uses the IA32_TSC_ADJUST MSR as follows:
•   On RESET, the value of the IA32_TSC_ADJUST MSR is 0.
•   If an execution of WRMSR to the IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR adds (or subtracts) value X from the TSC,
    the logical processor also adds (or subtracts) value X from the IA32_TSC_ADJUST MSR.
•   If an execution of WRMSR to the IA32_TSC_ADJUST MSR adds (or subtracts) value X from that MSR, the logical
    processor also adds (or subtracts) value X from the TSC.
Unlike the TSC, the value of the IA32_TSC_ADJUST MSR changes only in response to WRMSR (either to the MSR
itself, or to the IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR). Its value does not otherwise change as time elapses. Software
seeking to adjust the TSC can do so by using WRMSR to write the same value to the IA32_TSC_ADJUST MSR on
each logical processor.
Processor support for the IA32_TSC_ADJUST MSR is indicated by CPUID.(EAX=07H, ECX=0H):EBX.TSC_ADJUST
(bit 1).

17.15.4         Invariant Time-Keeping
The invariant TSC is based on the invariant timekeeping hardware (called Always Running Timer or ART), that runs
at the core crystal clock frequency. The ratio defined by CPUID leaf 15H expresses the frequency relationship
between the ART hardware and TSC.
If CPUID.15H:EBX[31:0] != 0 and CPUID.80000007H:EDX[InvariantTSC] = 1, the following linearity relationship
holds between TSC and the ART hardware:
    TSC_Value = (ART_Value * CPUID.15H:EBX[31:0] )/ CPUID.15H:EAX[31:0] + K
Where 'K' is an offset that can be adjusted by a privileged agent2.
When ART hardware is reset, both invariant TSC and K are also reset.

17.16           INTEL® RESOURCE DIRECTOR TECHNOLOGY (INTEL® RDT) MONITORING
                FEATURES
The Intel Resource Director Technology (Intel RDT) feature set provides a set of monitoring capabilities including
Cache Monitoring Technology (CMT) and Memory Bandwidth Monitoring (MBM). The Intel® Xeon® processor E5 v3
family introduced resource monitoring capability in each logical processor to measure specific platform shared
resource metrics, for example, L3 cache occupancy. The programming interface for these monitoring features is
described in this section. Two features within the monitoring feature set provided are described - Cache Monitoring
Technology (CMT) and Memory Bandwidth Monitoring.
Cache Monitoring Technology (CMT) allows an Operating System, Hypervisor or similar system management agent
to determine the usage of cache by applications running on the platform. The initial implementation is directed at
L3 cache monitoring (currently the last level cache in most server platforms).
Memory Bandwidth Monitoring (MBM), introduced in the Intel® Xeon® processor E5 v4 family, builds on the CMT
infrastructure to allow monitoring of bandwidth from one level of the cache hierarchy to the next - in this case

2. IA32_TSC_ADJUST MSR and the TSC-offset field in the VM execution controls of VMCS are some of the common interfaces that priv-
   ileged software can use to manage the time stamp counter for keeping time

focusing on the L3 cache, which is typically backed directly by system memory. As a result of this implementation,
memory bandwidth can be monitored.
The monitoring mechanisms described provide the following key shared infrastructure features:
•   A mechanism to enumerate the presence of the monitoring capabilities within the platform (via a CPUID feature
    bit).
•   A framework to enumerate the details of each sub-feature (including CMT and MBM, as discussed later, via
    CPUID leaves and sub-leaves).
•   A mechanism for the OS or Hypervisor to indicate a software-defined ID for each of the software threads (appli-
    cations, virtual machines, etc.) that are scheduled to run on a logical processor. These identifiers are known as
    Resource Monitoring IDs (RMIDs).
•   Mechanisms in hardware to monitor cache occupancy and bandwidth statistics as applicable to a given product
    generation on a per software-id basis.
•   Mechanisms for the OS or Hypervisor to read back the collected metrics such as L3 occupancy or Memory
    Bandwidth for a given software ID at any point during runtime.

17.16.1     Overview of Cache Monitoring Technology and Memory Bandwidth Monitoring
The shared resource monitoring features described in this chapter provide a layer of abstraction between applica-
tions and logical processors through the use of Resource Monitoring IDs (RMIDs). Each logical processor in the
system can be assigned an RMID independently, or multiple logical processors can be assigned to the same RMID
value (e.g., to track an application with multiple threads). For each logical processor, only one RMID value is active
at a time. This is enforced by the IA32_PQR_ASSOC MSR, which specifies the active RMID of a logical processor.
Writing to this MSR by software changes the active RMID of the logical processor from an old value to a new value.
The underlying platform shared resource monitoring hardware tracks cache metrics such as cache utilization and
misses as a result of memory accesses according to the RMIDs and reports monitored data via a counter register
(IA32_QM_CTR). The specific event types supported vary by generation and can be enumerated via CPUID. Before
reading back monitored data software must configure an event selection MSR (IA32_QM_EVTSEL) to specify which
metric is to be reported, and the specific RMID for which the data should be returned.
Processor support of the monitoring framework and sub-features such as CMT is reported via the CPUID instruc-
tion. The resource type available to the monitoring framework is enumerated via a new leaf function in CPUID.
Reading and writing to the monitoring MSRs requires the RDMSR and WRMSR instructions.
The Cache Monitoring Technology feature set provides the following unique mechanisms:
•   A mechanism to enumerate the presence and details of the CMT feature as applicable to a given level of the
    cache hierarchy, independent of other monitoring features.
•   CMT-specific event codes to read occupancy for a given level of the cache hierarchy.
The Memory Bandwidth Monitoring feature provides the following unique mechanisms:
•   A mechanism to enumerate the presence and details of the MBM feature as applicable to a given level of the
    cache hierarchy, independent of other monitoring features.
•   MBM-specific event codes to read bandwidth out to the next level of the hierarchy and various sub-event codes
    to read more specific metrics as discussed later (e.g., total bandwidth vs. bandwidth only from local memory
    controllers on the same package).

17.16.2     Enabling Monitoring: Usage Flow
Figure 17-19 illustrates the key steps for OS/VMM to detect support of shared resource monitoring features such
as CMT and enable resource monitoring for available resource types and monitoring events.

                  On OS/VMM Initialization        On Context Switch        Periodical Resource
                                                                           Selection/Reporting
                    PQM Capability                 Set RMID to monitor       Configure event type
                    Enumeration                    the scheduled app         Read monitored data

                                 CPUID[                        WRMSR                   RDMSR/WRMSR

                     CPUID.(7,0):EBX.12            IA32_PQR_ASSOC.RMID       IA32_QM_EVTSEL
                     CPUID.(0FH,0):EDX[31:1]
                     CPUID.(0FH,1):ECX[31:0]                                 IA32_QM_CTR
                     CPUID.(0FH,1):EDX[31:0]
                     CPUID.(0FH,1):EBX[31:0]
                     CPUID.(0FH,0):EBX[31:0]

                                 Figure 17-19. Platform Shared Resource Monitoring Usage Flow

17.16.3         Enumeration and Detecting Support of Cache Monitoring Technology and Memory
                Bandwidth Monitoring
Software can query processor support of shared resource monitoring features capabilities by executing CPUID
instruction with EAX = 07H, ECX = 0H as input. If CPUID.(EAX=07H, ECX=0):EBX.PQM[bit 12] reports 1, the
processor provides the following programming interfaces for shared resource monitoring, including Cache Moni-
toring Technology:
•   CPUID leaf function 0FH (Shared Resource Monitoring Enumeration leaf) provides information on available
    resource types (see Section 17.16.4), and monitoring capabilities for each resource type (see Section 17.16.5).
    Note CMT and MBM capabilities are enumerated as separate event vectors using shared enumeration infra-
    structure under a given resource type.
•   IA32_PQR_ASSOC.RMID: The per-logical-processor MSR, IA32_PQR_ASSOC, that OS/VMM can use to assign
    an RMID to each logical processor, see Section 17.16.6.
•   IA32_QM_EVTSEL: This MSR specifies an Event ID (EvtID) and an RMID which the platform uses to look up and
    provide monitoring data in the monitoring counter, IA32_QM_CTR, see Section 17.16.7.
•   IA32_QM_CTR: This MSR reports monitored resource data when available along with bits to allow software to
    check for error conditions and verify data validity.
Software must follow the following sequence of enumeration to discover Cache Monitoring Technology capabilities:
1. Execute CPUID with EAX=0 to discover the “cpuid_maxLeaf” supported in the processor;
2. If cpuid_maxLeaf >= 7, then execute CPUID with EAX=7, ECX= 0 to verify CPUID.(EAX=07H,
   ECX=0):EBX.PQM[bit 12] is set;
3. If CPUID.(EAX=07H, ECX=0):EBX.PQM[bit 12] = 1, then execute CPUID with EAX=0FH, ECX= 0 to query
   available resource types that support monitoring;
4. If CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=0):EDX.L3[bit 1] = 1, then execute CPUID with EAX=0FH, ECX= 1 to query the
   specific capabilities of L3 Cache Monitoring Technology (CMT) and Memory Bandwidth Monitoring.
5. If CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=0):EDX reports additional resource types supporting monitoring, then execute
   CPUID with EAX=0FH, ECX set to a corresponding resource type ID (ResID) as enumerated by the bit position
   of CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=0):EDX.

17.16.4         Monitoring Resource Type and Capability Enumeration
CPUID leaf function 0FH (Shared Resource Monitoring Enumeration leaf) provides one sub-leaf (sub-function 0)
that reports shared enumeration infrastructure, and one or more sub-functions that report feature-specific
enumeration data:
•   Monitoring leaf sub-function 0 enumerates available resources that support monitoring, i.e. executing CPUID
    with EAX=0FH and ECX=0H. In the initial implementation, L3 cache is the only resource type available. Each

   supported resource type is represented by a bit in CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=0):EDX[31:1]. The bit position
   corresponds to the sub-leaf index (ResID) that software must use to query details of the monitoring capability
   of that resource type (see Figure 17-21 and Figure 17-22). Reserved bits of CPUID.(EAX=0FH,
   ECX=0):EDX[31:2] correspond to unsupported sub-leaves of the CPUID.0FH leaf. Additionally,
   CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=0H):EBX reports the highest RMID value of any resource type that supports
   monitoring in the processor.

                           CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=0H) Output: (EAX: Reserved; ECX: Reserved)
                           31                                                                    2 1   0
                     EDX                              Reserved
                                                                                                   L
                                                                                                   3

                           31                                                                          0
                     EBX
                                          Highest RMID Value of Any Resource Type (Zero-Based)

               Figure 17-20. CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=0H) Monitoring Resource Type Enumeration

17.16.5    Feature-Specific Enumeration
Each additional sub-leaf of CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=ResID) enumerates the specific details for software to program
Monitoring MSRs using the resource type associated with the given ResID.
Note that in future Monitoring implementations the meanings of the returned registers may vary in other sub-
leaves that are not yet defined. The registers will be specified and defined on a per-ResID basis.

                                CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=1H) Output: (EAX: Reserved)
                      31                                                                         0
               EBX
                                    Upscaling Factor to Total Occupancy (Bytes)                        Upscaling Factor

                      31                                                                         0
               ECX                                                                                     MaxRMID
                                    Highest RMID Value of This Resource Type (Zero-Based)

          Figure 17-21. L3 Cache Monitoring Capability Enumeration Data (CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=1H) )

For each supported Cache Monitoring resource type, hardware supports only a finite number of RMIDs.
CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=1H).ECX enumerates the highest RMID value that can be monitored with this resource
type, see Figure 17-21.
CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=1H).EDX specifies a bit vector that is used to look up the EventID (See Figure 17-22 and
Table 17-18) that software must program with IA32_QM_EVTSEL in order to retrieve event data. After software
configures IA32_QMEVTSEL with the desired RMID and EventID, it can read the resulting data from IA32_QM_CTR.
The raw numerical value reported from IA32_QM_CTR can be converted to the final value (occupancy in bytes or
bandwidth in bytes per sampled time period) by multiplying the counter value by the value from CPUID.(EAX=0FH,
ECX=1H).EBX, see Figure 17-21.

                                               EventTypeBitMask
                         31                                                   3 2 1     0
                   EDX                      Reserved

                                                                                            L3 Occupancy
                                                                                            L3 Total BW
                                                                                            L3 Local BW

    Figure 17-22. L3 Cache Monitoring Capability Enumeration Event Type Bit Vector (CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=1H) )

17.16.5.1 Cache Monitoring Technology
On processors for which Cache Monitoring Technology supports the L3 cache occupancy event, CPUID.(EAX=0FH,
ECX=1H).EDX would return with only bit 0 set. The corresponding event ID can be looked up from Table 17-18. The
L3 occupancy data accumulated in IA32_QM_CTR can be converted to total occupancy (in bytes) by multiplying
with CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=1H).EBX.
Event codes for Cache Monitoring Technology are discussed in the next section.

17.16.5.2 Memory Bandwidth Monitoring
On processors that monitoring supports Memory Bandwidth Monitoring using ResID=1 (L3), two additional bits will
be set in the vector at CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=1H).EDX:
•    CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=1H).EDX[bit 1]: indicates the L3 total external bandwidth monitoring event is
     supported if set. This event monitors the L3 total external bandwidth to the next level of the cache hierarchy,
     including all demand and prefetch misses from the L3 to the next hierarchy of the memory system. In most
     platforms, this represents memory bandwidth.
•    CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=1H).EDX[bit 2]: indicates L3 local memory bandwidth monitoring event is supported if
     set. This event monitors the L3 external bandwidth satisfied by the local memory. In most platforms that
     support this event, L3 requests are likely serviced by a memory system with non-uniform memory architecture.
     This allows bandwidth to off-package memory resources to be tracked by subtracting total from local bandwidth
     (for instance, bandwidth over QPI to a memory controller on another physical processor could be tracked by
     subtraction).
The corresponding Event ID can be looked up from Table 17-18. The L3 bandwidth data accumulated in
IA32_QM_CTR can be converted to total bandwidth (in bytes) using CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=1H).EBX.

                                    Table 17-18. Monitoring Supported Event IDs

 Event Type                                  Event ID                             Context
 L3 Cache Occupancy                          01H                                  Cache Monitoring Technology
 L3 Total External Bandwidth                 02H                                  MBM
 L3 Local External Bandwidth                 03H                                  MBM
 Reserved                                    All other event codes                N/A

17.16.6         Monitoring Resource RMID Association
After Monitoring and sub-features has been enumerated, software can begin using the monitoring features. The
first step is to associate a given software thread (or multiple threads as part of an application, VM, group of appli-
cations or other abstraction) with an RMID.
Note that the process of associating an RMID with a given software thread is the same for all shared resource moni-
toring features (CMT, MBM), and a given RMID number has the same meaning from the viewpoint of any logical
processors in a package. Stated another way, a thread may be associated in a 1:1 mapping with an RMID, and that

RMID may allow cache occupancy, memory bandwidth information or other monitoring data to be read back later
with monitoring event codes (retrieving data is discussed in a previous section).
The association of an application thread with an RMID requires an OS to program the per-logical-processor MSR
IA32_PQR_ASSOC at context swap time (updates may also be made at any other arbitrary points during program
execution such as application phase changes). The IA32_PQR_ASSOC MSR specifies the active RMID that moni-
toring hardware will use to tag internal operations, such as L3 cache requests. The layout of the MSR is shown in
Figure 17-23. Software specifies the active RMID to monitor in the IA32_PQR_ASSOC.RMID field. The width of the
RMID field can vary from one implementation to another, and is derived from Ceil (LOG2 ( 1 + CPUID.(EAX=0FH,
ECX=0):EBX[31:0])). The value of IA32_PQR_ASSOC after power-on is 0.

                 Width of IA32_PQR_ASSOC.RMID field: Log2 ( CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=0H).EBX[31:0] +1)
                      63                        32 31               10 9               0

                           Reserved for CLOS*           Reserved             RMID            IA32_PQR_ASSOC

                      *See Section 17.15

                                           Figure 17-23. IA32_PQR_ASSOC MSR

In the initial implementation, the width of the RMID field is up to 10 bits wide, zero-referenced and fully encoded.
However, software must use CPUID to query the maximum RMID supported by the processor. If a value larger than
the maximum RMID is written to IA32_PQR_ASSOC.RMID, a #GP(0) fault will be generated.
RMIDs have a global scope within the physical package- if an RMID is assigned to one logical processor then the
same RMID can be used to read multiple thread attributes later (for example, L3 cache occupancy or external
bandwidth from the L3 to the next level of the cache hierarchy). In a multiple LLC platform the RMIDs are to be
reassigned by the OS or VMM scheduler when an application is migrated across LLCs.
Note that in a situation where Monitoring supports multiple resource types, some upper range of RMIDs (e.g. RMID
31) may only be supported by one resource type but not by another resource type.

17.16.7     Monitoring Resource Selection and Reporting Infrastructure
The reporting mechanism for Cache Monitoring Technology and other related features is architecturally exposed as
an MSR pair that can be programmed and read to measure various metrics such as the L3 cache occupancy (CMT)
and bandwidths (MBM) depending on the level of Monitoring support provided by the platform. Data is reported
back on a per-RMID basis. These events do not trigger based on event counts or trigger APIC interrupts (e.g. no
Performance Monitoring Interrupt occurs based on counts). Rather, they are used to sample counts explicitly.
The MSR pair for the shared resource monitoring features (CMT, MBM) is separate from and not shared with archi-
tectural Perfmon counters, meaning software can use these monitoring features simultaneously with the Perfmon
counters.
Access to the aggregated monitoring information is accomplished through the following programmable monitoring
MSRs:
•   IA32_QM_EVTSEL: This MSR provides a role similar to the event select MSRs for programmable performance
    monitoring described in Chapter 18. The simplified layout of the MSR is shown in Figure 17-24. Bits
    IA32_QM_EVTSEL.EvtID (bits 7:0) specify an event code of a supported resource type for hardware to report
    monitored data associated with IA32_QM_EVTSEL.RMID (bits 41:32). Software can configure
    IA32_QM_EVTSEL.RMID with any RMID that is active within the physical processor. The width of
    IA32_QM_EVTSEL.RMID matches that of IA32_PQR_ASSOC.RMID. Supported event codes for the
    IA32_QM_EVTSEL register are shown in Table 17-18. Note that valid event codes may not necessarily map
    directly to the bit position used to enumerate support for the resource via CPUID.
    Software can program an RMID / Event ID pair into the IA32_QM_EVTSEL MSR bit field to select an RMID to
    read a particular counter for a given resource. The currently supported list of Monitoring Event IDs is discussed
    in Section 17.16.5, which covers feature-specific details.

    Thread access to the IA32_QM_EVTSEL and IA32_QM_CTR MSR pair should be serialized to avoid situations
    where one thread changes the RMID/EvtID just before another thread reads monitoring data from
    IA32_QM_CTR.
•   IA32_QM_CTR: This MSR reports monitored data when available. It contains three bit fields. If software
    configures an unsupported RMID or event type in IA32_QM_EVTSEL, then IA32_QM_CTR.Error (bit 63) will be
    set, indicating there is no valid data to report. If IA32_QM_CTR.Unavailable (bit 62) is set, it indicates
    monitored data for the RMID is not available, and IA32_QM_CTR.data (bits 61:0) should be ignored. Therefore,
    IA32_QM_CTR.data (bits 61:0) is valid only if bit 63 and 62 are both clear. For Cache Monitoring Technology,
    software can convert IA32_QM_CTR.data into cache occupancy or bandwidth metrics expressed in bytes by
    multiplying with the conversion factor from CPUID.(EAX=0FH, ECX=1H).EBX.

                        63                     42 41                    32 31                    8 7              0
                                   Reserved               RMID                     Reserved            EvtID             IA32_QM_EVTSEL

                         63        61                                                                              0
                         E U                                          Resource Monitoring Data                            IA32_QM_CTR

                                        Figure 17-24. IA32_QM_EVTSEL and IA32_QM_CTR MSRs

17.16.8         Monitoring Programming Considerations
Figure 17-23 illustrates how system software can program IA32_QOSEVTSEL and IA32_QM_CTR to perform
resource monitoring.

                                                                             System Software

                                        RMID                      Event ID                                                 Counter Data
                       IA32_QOSEVTSEL MSR                                                                       IA32_QM_CTR MSR

                  63          41          32              7       0                                            63 62                       0

                   Reserved        RMID        Reserved       EvtID                                                      Monitoring Data

                                                                        Event ID                                       Availability
                                        Resource Monitoring ID                                                         Error

                                   Figure 17-25. Software Usage of Cache Monitoring Resources

Though the field provided in IA32_QM_CTR allows for up to 62 bits of data to be returned, often a subset of bits are
used. With Cache Monitoring Technology for instance, the number of bits used will be proportional to the base-two
logarithm of the total cache size divided by the Upscaling Factor from CPUID.
In Memory Bandwidth Monitoring the initial counter size is 24 bits, and retrieving the value at 1Hz or faster is suffi-
cient to ensure at most one rollover per sampling period. Any future changes to counter width will be enumerated
to software.

17.16.8.1 Monitoring Dynamic Configuration
Both the IA32_QM_EVTSEL and IA32_PQR_ASSOC registers are accessible and modifiable at any time during
execution using RDMSR/WRMSR unless otherwise noted. When writing to these MSRs a #GP(0) will be generated
if any of the following conditions occur:
•   A reserved bit is modified,
•   An RMID exceeding the maxRMID is used.

17.16.8.2 Monitoring Operation With Power Saving Features
Note that some advanced power management features such as deep package C-states may shrink the L3 cache
and cause CMT occupancy count to be reduced. MBM bandwidth counts may increase due to flushing cached data
out of L3.

17.16.8.3 Monitoring Operation with Other Operating Modes
The states in IA32_PQR_ASSOC and monitoring counter are unmodified across an SMI delivery. Thus, the execu-
tion of SMM handler code and SMM handler’s data can manifest as spurious contribution in the monitored data.
It is possible for an SMM handler to minimize the impact on of spurious contribution in the QOS monitoring coun-
ters by reserving a dedicated RMID for monitoring the SMM handler. Such an SMM handler can save the previously
configured QOS Monitoring state immediately upon entering SMM, and restoring the QOS monitoring state back to
the prev-SMM RMID upon exit.

17.16.8.4 Monitoring Operation with RAS Features
In general the Reliability, Availability and Serviceability (RAS) features present in Intel Platforms are not expected
to significantly affect shared resource monitoring counts. In cases where software RAS features cause memory
copies or cache accesses these may be tracked and may influence the shared resource monitoring counter values.

17.17       INTEL® RESOURCE DIRECTOR TECHNOLOGY (INTEL® RDT) ALLOCATION
            FEATURES
The Intel Resource Director Technology (Intel RDT) feature set provides a set of allocation (resource control) capa-
bilities including Cache Allocation Technology (CAT) and Code and Data Prioritization (CDP). The Intel Xeon
processor E5 v4 family (and subset of communication-focused Intel Xeon processors E5 v3 family) introduce capa-
bilities to configure and make use of the Cache Allocation Technology (CAT) mechanisms on the L3 cache. Some
future Intel platforms may also provide support for control over the L2 cache, with capabilities as described below.
The programming interface for Cache Allocation Technology and for the more general allocation capabilities are
described in the rest of this chapter.
Cache Allocation Technology enables an Operating System (OS), Hypervisor /Virtual Machine Manager (VMM) or
similar system service management agent to specify the amount of cache space into which an application can fill
(as a hint to hardware - certain features such as power management may override CAT settings). Specialized user-
level implementations with minimal OS support are also possible, though not necessarily recommended (see notes
below for OS/Hypervisor with respect to ring 3 software and virtual guests). Depending on the processor famility,
L2 or L3 cache allocation capability may be provided, and the technology is designed to scale across multiple cache
levels and technology generations.
Software can determine which levels are supported in a give platform programmatically using CPUID as described
in the following sections.
The CAT mechanisms defined in this document provide the following key features:
•   A mechanism to enumerate platform Cache Allocation Technology capabilities and available resource types that
    provides CAT control capabilities. For implementations that support Cache Allocation Technology, CPUID
    provides enumeration support to query which levels of the cache hierarchy are supported and specific CAT
    capabilities, such as the max allocation bitmask size,

•   A mechanism for the OS or Hypervisor to configure the amount of a resource available to a particular Class of
    Service via a list of allocation bitmasks,
•   Mechanisms for the OS or Hypervisor to signal the Class of Service to which an application belongs, and
•   Hardware mechanisms to guide the LLC fill policy when an application has been designated to belong to a
    specific Class of Service.
Note that for many usages, an OS or Hypervisor may not want to expose Cache Allocation Technology mechanisms
to Ring3 software or virtualized guests.
The Cache Allocation Technology feature enables more cache resources (i.e. cache space) to be made available for
high priority applications based on guidance from the execution environment as shown in Figure 17-26. The archi-
tecture also allows dynamic resource reassignment during runtime to further optimize the performance of the high
priority application with minimal degradation to the low priority app. Additionally, resources can be rebalanced for
system throughput benefit across uses cases of OSes, VMMs, containers and other scenarios by managing the
CPUID and MSR interfaces. This section describes the hardware and software support required in the platform
including what is required of the execution environment (i.e. OS/VMM) to support such resource control. Note that
in Figure 17-26 the L3 Cache is shown as an example resource.

                                Without CAT                                 With CAT

                             Hi Pri App        Lo Pri App              Hi Pri App        Lo Pri App

                             Core 0             Core 1                 Core 0             Core 1

                      Shared LLC, Low priority got more cache   Shared LLC, High priority got more cache

         Figure 17-26. Cache Allocation Technology Allocates More Resource to High Priority Applications

17.17.1         Cache Allocation Technology Architecture
The fundamental goal of Cache Allocation Technology is to enable resource allocation based on application priority
or Class of Service (COS or CLOS). The processor exposes a set of Classes of Service into which applications (or
individual threads) can be assigned. Cache allocation for the respective applications or threads is then restricted
based on the class with which they are associated. Each Class of Service can be configured using capacity bitmasks
(CBMs) which represent capacity and indicate the degree of overlap and isolation between classes. For each logical
processor there is a register exposed (referred to here as the IA32_PQR_ASSOC MSR or PQR) to allow the OS/VMM
to specify a COS when an application, thread or VM is scheduled.
The usage of Classes of Service (COS) are consistent across resources - and a COS may have multiple re-source
control attributes attached, which reduces software overhead at context swap time. Rather than adding new types
of COS tags per resource for instance, the COS management overhead is constant. Cache allocation for the indi-
cated application/thread/VM is then controlled automatically by the hardware based on the class and the bitmask
associated with that class. Bitmasks are configured via the IA32_resourceType_MASK_n MSRs, where
resourceType indicates a resource type (e.g. “L3” for the L3 cache) and n indicates a COS number.
The basic ingredients of Cache Allocation Technology are as follows:
•   An architecturally exposed mechanism using CPUID to indicate whether CAT is supported, and what resource
    types are available which can be controlled,
•   For each available resourceType, CPUID also enumerates the total number of Classes of Services and the length
    of the capacity bitmasks that can be used to enforce cache allocation to applications on the platform,
•   An architecturally exposed mechanism to allow the execution environment (OS/VMM) to configure the behavior
    of different classes of service using the bitmasks available,

•   An architecturally exposed mechanism to allow the execution environment (OS/VMM) to assign a COS to an
    executing software thread (i.e. associating the active CR3 of a logical processor with the COS in
    IA32_PQR_ASSOC),
•   Implementation-dependent mechanisms to indicate which COS is associated with a memory access and to
    enforce the cache allocation on a per COS basis.
A capacity bitmask (CBM) provides a hint to the hardware indicating the cache space an application should be
limited to as well as providing an indication of overlap and isolation in the CAT-capable cache from other applica-
tions contending for the cache. The bitlength of the capacity mask available generally depends on the configuration
of the cache and is specified in the enumeration process for CAT in CPUID (this may vary between models in a
processor family as well). Similarly, other parameters such as the number of supported COS may vary for each
resource type, and these details can be enumerated via CPUID.

                    M7       M6       M5       M4       M3       M2       M1       M0

             COS0        A        A        A        A        A        A        A        A
                                                                                            Default Bitmask
             COS1        A        A        A        A        A        A        A        A

             COS2        A        A        A        A        A        A        A        A

             COS3        A        A        A        A        A        A        A        A

                    M7       M6       M5       M4       M3       M2       M1       M0

             COS0        A        A        A        A        A        A        A        A
                                                                                            Overlapped Bitmask
             COS1                                            A        A        A        A

             COS2                                                              A        A

             COS3                                                                       A

                    M7       M6       M5       M4       M3       M2       M1       M0

             COS0        A        A        A        A
                                                                                            Isolated Bitmask
             COS1                                            A        A

             COS2                                                              A

             COS3                                                                       A

                                  Figure 17-27. Examples of Cache Capacity Bitmasks

Sample cache capacity bitmasks for a bitlength of 8 are shown in Figure 17-27. Please note that all (and only)
contiguous '1' combinations are allowed (e.g. FFFFH, 0FF0H, 003CH, etc.). Attempts to program a value without
contiguous '1's (including zero) will result in a general protection fault (#GP(0)). It is generally expected that in
way-based implementations, one capacity mask bit corresponds to some number of ways in cache, but the specific
mapping is implementation-dependent. In all cases, a mask bit set to '1' specifies that a particular Class of Service
can allocate into the cache subset represented by that bit. A value of '0' in a mask bit specifies that a Class of
Service cannot allocate into the given cache subset. In general, allocating more cache to a given application is
usually beneficial to its performance.
Figure 17-27 also shows three examples of sets of Cache Capacity Bitmasks. For simplicity these are represented
as 8-bit vectors, though this may vary depending on the implementation and how the mask is mapped to the avail-
able cache capacity. The first example shows the default case where all 4 Classes of Service (the total number of
COS are implementation-dependent) have full access to the cache. The second case shows an overlapped case,
which would allow some lower-priority threads share cache space with the highest priority threads. The third case

shows various non-overlapped partitioning schemes. As a matter of software policy for extensibility COS0 should
typically be considered and configured as the highest priority COS, followed by COS1, and so on, though there is
no hardware restriction enforcing this mapping. When the system boots all threads are initialized to COS0, which
has full access to the cache by default.
Though the representation of the CBMs looks similar to a way-based mapping they are independent of any specific
enforcement implementation (e.g. way partitioning.) Rather, this is a convenient manner to represent capacity,
overlap and isolation of cache space. For example, executing a POPCNT instruction (population count of set bits) on
the capacity bitmask can provide the fraction of cache space that a class of service can allocate into. In addition to
the fraction, the exact location of the bits also shows whether the class of service overlaps with other classes of
service or is entirely isolated in terms of cache space used.

                Enum/Confg                      Association               Enforcement
                Enumerate                       OS Context                Application
                Enforcement                     Switch                    Memory Request

                Configure CBM for               Set Class of Service      Tag with Cache
                each Class of Service           in IA32_PQR               Class of Service

                   Config                         COS = 2                 Mem Request

                                                     COS                   Transaction

                                          Cache Subsystem
                                                                           Enforce Mask
                                          Cache Allocation
                                                                             Set 1
                                                                              Set 2

                                          COS 0      Capacity bitmask 3
                                                                                   ....
                                                                                      Set n
                                          COS 1      Capacity bitmask 3
                                                                                      way 1
                                          COS 2      Capacity bitmask 3
                                                                                      ......
                                          COS 3      Capacity bitmask 3
                                                                                      way 16

                                    Figure 17-28. Class of Service and Cache Capacity Bitmasks

Figure 17-28 shows how the Cache Capacity Bitmasks and the per-logical-processor Class of Service are logically
used to enable Cache Allocation Technology. All (and only) contiguous 1's in the CBM are permitted. The length of
CBM may vary from resource to resource or between processor generations and can be enumerated using CPUID.
From the available mask set and based on the goals of the OS/VMM (shared or isolated cache, etc.) bitmasks are
selected and associated with different classes of service. For the available Classes of Service the associated CBMs
can be programmed via the global set of CAT configuration registers (in the case of L3 CAT, via the
IA32_L3_MASK_n MSRs, where “n” is the Class of Service, starting from zero). In all architectural implementations
supporting CPUID it is possible to change the CBMs dynamically, during program execution, unless stated other-
wise by Intel.
The currently running application's Class of Service is communicated to the hardware through the per-logical-
processor PQR MSR (IA32_PQR_ASSOC MSR). When the OS schedules an application thread on a logical processor,
the application thread is associated with a specific COS (i.e. the corresponding COS in the PQR) and all requests to
the CAT-capable resource from that logical processor are tagged with that COS (in other words, the application
thread is configured to belong to a specific COS). The cache subsystem uses this tagged request information to
enforce QoS. The capacity bitmask may be mapped into a way bitmask (or a similar enforcement entity based on
the implementation) at the cache before it is applied to the allocation policy. For example, the capacity bitmask can
be an 8-bit mask and the enforcement may be accomplished using a 16-way bitmask for a cache enforcement
implementation based on way partitioning.

The following sections describe extensions of CAT such as Code and Data Prioritization (CDP), followed by details
on specific features such as L3 CAT, L3 CDP, and L2 CAT. Depending on the specific processor a mix of features may
be supported, and CPUID provides enumeration capabilities to enable software to detect the set of supported
features.

17.17.2     Code and Data Prioritization (CDP) Technology
Code and Data Prioritization Technology is an extension of CAT. CDP enables isolation and separate prioritization of
code and data fetches to the L3 cache in a software configurable manner, which can enable workload prioritization
and tuning of cache capacity to the characteristics of the workload. CDP extends Cache Allocation Technology (CAT)
by providing separate code and data masks per Class of Service (COS).
By default, CDP is disabled on the processor. If the CAT MSRs are used without enabling CDP, the processor oper-
ates in a traditional CAT-only mode. When CDP is enabled,
•   the CAT mask MSRs are re-mapped into interleaved pairs of mask MSRs for data or code fetches (see
    Figure 17-29),
•   the range of COS for CAT is re-indexed, with the lower-half of the COS range available for CDP.
Using the CDP feature, virtual isolation between code and data can be configured on the L3 cache if desired, similar
to how some processor cache levels provide separate L1 data and L1 instruction caches.
Like the CAT feature, CDP may be dynamically configured by privileged software at any point during normal system
operation, including dynamically enabling or disabling the feature provided that certain software configuration
requirements are met (see Section 17.17.4).
An example of the operating mode of CDP is shown in Figure 17-29. Shown at the top are traditional CAT usage
models where capacity masks map 1:1 with a COS number to enable control over the cache space which a given
COS (and thus applications, threads or VMs) may occupy. Shown at the bottom are example mask configurations
where CDP is enabled, and each COS number maps 1:2 to two masks, one for code and one for data. This enables
code and data to be either overlapped or isolated to varying degrees either globally or on a per-COS basis,
depending on application and system needs.

                           Example of CAT-Only Usage - 16 bit Capacity Masks

              COS0     1       1        1       1       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0
              COS1     0       0        0       0       1       1       1        1       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       Traditional
              COS2     0       0        0       0       0       0       0        0       1       1       0       0       0       0       0       0       CAT
              COS3     0       0        0       0       0       0       0        0       1       1       1       1       1       1       1       1

                      Example of Code/Data Prioritization Usage - 16 bit Capacity Masks

          COS0.Data        1       1        1       1       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0

          COS0.Code        0       0        0       0       1       1       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0   CAT with
          COS1.Data        0       0        0       0       0       0       1        1       1       1       1       0       0       0       0       0   CDP

          COS1.Code        0       0        0       0       0       0       0        0       0       1       1       1       0       0       0       0
      Other COS.Data       0       0        0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       1       1       1       1
      Other COS.Code       0       0        0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       1       1       1       1

                                       Figure 17-29. Code and Data Capacity Bitmasks of CDP

When CDP is enabled, the existing mask space for CAT-only operation is split. As an example if the system supports
16 CAT-only COS, when CDP is enabled the same MSR interfaces are used, however half of the masks correspond
to code, half correspond to data, and the effective number of COS is reduced by half. Code/Data masks are defined
per-COS and interleaved in the MSR space as described in subsequent sections.

17.17.3         Enabling Cache Allocation Technology Usage Flow
Figure 17-30 illustrates the key steps for OS/VMM to detect support of Cache Allocation Technology and enable
priority-based resource allocation for a CAT-capable resource.

                  On OS/VMM Initialization          Cache Allocation Configuration   On Context Switch

                    CQE Capability                   Configure CBM                     Set COS for scheduled
                    Enumeration                      per COS                           thread context

                                 CPUID[                              WRMSR                       WRMSR

                     CPUID.(7,0):EBX.15              IA32_L3_QOS_MASK_0
                     CPUID.(10H,0):EBX[31:1]         ...                               IA32_PQR_ASSOC
                     CPUID.(10H,1):EAX[4:0]
                     CPUID.(10H,1):EDX[15:0]         A32_L3_QOS_MASK_n
                     CPUID.(10H,1):EBX[

                                          Figure 17-30. Cache Allocation Technology Usage Flow

Enumeration and configuration of L2 CAT is similar to L3 CAT, however CPUID details and MSR addresses differ.
Common CLOS are used across the features.

17.17.3.1 Enumeration and Detection Support of Cache Allocation Technology
Software can query processor support of CAT capabilities by executing CPUID instruction with EAX = 07H, ECX =
0H as input. If CPUID.(EAX=07H, ECX=0):EBX.PQE[bit 15] reports 1, the processor supports software control over
shared processor resources. Software must use CPUID leaf 10H to enumerate additional details of available
resource types, classes of services and capability bitmasks. The programming interfaces provided by Cache Alloca-
tion Technology include:
•   CPUID leaf function 10H (Cache Allocation Technology Enumeration leaf) and its sub-functions provide
    information on available resource types, and CAT capability for each resource type (see Section 17.17.3.2).
•   IA32_L3_MASK_n: A range of MSRs is provided for each resource type, each MSR within that range specifying
    a software-configured capacity bitmask for each class of service. For L3 with Cache Allocation support, the CBM
    is specified using one of the IA32_L3_QOS_MASK_n MSR, where 'n' corresponds to a number within the
    supported range of COS, i.e. the range between 0 and CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=ResID):EDX[15:0], inclusive.
    See Section 17.17.3.3 for details.
•   IA32_L2_MASK_n: A range of MSRs is provided for L2 Cache Allocation Technology, enabling software control
    over the amount of L2 cache available for each CLOS. Similar to L3 CAT, a CBM is specified for each CLOS using
    the set of registers, IA32_L2_QOS_MASK_n MSR, where 'n' ranges from zero to the maximum CLOS number
    reported for L2 CAT in CPUID. See Section 17.17.3.3 for details.
    The L2 mask MSRs are scoped at the same level as the L2 cache (similarly, the L3 mask MSRs are scoped at the
    same level as the L3 cache). Software may determine which logical processors share an MSR (for instance local
    to a core, or shared across multiple cores) by performing a write to one of these MSRs and noting which logical
    threads observe the change. Example flows for a similar method to determine register scope are described in
    Section 15.5.2, “System Software Recommendation for Managing CMCI and Machine Check Resources”.
    Software may also use CPUID leaf 4 to determine the maximum number of logical processor IDs that may share
    a given level of the cache.

•   IA32_PQR_ASSOC.CLOS: The IA32_PQR_ASSOC MSR provides a COS field that OS/VMM can use to assign a
    logical processor to an available COS. The set of COS are common across all allocation features, meaning that
    multiple features may be supported in the same processor without additional software COS management
    overhead at context swap time. See Section 17.17.3.4 for details.

17.17.3.2 Cache Allocation Technology: Resource Type and Capability Enumeration
CPUID leaf function 10H (Cache Allocation Technology Enumeration leaf) provides two or more sub-functions:
•   CAT Enumeration leaf sub-function 0 enumerates available resource types that support allocation control, i.e.
    by executing CPUID with EAX=10H and ECX=0H. Each supported resource type is represented by a bit field in
    CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=0):EBX[31:1]. The bit position of each set bit corresponds to a Resource ID (ResID),
    for instance ResID=1 is used to indicate L3 CAT support, and ResID=2 indicates L2 CAT support. The ResID is
    also the sub-leaf index that software must use to query details of the CAT capability of that resource type (see
    Figure 17-31).

                           CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=0H) Output: (EAX: Reserved; ECX: Reserved; EDX: Reserved)
                                   31                                                                       3 2 1   0
                           EBX                                                                                L L
                                                                 Reserved
                                                                                                              2 3

                 Figure 17-31. CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=0H) Available Resource Type Identification

    — EAX[4:0] reports the length of the capacity bitmask length using minus-one notation, i.e. a value of 15
      corresponds to the capability bitmask having length of 16 bits. Bits 31:5 of EAX are reserved.
•   Sub-functions of CPUID.EAX=10H with a non-zero ECX input matching a supported ResID enumerate the
    specific enforcement details of the corresponding ResID. The capabilities enumerated include the length of the
    capacity bitmasks and the number of Classes of Service for a given ResID. Software should query the capability
    of each available ResID that supports CAT from a sub-leaf of leaf 10H using the sub-leaf index reported by the
    corresponding non-zero bit in CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=0):EBX[31:1] in order to obtain additional feature
    details.
•   CAT capability for L3 is enumerated by CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=1H), see Figure 17-32. The specific CAT
    capabilities reported by CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=1) are:

                              CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=ResID=1) Output:
                      31                                                           5 4                  0
              EAX                                  Reserved                              CBM_LEN

                      31                                                                                0
               EBX
                                    Bitmask of Shareable Resource with Other executing entities

                      31                                                                          2 1   0
               ECX
                                    Reserved

                                                                                                             CDP

                      31                                      16 15                                     0
              EDX                                                           COS_MAX
                                        Reserved

                       Figure 17-32. L3 Cache Allocation Technology and CDP Enumeration

    — CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=ResID=1):EAX[4:0] reports the length of the capacity bitmask length using
      minus-one notation, i.e. a value of 15 corresponds to the capability bitmask having length of 16 bits. Bits
      31:5 of EAX are reserved.
    — CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=1):EBX[31:0] reports a bit mask. Each set bit within the length of the CBM
      indicates the corresponding unit of the L3 allocation may be used by other entities in the platform (e.g. an
      integrated graphics engine or hardware units outside the processor core and have direct access to L3). Each
      cleared bit within the length of the CBM indicates the corresponding allocation unit can be configured to
      implement a priority-based allocation scheme chosen by an OS/VMM without interference with other
      hardware agents in the system. Bits outside the length of the CBM are reserved.
    — CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=1):ECX.CDP[bit 2]: If 1, indicates Code and Data Prioritization Technology is
      supported (see Section 17.17.4). Other bits of CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=1):ECX are reserved.
    — CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=1):EDX[15:0] reports the maximum COS supported for the resource (COS are
      zero-referenced, meaning a reported value of '15' would indicate 16 total supported COS). Bits 31:16 are
      reserved.
•   CAT capability for L2 is enumerated by CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=2H), see Figure 17-33. The specific CAT
    capabilities reported by CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=2) are:

                           CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=ResID=2) Output:
                      31                                                       5 4             0
                EAX                         Reserved                                 CBM_LEN

                      31                                                                       0
                EBX
                                Bitmask of Shareable Resource with Other executing entities

                      31                                                                       0
                ECX
                                Reserved

                      31                               16 15                                   0
                EDX                                                COS_MAX
                                 Reserved

                                  Figure 17-33. L2 Cache Allocation Technology

    — CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=ResID=2):EAX[4:0] reports the length of the capacity bitmask length using
      minus-one notation, i.e. a value of 15 corresponds to the capability bitmask having length of 16 bits. Bits
      31:5 of EAX are reserved.
    — CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=2):EBX[31:0] reports a bit mask. Each set bit within the length of the CBM
      indicates the corresponding unit of the L2 allocation may be used by other entities in the platform. Each
      cleared bit within the length of the CBM indicates the corresponding allocation unit can be configured to
      implement a priority-based allocation scheme chosen by an OS/VMM without interference with other
      hardware agents in the system. Bits outside the length of the CBM are reserved.
    — CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=2):ECX: reserved.
    — CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=2):EDX[15:0] reports the maximum COS supported for the resource (COS are
      zero-referenced, meaning a reported value of '15' would indicate 16 total supported COS). Bits 31:16 are
      reserved.
A note on migration of Classes of Service (COS): Software should minimize migrations of COS across logical
processors (across threads or cores), as a reduction in the performance of the Cache Allocation Technology feature
may result if COS are migrated frequently. This is aligned with the industry-standard practice of minimizing unnec-
essary thread migrations across processor cores in order to avoid excessive time spent warming up processor

caches after a migration. In general, for best performance, minimize thread migration and COS migration across
processor logical threads and processor cores.

17.17.3.3 Cache Allocation Technology: Cache Mask Configuration
After determining the length of the capacity bitmasks (CBM) and number of COS supported using CPUID (see
Section 17.17.3.2), each COS needs to be programmed with a CBM to dictate its available cache via a write to the
corresponding IA32_resourceType_MASK_n register, where 'n' corresponds to a number within the supported
range of COS, i.e. the range between 0 and CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=ResID):EDX[15:0], inclusive, and
'resourceType' corresponds to a specific resource as enumerated by the set bits of CPUID.(EAX=10H,
ECX=0):EAX[31:1], for instance, ‘L2’ or ‘L3’ cache.
A hierarchy of MSRs is reserved for Cache Allocation Technology registers of the form
IA32_resourceType_MASK_n:
•   from 0C90H through 0D8FH (inclusive), providing support for multiple sub-ranges to support varying resource
    types. The first supported resourceType is 'L3', corresponding to the L3 cache in a platform. The MSRs range
    from 0C90H through 0D0FH (inclusive), enables support for up to 128 L3 CAT Classes of Service.

                   63                              31               10 9              0

                              COS                       Reserved               RMID        IA32_PQR_ASSOC

                    63                              32 31                             0
                               Reserved                             Bit_Mask               IA32_L3_MASK_0

                                            ....
                    63                              32 31                             0
                               Reserved                             Bit_Mask               IA32_L3_MASK_n

                            Figure 17-34. IA32_PQR_ASSOC, IA32_L3_MASK_n MSRs

•   Within the same CAT range hierarchy, another set of registers is defined for resourceType 'L2', corresponding
    to the L2 cache in a platform, and MSRs IA32_L2_MASK_n are defined for n=[0,63] at addresses 0D10H
    through 0D4FH (inclusive).
Figure 17-34 and Figure 17-35 provide an overview of the relevant registers.

                    63                              32 31                             0
                               Reserved                             Bit_Mask               IA32_L2_MASK_0

                                            ....
                    63                              32 31                             0
                               Reserved                             Bit_Mask               IA32_L2_MASK_n

                                          Figure 17-35. IA32_L2_MASK_n MSRs

All CAT configuration registers can be accessed using the standard RDMSR / WRMSR instructions.
Note that once L3 or L2 CAT masks are configured, threads can be grouped into Classes of Service (COS) using the
IA32_PQR_ASSOC MSR as described in Section 17.17.3.4 (Class of Service (COS) to Cache Mask Association:
Common Across Allocation Features)

17.17.3.4 Class of Service to Cache Mask Association: Common Across Allocation Features
After configuring the available classes of service with the preferred set of capacity bitmasks, the OS/VMM can set
the IA32_PQR_ASSOC.COS of a logical processor to the class of service with the desired CBM when a thread
context switch occurs. This allows the OS/VMM to indicate which class of service an executing thread/VM belongs
within. Each logical processor contains an instance of the IA32_PQR_ASSOC register at MSR location 0C8FH, and
Figure 17-34 shows the bit field layout for this register. Bits[63:32] contain the COS field for each logical processor.
Note that placing the RMID field within the same PQR register enables both RMID and CLOS to be swapped at
context swap time for simultaneous use of monitoring and allocation features with a single register write for effi-
ciency.
When CDP is enabled, Specifying a COS value in IA32_PQR_ASSOC.COS greater than MAX_COS_CDP =(
CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=1):EDX[15:0] >> 1) will cause undefined performance impact to code and data fetches.
Note that if the IA32_PQR_ASSOC.COS is never written then the CAT capability defaults to using COS 0, which in
turn is set to the default mask in IA32_L3_MASK_0 - which is all “1”s (on reset). This essentially disables the
enforcement feature by default or for legacy operating systems and software.
See Section 17.17.5, “Cache Allocation Technology Programming Considerations” for important COS programming
considerations including maximum values when using CAT and CDP.

17.17.4         Code and Data Prioritization (CDP): Enumerating and Enabling L3 CDP Technology
CDP is an extension of CAT. The presence of the CDP feature is enumerated via CPUID.(EAX=10H,
ECX=1):ECX.CDP[bit 2] (see Figure 17-32). Most of the CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=1) sub-leaf data that applies to
CAT also apply to CDP. However, CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=1):EDX.COS_MAX_CAT specifies the maximum COS
applicable to CAT-only operation. For CDP operations, COS_MAX_CDP is equal to (CPUID.(EAX=10H,
ECX=1):EDX.COS_MAX_CAT >>1).
If CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=1):ECX.CDP[bit 2] =1, the processor supports CDP and provides a new MSR
IA32_L3_QOS_CFG at address 0C81H. The layout of IA32_L3_QOS_CFG is shown in Figure 17-36. The bit field
definition of IA32_L3_QOS_CFG are:
•   Bit 0: L3 CDP Enable. If set, enables CDP, maps CAT mask MSRs into pairs of Data Mask and Code Mask MSRs.
    The maximum allowed value to write into IA32_PQR_ASSOC.COS is COS_MAX_CDP.
•   Bits 63:1: Reserved. Attempts to write to reserved bits result in a #GP(0).

                                               IA32_L3_QOS_CFG
                        63                                                    3 2 1   0
                                            Reserved

                                                                                          L3 CDP Enable

                                     Figure 17-36. Layout of IA32_L3_QOS_CFG

IA32_L3_QOS_CFG default values are all 0s at RESET, the mask MSRs are all 1s. Hence. all logical processors are
initialized in COS0 allocated with the entire L3 with CDP disabled, until software programs CAT and CDP.
Before enabling or disabling CDP, software should write all 1's to all of the CAT/CDP masks to ensure proper
behavior (e.g., the IA32_L3_QOS_Mask_n set of MSRs). When enabling CDP, software should also ensure that only
COS number which are valid in CDP operation is used, otherwise undefined behavior may result. For instance in a
case with 16 CAT COS, since COS are reduced by half when CDP is enabled, software should ensure that only COS
0-7 are in use before enabling CDP (along with writing 1's to all mask bits before enabling or disabling CDP).
Software should also account for the fact that mask interpretations change when CDP is enabled or disabled,
meaning for instance that a CAT mask for a given COS may become a code mask for a different Class of Service

when CDP is enabled. In order to simplify this behavior and prevent unintended remapping software should
consider resetting all threads to COS[0] before enabling or disabling CDP.

17.17.4.1 Mapping Between L3 CDP Masks and CAT Masks
When CDP is enabled, the existing CAT mask MSR space is re-mapped to provide a code mask and a data mask per
COS. The re-mapping is shown in

                         Table 17-19. Re-indexing of COS Numbers and Mapping to CAT/CDP Mask MSRs

    Mask MSR                                            CAT-only Operation             CDP Operation
    IA32_L3_QOS_Mask_0                                  COS0                           COS0.Data
    IA32_L3_QOS_Mask_1                                  COS1                           COS0.Code
    IA32_L3_QOS_Mask_2                                  COS2                           COS1.Data
    IA32_L3_QOS_Mask_3                                  COS3                           COS1.Code
    IA32_L3_QOS_Mask_4                                  COS4                           COS2.Data
    IA32_L3_QOS_Mask_5                                  COS5                           COS2.Code
    ....                                                ....                           ....
    IA32_L3_QOS_Mask_’2n’                               COS’2n’                        COS’n’.Data
    IA32_L3_QOS_Mask_’2n+1’                             COS’2n+1’                      COS’n’.Code

One can derive the MSR address for the data mask or code mask for a given COS number ‘n’ by:
•          data_mask_address (n) = base + (n <<1), where base is the address of IA32_L3_QOS_MASK_0.
•          code_mask_address (n) = base + (n <<1) +1.
When CDP is enabled, each COS is mapped 1:2 with mask MSRs, with one mask enabling programmatic control
over data fill location and one mask enabling control over data placement. A variety of overlapped and isolated
mask configurations are possible (see the example in Figure 17-29).
Mask MSR field definitions remain the same. Capacity masks must be formed of contiguous set bits, with a length
of 1 bit or longer and should not exceed the maximum mask length specified in CPUID. As examples, valid masks
on a cache with max bitmask length of 16b (from CPUID) include 0xFFFF, 0xFF00, 0x00FF, 0x00F0, 0x0001,
0x0003 and so on. Maximum valid mask lengths are unchanged whether CDP is enabled or disabled, and writes of
invalid mask values may lead to undefined behavior. Writes to reserved bits will generate #GP(0).

17.17.4.2 L3 CAT: Disabling CDP
Before enabling or disabling CDP, software should write all 1's to all of the CAT/CDP masks to ensure proper
behavior (e.g., the IA32_L3_QOS_Mask_n set of MSRs).
Software should also account for the fact that mask interpretations change when CDP is enabled or disabled,
meaning for instance that a CAT mask for a given COS may become a code mask for a different Class of Service
when CDP is enabled. In order to simplify this behavior and prevent unintended remapping software should
consider resetting all threads to COS[0] before enabling or disabling CDP.

17.17.5            Cache Allocation Technology Programming Considerations

17.17.5.1 Cache Allocation Technology Dynamic Configuration
Both the CAT masks and CQM registers are accessible and modifiable at any time during execution using
RDMSR/WRMSR unless otherwise noted. When writing to these MSRs a #GP(0) will be generated if any of the
following conditions occur:
•          A reserved bit is modified,

•   Accessing a QOS mask register outside the supported COS (the max COS number is specified in
    CPUID.(EAX=10H, ECX=ResID):EDX[15:0]), or
•   Writing a COS greater than the supported maximum (specified as the maximum value of CPUID.(EAX=10H,
    ECX=ResID):EDX[15:0] for all valid ResID values) is written to the IA32_PQR_ASSOC.CLOS field.
When CDP is enabled, specifying a COS value in IA32_PQR_ASSOC.COS outside of the lower half of the COS space
will cause undefined performance impact to code and data fetches due to MSR space re-indexing into code/data
masks when CDP is enabled.
When reading the IA32_PQR_ASSOC register the currently programmed COS on the core will be returned.
When reading an IA32_resourceType_MASK_n register the current capacity bit mask for COS 'n' will be returned.
As noted previously, software should minimize migrations of COS across logical processors (across threads or
cores), as a reduction in the accuracy of the Cache Allocation feature may result if COS are migrated frequently.
This is aligned with the industry standard practice of minimizing unnecessary thread migrations across processor
cores in order to avoid excessive time spent warming up processor caches after a migration. In general, for best
performance, minimize thread migration and COS migration across processor logical threads and processor cores.

17.17.5.2 Cache Allocation Technology Operation With Power Saving Features
Note that the Cache Allocation Technology feature cannot be used to enforce cache coherency, and that some
advanced power management features such as C-states which may shrink or power off various caches within the
system may interfere with CAT hints - in such cases the CAT bitmasks are ignored and the other features take
precedence. If the highest possible level of CAT differentiation or determinism is required, disable any power-
saving features which shrink the caches or power off caches. The details of the power management interfaces are
typically implementation-specific, but can be found at Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s
Manual, Volume 3C.
If software requires differentiation between threads but not absolute determinism then in many cases it is possible
to leave power-saving cache shrink features enabled, which can provide substantial power savings and increase
battery life in mobile platforms. In such cases when the caches are powered off (e.g., package C-states) the entire
cache of a portion thereof may be powered off. Upon resuming an active state any new incoming data to the cache
will be filled subject to the cache capacity bitmasks. Any data in the cache prior to the cache shrink or power off
may have been flushed to memory during the process of entering the idle state, however, and is not guaranteed to
remain in the cache. If differentiation between threads is the goal of system software then this model allows
substantial power savings while continuing to deliver performance differentiation. If system software needs
optimal determinism then power saving modes which flush portions of the caches and power them off should be
disabled.

                                                      NOTE
        IA32_PQR_ASSOC is saved and restored across C6 entry/exit. Similarly, the mask register contents
        are saved across package C-state entry/exit and are not lost.

17.17.5.3 Cache Allocation Technology Operation with Other Operating Modes
The states in IA32_PQR_ASSOC and mask registers are unmodified across an SMI delivery. Thus, the execution of
SMM handler code can interact with the Cache Allocation Technology resource and manifest some degree of non-
determinism to the non-SMM software stack. An SMM handler may also perform certain system-level or power
management practices that affect CAT operation.
It is possible for an SMM handler to minimize the impact on data determinism in the cache by reserving a COS with
a dedicated partition in the cache. Such an SMM handler can switch to the dedicated COS immediately upon
entering SMM, and switching back to the previously running COS upon exit.

17.17.5.4 Associating Threads with CAT/CDP Classes of Service
Threads are associated with Classes of Service (CLOS) via the per-logical-processor IA32_PQR_ASSOC MSR. The
same COS concept applies to both CAT and CDP (for instance, COS[5] means the same thing whether CAT or CDP
is in use, and the COS has associated resource usage constraint attributes including cache capacity masks). The
mapping of COS to mask MSRs does change when CDP is enabled, according to the following guidelines:
•   In CAT-only Mode - one set of bitmasks in one mask MSR control both code and data.
    — Each COS number map 1:1 with a capacity mask on the applicable resource (e.g., L3 cache).
•   When CDP is enabled,
    — Two mask sets exist for each COS number, one for code, one for data.
    — Masks for code/data are interleaved in the MSR address space (see Table 17-19).

