                                                                                            CHAPTER 20

IA-32 processors (beginning with the Intel386 processor) provide two ways to execute new or legacy programs
that are assembled and/or compiled to run on an Intel 8086 processor:
•   Real-address mode.
•   Virtual-8086 mode.
Figure 2-3 shows the relationship of these operating modes to protected mode and system management mode
(SMM).
When the processor is powered up or reset, it is placed in the real-address mode. This operating mode almost
exactly duplicates the execution environment of the Intel 8086 processor, with some extensions. Virtually any
program assembled and/or compiled to run on an Intel 8086 processor will run on an IA-32 processor in this mode.
When running in protected mode, the processor can be switched to virtual-8086 mode to run 8086 programs. This
mode also duplicates the execution environment of the Intel 8086 processor, with extensions. In virtual-8086
mode, an 8086 program runs as a separate protected-mode task. Legacy 8086 programs are thus able to run
under an operating system (such as Microsoft Windows*) that takes advantage of protected mode and to use
protected-mode facilities, such as the protected-mode interrupt- and exception-handling facilities. Protected-mode
multitasking permits multiple virtual-8086 mode tasks (with each task running a separate 8086 program) to be run
on the processor along with other non-virtual-8086 mode tasks.
This section describes both the basic real-address mode execution environment and the virtual-8086-mode execu-
tion environment, available on the IA-32 processors beginning with the Intel386 processor.

20.1        REAL-ADDRESS MODE
The IA-32 architecture’s real-address mode runs programs written for the Intel 8086, Intel 8088, Intel 80186, and
Intel 80188 processors, or for the real-address mode of the Intel 286, Intel386, Intel486, Pentium, P6 family,
Pentium 4, and Intel Xeon processors.
The execution environment of the processor in real-address mode is designed to duplicate the execution environ-
ment of the Intel 8086 processor. To an 8086 program, a processor operating in real-address mode behaves like a
high-speed 8086 processor. The principal features of this architecture are defined in Chapter 3, “Basic Execution
Environment”, of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1.
The following is a summary of the core features of the real-address mode execution environment as would be seen
by a program written for the 8086:
•   The processor supports a nominal 1-MByte physical address space (see Section 20.1.1, “Address Translation in
    Real-Address Mode”, for specific details). This address space is divided into segments, each of which can be up
    to 64 KBytes in length. The base of a segment is specified with a 16-bit segment selector, which is zero
    extended to form a 20-bit offset from address 0 in the address space. An operand within a segment is
    addressed with a 16-bit offset from the base of the segment. A physical address is thus formed by adding the
    offset to the 20-bit segment base (see Section 20.1.1, “Address Translation in Real-Address Mode”).
•   All operands in “native 8086 code” are 8-bit or 16-bit values. (Operand size override prefixes can be used to
    access 32-bit operands.)
•   Eight 16-bit general-purpose registers are provided: AX, BX, CX, DX, SP, BP, SI, and DI. The extended 32 bit
    registers (EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX, ESP, EBP, ESI, and EDI) are accessible to programs that explicitly perform a size
    override operation.
•   Four segment registers are provided: CS, DS, SS, and ES. (The FS and GS registers are accessible to programs
    that explicitly access them.) The CS register contains the segment selector for the code segment; the DS and
    ES registers contain segment selectors for data segments; and the SS register contains the segment selector
    for the stack segment.
•   The 8086 16-bit instruction pointer (IP) is mapped to the lower 16-bits of the EIP register. Note this register is
    a 32-bit register and unintentional address wrapping may occur.

•   The 16-bit FLAGS register contains status and control flags. (This register is mapped to the 16 least significant
    bits of the 32-bit EFLAGS register.)
•   All of the Intel 8086 instructions are supported (see Section 20.1.3, “Instructions Supported in Real-Address
    Mode”).
•   A single, 16-bit-wide stack is provided for handling procedure calls and invocations of interrupt and exception
    handlers. This stack is contained in the stack segment identified with the SS register. The SP (stack pointer)
    register contains an offset into the stack segment. The stack grows down (toward lower segment offsets) from
    the stack pointer. The BP (base pointer) register also contains an offset into the stack segment that can be used
    as a pointer to a parameter list. When a CALL instruction is executed, the processor pushes the current
    instruction pointer (the 16 least-significant bits of the EIP register and, on far calls, the current value of the CS
    register) onto the stack. On a return, initiated with a RET instruction, the processor pops the saved instruction
    pointer from the stack into the EIP register (and CS register on far returns). When an implicit call to an interrupt
    or exception handler is executed, the processor pushes the EIP, CS, and EFLAGS (low-order 16-bits only)
    registers onto the stack. On a return from an interrupt or exception handler, initiated with an IRET instruction,
    the processor pops the saved instruction pointer and EFLAGS image from the stack into the EIP, CS, and
    EFLAGS registers.
•   A single interrupt table, called the “interrupt vector table” or “interrupt table,” is provided for handling
    interrupts and exceptions (see Figure 20-2). The interrupt table (which has 4-byte entries) takes the place of
    the interrupt descriptor table (IDT, with 8-byte entries) used when handling protected-mode interrupts and
    exceptions. Interrupt and exception vector numbers provide an index to entries in the interrupt table. Each
    entry provides a pointer (called a “vector”) to an interrupt- or exception-handling procedure. See Section
    20.1.4, “Interrupt and Exception Handling”, for more details. It is possible for software to relocate the IDT by
    means of the LIDT instruction on IA-32 processors beginning with the Intel386 processor.
•   The x87 FPU is active and available to execute x87 FPU instructions in real-address mode. Programs written to
    run on the Intel 8087 and Intel 287 math coprocessors can be run in real-address mode without modification.
The following extensions to the Intel 8086 execution environment are available in the IA-32 architecture’s real-
address mode. If backwards compatibility to Intel 286 and Intel 8086 processors is required, these features should
not be used in new programs written to run in real-address mode.
•   Two additional segment registers (FS and GS) are available.
•   Many of the integer and system instructions that have been added to later IA-32 processors can be executed in
    real-address mode (see Section 20.1.3, “Instructions Supported in Real-Address Mode”).
•   The 32-bit operand prefix can be used in real-address mode programs to execute the 32-bit forms of instruc-
    tions. This prefix also allows real-address mode programs to use the processor’s 32-bit general-purpose
    registers.
•   The 32-bit address prefix can be used in real-address mode programs, allowing 32-bit offsets.
The following sections describe address formation, registers, available instructions, and interrupt and exception
handling in real-address mode. For information on I/O in real-address mode, see Chapter 18, “Input/Output”, of
the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1.

20.1.1         Address Translation in Real-Address Mode
In real-address mode, the processor does not interpret segment selectors as indexes into a descriptor table;
instead, it uses them directly to form linear addresses as the 8086 processor does. It shifts the segment selector
left by 4 bits to form a 20-bit base address (see Figure 20-1). The offset into a segment is added to the base
address to create a linear address that maps directly to the physical address space.
When using 8086-style address translation, it is possible to specify addresses larger than 1 MByte. For example,
with a segment selector value of FFFFH and an offset of FFFFH, the linear (and physical) address would be 10FFEFH
(1 megabyte plus 64 KBytes). The 8086 processor, which can form addresses only up to 20 bits long, truncates the
high-order bit, thereby “wrapping” this address to FFEFH. When operating in real-address mode, however, the
processor does not truncate such an address and uses it as a physical address. (Note, however, that for IA-32
processors beginning with the Intel486 processor, the A20M# signal can be used in real-address mode to mask
address line A20, thereby mimicking the 20-bit wrap-around behavior of the 8086 processor.) Care should be take
to ensure that A20M# based address wrapping is handled correctly in multiprocessor based system.

                                  19                                                   4 3             0

                          Base                    16-bit Segment Selector                    0 0 0 0

                           +      19      16 15                                                        0

                         Offset    0 0 0 0                  16-bit Effective Address

                           =      19                                                                   0
                         Linear
                        Address                         20-bit Linear Address

                                  Figure 20-1. Real-Address Mode Address Translation

The IA-32 processors beginning with the Intel386 processor can generate 32-bit offsets using an address override
prefix; however, in real-address mode, the value of a 32-bit offset may not exceed FFFFH without causing an
exception.
For full compatibility with Intel 286 real-address mode, pseudo-protection faults (interrupt 12 or 13) occur if a 32-
bit offset is generated outside the range 0 through FFFFH.

20.1.2      Registers Supported in Real-Address Mode
The register set available in real-address mode includes all the registers defined for the 8086 processor plus the
new registers introduced in later IA-32 processors, such as the FS and GS segment registers, the debug registers,
the control registers, and the floating-point unit registers. The 32-bit operand prefix allows a real-address mode
program to use the 32-bit general-purpose registers (EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX, ESP, EBP, ESI, and EDI).

20.1.3      Instructions Supported in Real-Address Mode
The following instructions make up the core instruction set for the 8086 processor. If backwards compatibility to
the Intel 286 and Intel 8086 processors is required, only these instructions should be used in a new program
written to run in real-address mode.
•   Move (MOV) instructions that move operands between general-purpose registers, segment registers, and
    between memory and general-purpose registers.
•   The exchange (XCHG) instruction.
•   Load segment register instructions LDS and LES.
•   Arithmetic instructions ADD, ADC, SUB, SBB, MUL, IMUL, DIV, IDIV, INC, DEC, CMP, and NEG.
•   Logical instructions AND, OR, XOR, and NOT.
•   Decimal instructions DAA, DAS, AAA, AAS, AAM, and AAD.
•   Stack instructions PUSH and POP (to general-purpose registers and segment registers).
•   Type conversion instructions CWD, CDQ, CBW, and CWDE.
•   Shift and rotate instructions SAL, SHL, SHR, SAR, ROL, ROR, RCL, and RCR.
•   TEST instruction.
•   Control instructions JMP, Jcc, CALL, RET, LOOP, LOOPE, and LOOPNE.
•   Interrupt instructions INT n, INTO, and IRET.
•   EFLAGS control instructions STC, CLC, CMC, CLD, STD, LAHF, SAHF, PUSHF, and POPF.
•   I/O instructions IN, INS, OUT, and OUTS.
•   Load effective address (LEA) instruction, and translate (XLATB) instruction.

•   LOCK prefix.
•   Repeat prefixes REP, REPE, REPZ, REPNE, and REPNZ.
•   Processor halt (HLT) instruction.
•   No operation (NOP) instruction.
The following instructions, added to later IA-32 processors (some in the Intel 286 processor and the remainder in
the Intel386 processor), can be executed in real-address mode, if backwards compatibility to the Intel 8086
processor is not required.
•   Move (MOV) instructions that operate on the control and debug registers.
•   Load segment register instructions LSS, LFS, and LGS.
•   Generalized multiply instructions and multiply immediate data.
•   Shift and rotate by immediate counts.
•   Stack instructions PUSHA, PUSHAD, POPA and POPAD, and PUSH immediate data.
•   Move with sign extension instructions MOVSX and MOVZX.
•   Long-displacement Jcc instructions.
•   Exchange instructions CMPXCHG, CMPXCHG8B, and XADD.
•   String instructions MOVS, CMPS, SCAS, LODS, and STOS.
•   Bit test and bit scan instructions BT, BTS, BTR, BTC, BSF, and BSR; the byte-set-on condition instruction SETcc;
    and the byte swap (BSWAP) instruction.
•   Double shift instructions SHLD and SHRD.
•   EFLAGS control instructions PUSHF and POPF.
•   ENTER and LEAVE control instructions.
•   BOUND instruction.
•   CPU identification (CPUID) instruction.
•   System instructions CLTS, INVD, WINVD, INVLPG, LGDT, SGDT, LIDT, SIDT, LMSW, SMSW, RDMSR, WRMSR,
    RDTSC, and RDPMC.
Execution of any of the other IA-32 architecture instructions (not given in the previous two lists) in real-address
mode result in an invalid-opcode exception (#UD) being generated.

20.1.4         Interrupt and Exception Handling
When operating in real-address mode, software must provide interrupt and exception-handling facilities that are
separate from those provided in protected mode. Even during the early stages of processor initialization when the
processor is still in real-address mode, elementary real-address mode interrupt and exception-handling facilities
must be provided to insure reliable operation of the processor, or the initialization code must insure that no inter-
rupts or exceptions will occur.
The IA-32 processors handle interrupts and exceptions in real-address mode similar to the way they handle them
in protected mode. When a processor receives an interrupt or generates an exception, it uses the vector number of
the interrupt or exception as an index into the interrupt table. (In protected mode, the interrupt table is called the
interrupt descriptor table (IDT), but in real-address mode, the table is usually called the interrupt vector
table, or simply the interrupt table.) The entry in the interrupt vector table provides a pointer to an interrupt- or
exception-handler procedure. (The pointer consists of a segment selector for a code segment and a 16-bit offset
into the segment.) The processor performs the following actions to make an implicit call to the selected handler:
1. Pushes the current values of the CS and EIP registers onto the stack. (Only the 16 least-significant bits of the
   EIP register are pushed.)
2. Pushes the low-order 16 bits of the EFLAGS register onto the stack.
3. Clears the IF flag in the EFLAGS register to disable interrupts.
4. Clears the TF, RF, and AC flags, in the EFLAGS register.

5. Transfers program control to the location specified in the interrupt vector table.
An IRET instruction at the end of the handler procedure reverses these steps to return program control to the inter-
rupted program. Exceptions do not return error codes in real-address mode.
The interrupt vector table is an array of 4-byte entries (see Figure 20-2). Each entry consists of a far pointer to a
handler procedure, made up of a segment selector and an offset. The processor scales the interrupt or exception
vector by 4 to obtain an offset into the interrupt table. Following reset, the base of the interrupt vector table is
located at physical address 0 and its limit is set to 3FFH. In the Intel 8086 processor, the base address and limit of
the interrupt vector table cannot be changed. In the later IA-32 processors, the base address and limit of the inter-
rupt vector table are contained in the IDTR register and can be changed using the LIDT instruction.
(For backward compatibility to Intel 8086 processors, the default base address and limit of the interrupt vector
table should not be changed.)

                                                                    Up to Entry 255

                                                                        Entry 3
                                                                                          12

                                                                        Entry 2
                                                                                          8

                                                                        Entry 1
                                                                                          4

                                                                   Segment Selector       2
                     Interrupt Vector 0*
                                                                        Offset            0
                                                    15                                0
                     * Interrupt vector number 0 selects entry 0
                       (called “interrupt vector 0”) in the interrupt                          IDTR
                       vector table. Interrupt vector 0 in turn
                       points to the start of the interrupt handler
                       for interrupt 0.

                               Figure 20-2. Interrupt Vector Table in Real-Address Mode

Table 20-1 shows the interrupt and exception vectors that can be generated in real-address mode and virtual-8086
mode, and in the Intel 8086 processor. See Chapter 6, “Interrupt and Exception Handling”, for a description of the
exception conditions.

20.2        VIRTUAL-8086 MODE
Virtual-8086 mode is actually a special type of a task that runs in protected mode. When the operating-system or
executive switches to a virtual-8086-mode task, the processor emulates an Intel 8086 processor. The execution
environment of the processor while in the 8086-emulation state is the same as is described in Section 20.1, “Real-
Address Mode” for real-address mode, including the extensions. The major difference between the two modes is
that in virtual-8086 mode the 8086 emulator uses some protected-mode services (such as the protected-mode
interrupt and exception-handling and paging facilities).

As in real-address mode, any new or legacy program that has been assembled and/or compiled to run on an Intel
8086 processor will run in a virtual-8086-mode task. And several 8086 programs can be run as virtual-8086-mode
tasks concurrently with normal protected-mode tasks, using the processor’s multitasking facilities.
                                    Table 20-1. Real-Address Mode Exceptions and Interrupts
 Vector        Description                               Real-Address Mode      Virtual-8086 Mode       Intel 8086 Processor
 No.
    0          Divide Error (#DE)                        Yes                    Yes                     Yes
    1          Debug Exception (#DB)                     Yes                    Yes                     No
    2          NMI Interrupt                             Yes                    Yes                     Yes
    3          Breakpoint (#BP)                          Yes                    Yes                     Yes
    4          Overflow (#OF)                            Yes                    Yes                     Yes
    5          BOUND Range Exceeded (#BR)                Yes                    Yes                     Reserved
    6          Invalid Opcode (#UD)                      Yes                    Yes                     Reserved
    7          Device Not Available (#NM)                Yes                    Yes                     Reserved
    8          Double Fault (#DF)                        Yes                    Yes                     Reserved
    9          (Intel reserved. Do not use.)             Reserved               Reserved                Reserved
 10            Invalid TSS (#TS)                         Reserved               Yes                     Reserved
 11            Segment Not Present (#NP)                 Reserved               Yes                     Reserved
 12            Stack Fault (#SS)                         Yes                    Yes                     Reserved
 13            General Protection (#GP)*                 Yes                    Yes                     Reserved
 14            Page Fault (#PF)                          Reserved               Yes                     Reserved
 15            (Intel reserved. Do not use.)             Reserved               Reserved                Reserved
 16            Floating-Point Error (#MF)                Yes                    Yes                     Reserved
 17            Alignment Check (#AC)                     Reserved               Yes                     Reserved
 18            Machine Check (#MC)                       Yes                    Yes                     Reserved
 19-31         (Intel reserved. Do not use.)             Reserved               Reserved                Reserved
 32-255        User Defined Interrupts                   Yes                    Yes                     Yes
 NOTE:
 * In the real-address mode, vector 13 is the segment overrun exception. In protected and virtual-8086 modes, this exception cov-
   ers all general-protection error conditions, including traps to the virtual-8086 monitor from virtual-8086 mode.

20.2.1          Enabling Virtual-8086 Mode
The processor runs in virtual-8086 mode when the VM (virtual machine) flag in the EFLAGS register is set. This flag
can only be set when the processor switches to a new protected-mode task or resumes virtual-8086 mode via an
IRET instruction.
System software cannot change the state of the VM flag directly in the EFLAGS register (for example, by using the
POPFD instruction). Instead it changes the flag in the image of the EFLAGS register stored in the TSS or on the
stack following a call to an interrupt- or exception-handler procedure. For example, software sets the VM flag in the
EFLAGS image in the TSS when first creating a virtual-8086 task.
The processor tests the VM flag under three general conditions:
•       When loading segment registers, to determine whether to use 8086-style address translation.
•       When decoding instructions, to determine which instructions are not supported in virtual-8086 mode and which
        instructions are sensitive to IOPL.

•   When checking privileged instructions, on page accesses, or when performing other permission checks.
    (Virtual-8086 mode always executes at CPL 3.)

20.2.2      Structure of a Virtual-8086 Task
A virtual-8086-mode task consists of the following items:
•   A 32-bit TSS for the task.
•   The 8086 program.
•   A virtual-8086 monitor.
•   8086 operating-system services.
The TSS of the new task must be a 32-bit TSS, not a 16-bit TSS, because the 16-bit TSS does not load the most-
significant word of the EFLAGS register, which contains the VM flag. All TSS’s, stacks, data, and code used to handle
exceptions when in virtual-8086 mode must also be 32-bit segments.
The processor enters virtual-8086 mode to run the 8086 program and returns to protected mode to run the virtual-
8086 monitor.
The virtual-8086 monitor is a 32-bit protected-mode code module that runs at a CPL of 0. The monitor consists of
initialization, interrupt- and exception-handling, and I/O emulation procedures that emulate a personal computer
or other 8086-based platform. Typically, the monitor is either part of or closely associated with the protected-mode
general-protection (#GP) exception handler, which also runs at a CPL of 0. As with any protected-mode code
module, code-segment descriptors for the virtual-8086 monitor must exist in the GDT or in the task’s LDT. The
virtual-8086 monitor also may need data-segment descriptors so it can examine the IDT or other parts of the 8086
program in the first 1 MByte of the address space. The linear addresses above 10FFEFH are available for the
monitor, the operating system, and other system software.
The 8086 operating-system services consists of a kernel and/or operating-system procedures that the 8086
program makes calls to. These services can be implemented in either of the following two ways:
•   They can be included in the 8086 program. This approach is desirable for either of the following reasons:
    — The 8086 program code modifies the 8086 operating-system services.
    — There is not sufficient development time to merge the 8086 operating-system services into main operating
      system or executive.
•   They can be implemented or emulated in the virtual-8086 monitor. This approach is desirable for any of the
    following reasons:
    — The 8086 operating-system procedures can be more easily coordinated among several virtual-8086 tasks.
    — Memory can be saved by not duplicating 8086 operating-system procedure code for several virtual-8086
      tasks.
    — The 8086 operating-system procedures can be easily emulated by calls to the main operating system or
      executive.
The approach chosen for implementing the 8086 operating-system services may result in different virtual-8086-
mode tasks using different 8086 operating-system services.

20.2.3      Paging of Virtual-8086 Tasks
Even though a program running in virtual-8086 mode can use only 20-bit linear addresses, the processor converts
these addresses into 32-bit linear addresses before mapping them to the physical address space. If paging is being
used, the 8086 address space for a program running in virtual-8086 mode can be paged and located in a set of
pages in physical address space. If paging is used, it is transparent to the program running in virtual-8086 mode
just as it is for any task running on the processor.
Paging is not necessary for a single virtual-8086-mode task, but paging is useful or necessary in the following situ-
ations:

•   When running multiple virtual-8086-mode tasks. Here, paging allows the lower 1 MByte of the linear address
    space for each virtual-8086-mode task to be mapped to a different physical address location.
•   When emulating the 8086 address-wraparound that occurs at 1 MByte. When using 8086-style address trans-
    lation, it is possible to specify addresses larger than 1 MByte. These addresses automatically wraparound in the
    Intel 8086 processor (see Section 20.1.1, “Address Translation in Real-Address Mode”). If any 8086 programs
    depend on address wraparound, the same effect can be achieved in a virtual-8086-mode task by mapping the
    linear addresses between 100000H and 110000H and linear addresses between 0 and 10000H to the same
    physical addresses.
•   When sharing the 8086 operating-system services or ROM code that is common to several 8086 programs
    running as different 8086-mode tasks.
•   When redirecting or trapping references to memory-mapped I/O devices.

20.2.4         Protection within a Virtual-8086 Task
Protection is not enforced between the segments of an 8086 program. Either of the following techniques can be
used to protect the system software running in a virtual-8086-mode task from the 8086 program:
•   Reserve the first 1 MByte plus 64 KBytes of each task’s linear address space for the 8086 program. An 8086
    processor task cannot generate addresses outside this range.
•   Use the U/S flag of page-table entries to protect the virtual-8086 monitor and other system software in the
    virtual-8086 mode task space. When the processor is in virtual-8086 mode, the CPL is 3. Therefore, an 8086
    processor program has only user privileges. If the pages of the virtual-8086 monitor have supervisor privilege,
    they cannot be accessed by the 8086 program.

20.2.5         Entering Virtual-8086 Mode
Figure 20-3 summarizes the methods of entering and leaving virtual-8086 mode. The processor switches to
virtual-8086 mode in either of the following situations:
•   Task switch when the VM flag is set to 1 in the EFLAGS register image stored in the TSS for the task. Here the
    task switch can be initiated in either of two ways:
    — A CALL or JMP instruction.
    — An IRET instruction, where the NT flag in the EFLAGS image is set to 1.
•   Return from a protected-mode interrupt or exception handler when the VM flag is set to 1 in the EFLAGS
    register image on the stack.
When a task switch is used to enter virtual-8086 mode, the TSS for the virtual-8086-mode task must be a 32-bit
TSS. (If the new TSS is a 16-bit TSS, the upper word of the EFLAGS register is not in the TSS, causing the processor
to clear the VM flag when it loads the EFLAGS register.) The processor updates the VM flag prior to loading the
segment registers from their images in the new TSS. The new setting of the VM flag determines whether the
processor interprets the contents of the segment registers as 8086-style segment selectors or protected-mode
segment selectors. When the VM flag is set, the segment registers are loaded from the TSS, using 8086-style
address translation to form base addresses.
See Section 20.3, “Interrupt and Exception Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode”, for information on entering virtual-
8086 mode on a return from an interrupt or exception handler.

                                            Real Mode
                                              Code
                  Real-Address
                  Mode                                   PE=0 or
                                     PE=1                RESET

                                                           Task Switch      Protected-       CALL
                  Protected                Protected-      VM=0           Mode Interrupt                 Virtual-8086
                  Mode                    Mode Tasks                      and Exception                    Monitor
                                                                             Handlers         RET

                                   Task Switch1
                                                  VM = 0
                                                  VM = 1

                                                               Interrupt or
                  Virtual-8086                                 Exception2
                  Mode                    Virtual-8086         #GP Exception3
                                 RESET    Mode Tasks
                                             (8086             IRET4
                                          Programs)            IRET5

                                                               Redirect Interrupt to 8086 Program
                                                               Interrupt or Exception Handler6

                                 NOTES:
                                 1. Task switch carried out in either of two ways:
                                     - CALL or JMP where the VM flag in the EFLAGS image is 1.
                                     - IRET where VM is 1 and NT is 1.
                                 2. Hardware interrupt or exception; software interrupt (INT n) when IOPL is 3.
                                 3. General-protection exception caused by software interrupt (INT n), IRET,
                                     POPF, PUSHF, IN, or OUT when IOPL is less than 3.
                                 4. Normal return from protected-mode interrupt or exception handler.
                                 5. A return from the 8086 monitor to redirect an interrupt or exception back
                                    to an interrupt or exception handler in the 8086 program running in virtual-
                                    8086 mode.
                                 6. Internal redirection of a software interrupt (INT n) when VME is 1,
                                    IOPL is <3, and the redirection bit is 1.

                                 Figure 20-3. Entering and Leaving Virtual-8086 Mode

20.2.6      Leaving Virtual-8086 Mode
The processor can leave the virtual-8086 mode only through an interrupt or exception. The following are situations
where an interrupt or exception will lead to the processor leaving virtual-8086 mode (see Figure 20-3):
•   The processor services a hardware interrupt generated to signal the suspension of execution of the virtual-
    8086 application. This hardware interrupt may be generated by a timer or other external mechanism. Upon
    receiving the hardware interrupt, the processor enters protected mode and switches to a protected-mode (or
    another virtual-8086 mode) task either through a task gate in the protected-mode IDT or through a trap or
    interrupt gate that points to a handler that initiates a task switch. A task switch from a virtual-8086 task to
    another task loads the EFLAGS register from the TSS of the new task. The value of the VM flag in the new
    EFLAGS determines if the new task executes in virtual-8086 mode or not.
•   The processor services an exception caused by code executing the virtual-8086 task or services a hardware
    interrupt that “belongs to” the virtual-8086 task. Here, the processor enters protected mode and services the

    exception or hardware interrupt through the protected-mode IDT (normally through an interrupt or trap gate)
    and the protected-mode exception- and interrupt-handlers. The processor may handle the exception or
    interrupt within the context of the virtual 8086 task and return to virtual-8086 mode on a return from the
    handler procedure. The processor may also execute a task switch and handle the exception or interrupt in the
    context of another task.
•   The processor services a software interrupt generated by code executing in the virtual-8086 task (such as a
    software interrupt to call a MS-DOS* operating system routine). The processor provides several methods of
    handling these software interrupts, which are discussed in detail in Section 20.3.3, “Class 3—Software
    Interrupt Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode”. Most of them involve the processor entering protected mode, often
    by means of a general-protection (#GP) exception. In protected mode, the processor can send the interrupt to
    the virtual-8086 monitor for handling and/or redirect the interrupt back to the application program running in
    virtual-8086 mode task for handling.
    IA-32 processors that incorporate the virtual mode extension (enabled with the VME flag in control register
    CR4) are capable of redirecting software-generated interrupts back to the program’s interrupt handlers without
    leaving virtual-8086 mode. See Section 20.3.3.4, “Method 5: Software Interrupt Handling”, for more
    information on this mechanism.
•   A hardware reset initiated by asserting the RESET or INIT pin is a special kind of interrupt. When a RESET or
    INIT is signaled while the processor is in virtual-8086 mode, the processor leaves virtual-8086 mode and enters
    real-address mode.
•   Execution of the HLT instruction in virtual-8086 mode will cause a general-protection (GP#) fault, which the
    protected-mode handler generally sends to the virtual-8086 monitor. The virtual-8086 monitor then
    determines the correct execution sequence after verifying that it was entered as a result of a HLT execution.
See Section 20.3, “Interrupt and Exception Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode”, for information on leaving virtual-8086
mode to handle an interrupt or exception generated in virtual-8086 mode.

20.2.7          Sensitive Instructions
When an IA-32 processor is running in virtual-8086 mode, the CLI, STI, PUSHF, POPF, INT n, and IRET instructions
are sensitive to IOPL. The IN, INS, OUT, and OUTS instructions, which are sensitive to IOPL in protected mode, are
not sensitive in virtual-8086 mode.
The CPL is always 3 while running in virtual-8086 mode; if the IOPL is less than 3, an attempt to use the IOPL-
sensitive instructions listed above triggers a general-protection exception (#GP). These instructions are sensitive
to IOPL to give the virtual-8086 monitor a chance to emulate the facilities they affect.

20.2.8          Virtual-8086 Mode I/O
Many 8086 programs written for non-multitasking systems directly access I/O ports. This practice may cause prob-
lems in a multitasking environment. If more than one program accesses the same port, they may interfere with
each other. Most multitasking systems require application programs to access I/O ports through the operating
system. This results in simplified, centralized control.
The processor provides I/O protection for creating I/O that is compatible with the environment and transparent to
8086 programs. Designers may take any of several possible approaches to protecting I/O ports:
•   Protect the I/O address space and generate exceptions for all attempts to perform I/O directly.
•   Let the 8086 program perform I/O directly.
•   Generate exceptions on attempts to access specific I/O ports.
•   Generate exceptions on attempts to access specific memory-mapped I/O ports.
The method of controlling access to I/O ports depends upon whether they are I/O-port mapped or memory
mapped.

20.2.8.1       I/O-Port-Mapped I/O
The I/O permission bit map in the TSS can be used to generate exceptions on attempts to access specific I/O port
addresses. The I/O permission bit map of each virtual-8086-mode task determines which I/O addresses generate
exceptions for that task. Because each task may have a different I/O permission bit map, the addresses that
generate exceptions for one task may be different from the addresses for another task. This differs from protected
mode in which, if the CPL is less than or equal to the IOPL, I/O access is allowed without checking the I/O permis-
sion bit map. See Chapter 18, “Input/Output”, in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s
Manual, Volume 1, for more information about the I/O permission bit map.

20.2.8.2       Memory-Mapped I/O
In systems which use memory-mapped I/O, the paging facilities of the processor can be used to generate excep-
tions for attempts to access I/O ports. The virtual-8086 monitor may use paging to control memory-mapped I/O in
these ways:
•   Map part of the linear address space of each task that needs to perform I/O to the physical address space
    where I/O ports are placed. By putting the I/O ports at different addresses (in different pages), the paging
    mechanism can enforce isolation between tasks.
•   Map part of the linear address space to pages that are not-present. This generates an exception whenever a
    task attempts to perform I/O to those pages. System software then can interpret the I/O operation being
    attempted.
Software emulation of the I/O space may require too much operating system intervention under some conditions.
In these cases, it may be possible to generate an exception for only the first attempt to access I/O. The system
software then may determine whether a program can be given exclusive control of I/O temporarily, the protection
of the I/O space may be lifted, and the program allowed to run at full speed.

20.2.8.3       Special I/O Buffers
Buffers of intelligent controllers (for example, a bit-mapped frame buffer) also can be emulated using page
mapping. The linear space for the buffer can be mapped to a different physical space for each virtual-8086-mode
task. The virtual-8086 monitor then can control which virtual buffer to copy onto the real buffer in the physical
address space.

20.3          INTERRUPT AND EXCEPTION HANDLING IN VIRTUAL-8086 MODE
When the processor receives an interrupt or detects an exception condition while in virtual-8086 mode, it invokes
an interrupt or exception handler, just as it does in protected or real-address mode. The interrupt or exception
handler that is invoked and the mechanism used to invoke it depends on the class of interrupt or exception that has
been detected or generated and the state of various system flags and fields.
In virtual-8086 mode, the interrupts and exceptions are divided into three classes for the purposes of handling:
•   Class 1 — All processor-generated exceptions and all hardware interrupts, including the NMI interrupt and the
    hardware interrupts sent to the processor’s external interrupt delivery pins. All class 1 exceptions and
    interrupts are handled by the protected-mode exception and interrupt handlers.
•   Class 2 — Special case for maskable hardware interrupts (Section 6.3.2, “Maskable Hardware Interrupts”)
    when the virtual mode extensions are enabled.
•   Class 3 — All software-generated interrupts, that is interrupts generated with the INT n instruction1.
The method the processor uses to handle class 2 and 3 interrupts depends on the setting of the following flags and
fields:
•   IOPL field (bits 12 and 13 in the EFLAGS register) — Controls how class 3 software interrupts are handled
    when the processor is in virtual-8086 mode (see Section 2.3, “System Flags and Fields in the EFLAGS

1. The INT 3 instruction is a special case (see the description of the INT n instruction in Chapter 3, “Instruction Set Reference, A-L”, of
   the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2A).

    Register”). This field also controls the enabling of the VIF and VIP flags in the EFLAGS register when the VME
    flag is set. The VIF and VIP flags are provided to assist in the handling of class 2 maskable hardware interrupts.
•   VME flag (bit 0 in control register CR4) — Enables the virtual mode extension for the processor when set
    (see Section 2.5, “Control Registers”).
•   Software interrupt redirection bit map (32 bytes in the TSS, see Figure 20-5) — Contains 256 flags
    that indicates how class 3 software interrupts should be handled when they occur in virtual-8086 mode. A
    software interrupt can be directed either to the interrupt and exception handlers in the currently running 8086
    program or to the protected-mode interrupt and exception handlers.
•   The virtual interrupt flag (VIF) and virtual interrupt pending flag (VIP) in the EFLAGS register —
    Provides virtual interrupt support for the handling of class 2 maskable hardware interrupts (see Section
    20.3.2, “Class 2—Maskable Hardware Interrupt Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode Using the Virtual Interrupt
    Mechanism”).

                                                       NOTE
        The VME flag, software interrupt redirection bit map, and VIF and VIP flags are only available in IA-
        32 processors that support the virtual mode extensions. These extensions were introduced in the
        IA-32 architecture with the Pentium processor.
The following sections describe the actions that processor takes and the possible actions of interrupt and exception
handlers for the two classes of interrupts described in the previous paragraphs. These sections describe three
possible types of interrupt and exception handlers:
•   Protected-mode interrupt and exceptions handlers — These are the standard handlers that the processor
    calls through the protected-mode IDT.
•   Virtual-8086 monitor interrupt and exception handlers — These handlers are resident in the virtual-8086
    monitor, and they are commonly accessed through a general-protection exception (#GP, interrupt 13) that is
    directed to the protected-mode general-protection exception handler.
•   8086 program interrupt and exception handlers — These handlers are part of the 8086 program that is
    running in virtual-8086 mode.
The following sections describe how these handlers are used, depending on the selected class and method of inter-
rupt and exception handling.

20.3.1          Class 1—Hardware Interrupt and Exception Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode
In virtual-8086 mode, the Pentium, P6 family, Pentium 4, and Intel Xeon processors handle hardware interrupts
and exceptions in the same manner as they are handled by the Intel486 and Intel386 processors. They invoke the
protected-mode interrupt or exception handler that the interrupt or exception vector points to in the IDT. Here, the
IDT entry must contain either a 32-bit trap or interrupt gate or a task gate. The following sections describe various
ways that a virtual-8086 mode interrupt or exception can be handled after the protected-mode handler has been
invoked.
See Section 20.3.2, “Class 2—Maskable Hardware Interrupt Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode Using the Virtual Inter-
rupt Mechanism”, for a description of the virtual interrupt mechanism that is available for handling maskable hard-
ware interrupts while in virtual-8086 mode. When this mechanism is either not available or not enabled, maskable
hardware interrupts are handled in the same manner as exceptions, as described in the following sections.

20.3.1.1        Handling an Interrupt or Exception Through a Protected-Mode Trap or Interrupt Gate
When an interrupt or exception vector points to a 32-bit trap or interrupt gate in the IDT, the gate must in turn
point to a nonconforming, privilege-level 0, code segment. When accessing this code segment, processor performs
the following steps.
1. Switches to 32-bit protected mode and privilege level 0.
2. Saves the state of the processor on the privilege-level 0 stack. The states of the EIP, CS, EFLAGS, ESP, SS, ES,
   DS, FS, and GS registers are saved (see Figure 20-4).

3. Clears the segment registers. Saving the DS, ES, FS, and GS registers on the stack and then clearing the
   registers lets the interrupt or exception handler safely save and restore these registers regardless of the type
   segment selectors they contain (protected-mode or 8086-style). The interrupt and exception handlers, which
   may be called in the context of either a protected-mode task or a virtual-8086-mode task, can use the same
   code sequences for saving and restoring the registers for any task. Clearing these registers before execution of
   the IRET instruction does not cause a trap in the interrupt handler. Interrupt procedures that expect values in
   the segment registers or that return values in the segment registers must use the register images saved on the
   stack for privilege level 0.
4. Clears VM, NT, RF and TF flags (in the EFLAGS register). If the gate is an interrupt gate, clears the IF flag.
5. Begins executing the selected interrupt or exception handler.
If the trap or interrupt gate references a procedure in a conforming segment or in a segment at a privilege level
other than 0, the processor generates a general-protection exception (#GP). Here, the error code is the segment
selector of the code segment to which a call was attempted.

                         Without Error Code                    With Error Code

                                               ESP from                            ESP from
                               Unused                              Unused
                                               TSS                                 TSS
                                   Old GS                              Old GS

                                   Old FS                              Old FS

                                   Old DS                              Old DS

                                   Old ES                              Old ES

                                   Old SS                              Old SS

                              Old ESP                             Old ESP

                            Old EFLAGS                          Old EFLAGS

                                   Old CS                              Old CS

                               Old EIP         New ESP             Old EIP

                                                                 Error Code        New ESP

                               Figure 20-4. Privilege Level 0 Stack After Interrupt or
                                          Exception in Virtual-8086 Mode

Interrupt and exception handlers can examine the VM flag on the stack to determine if the interrupted procedure
was running in virtual-8086 mode. If so, the interrupt or exception can be handled in one of three ways:
•   The protected-mode interrupt or exception handler that was called can handle the interrupt or exception.
•   The protected-mode interrupt or exception handler can call the virtual-8086 monitor to handle the interrupt or
    exception.
•   The virtual-8086 monitor (if called) can in turn pass control back to the 8086 program’s interrupt and exception
    handler.
If the interrupt or exception is handled with a protected-mode handler, the handler can return to the interrupted
program in virtual-8086 mode by executing an IRET instruction. This instruction loads the EFLAGS and segment
registers from the images saved in the privilege level 0 stack (see Figure 20-4). A set VM flag in the EFLAGS image
causes the processor to switch back to virtual-8086 mode. The CPL at the time the IRET instruction is executed
must be 0, otherwise the processor does not change the state of the VM flag.

The virtual-8086 monitor runs at privilege level 0, like the protected-mode interrupt and exception handlers. It is
commonly closely tied to the protected-mode general-protection exception (#GP, vector 13) handler. If the
protected-mode interrupt or exception handler calls the virtual-8086 monitor to handle the interrupt or exception,
the return from the virtual-8086 monitor to the interrupted virtual-8086 mode program requires two return
instructions: a RET instruction to return to the protected-mode handler and an IRET instruction to return to the
interrupted program.
The virtual-8086 monitor has the option of directing the interrupt and exception back to an interrupt or exception
handler that is part of the interrupted 8086 program, as described in Section 20.3.1.2, “Handling an Interrupt or
Exception With an 8086 Program Interrupt or Exception Handler”.

20.3.1.2        Handling an Interrupt or Exception With an 8086 Program Interrupt or Exception Handler
Because it was designed to run on an 8086 processor, an 8086 program running in a virtual-8086-mode task
contains an 8086-style interrupt vector table, which starts at linear address 0. If the virtual-8086 monitor correctly
directs an interrupt or exception vector back to the virtual-8086-mode task it came from, the handlers in the 8086
program can handle the interrupt or exception. The virtual-8086 monitor must carry out the following steps to send
an interrupt or exception back to the 8086 program:
1. Use the 8086 interrupt vector to locate the appropriate handler procedure in the 8086 program interrupt table.
2. Store the EFLAGS (low-order 16 bits only), CS and EIP values of the 8086 program on the privilege-level 3
   stack. This is the stack that the virtual-8086-mode task is using. (The 8086 handler may use or modify this
   information.)
3. Change the return link on the privilege-level 0 stack to point to the privilege-level 3 handler procedure.
4. Execute an IRET instruction to pass control to the 8086 program handler.
5. When the IRET instruction from the privilege-level 3 handler triggers a general-protection exception (#GP) and
   thus effectively again calls the virtual-8086 monitor, restore the return link on the privilege-level 0 stack to
   point to the original, interrupted, privilege-level 3 procedure.
6. Copy the low order 16 bits of the EFLAGS image from the privilege-level 3 stack to the privilege-level 0 stack
   (because some 8086 handlers modify these flags to return information to the code that caused the interrupt).
7. Execute an IRET instruction to pass control back to the interrupted 8086 program.
Note that if an operating system intends to support all 8086 MS-DOS-based programs, it is necessary to use the
actual 8086 interrupt and exception handlers supplied with the program. The reason for this is that some programs
modify their own interrupt vector table to substitute (or hook in series) their own specialized interrupt and excep-
tion handlers.

20.3.1.3        Handling an Interrupt or Exception Through a Task Gate
When an interrupt or exception vector points to a task gate in the IDT, the processor performs a task switch to the
selected interrupt- or exception-handling task. The following actions are carried out as part of this task switch:
1. The EFLAGS register with the VM flag set is saved in the current TSS.
2. The link field in the TSS of the called task is loaded with the segment selector of the TSS for the interrupted
   virtual-8086-mode task.
3. The EFLAGS register is loaded from the image in the new TSS, which clears the VM flag and causes the
   processor to switch to protected mode.
4. The NT flag in the EFLAGS register is set.
5. The processor begins executing the selected interrupt- or exception-handler task.
When an IRET instruction is executed in the handler task and the NT flag in the EFLAGS register is set, the proces-
sors switches from a protected-mode interrupt- or exception-handler task back to a virtual-8086-mode task. Here,
the EFLAGS and segment registers are loaded from images saved in the TSS for the virtual-8086-mode task. If the
VM flag is set in the EFLAGS image, the processor switches back to virtual-8086 mode on the task switch. The CPL
at the time the IRET instruction is executed must be 0, otherwise the processor does not change the state of the
VM flag.

20.3.2       Class 2—Maskable Hardware Interrupt Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode Using the
             Virtual Interrupt Mechanism
Maskable hardware interrupts are those interrupts that are delivered through the INTR# pin or through an inter-
rupt request to the local APIC (see Section 6.3.2, “Maskable Hardware Interrupts”). These interrupts can be inhib-
ited (masked) from interrupting an executing program or task by clearing the IF flag in the EFLAGS register.
When the VME flag in control register CR4 is set and the IOPL field in the EFLAGS register is less than 3, two addi-
tional flags are activated in the EFLAGS register:
•   VIF (virtual interrupt) flag, bit 19 of the EFLAGS register.
•   VIP (virtual interrupt pending) flag, bit 20 of the EFLAGS register.
These flags provide the virtual-8086 monitor with more efficient control over handling maskable hardware inter-
rupts that occur during virtual-8086 mode tasks. They also reduce interrupt-handling overhead, by eliminating the
need for all IF related operations (such as PUSHF, POPF, CLI, and STI instructions) to trap to the virtual-8086
monitor. The purpose and use of these flags are as follows.

                                                         NOTE
         The VIF and VIP flags are only available in IA-32 processors that support the virtual mode
         extensions. These extensions were introduced in the IA-32 architecture with the Pentium
         processor. When this mechanism is either not available or not enabled, maskable hardware
         interrupts are handled as class 1 interrupts. Here, if VIF and VIP flags are needed, the virtual-8086
         monitor can implement them in software.

Existing 8086 programs commonly set and clear the IF flag in the EFLAGS register to enable and disable maskable
hardware interrupts, respectively; for example, to disable interrupts while handling another interrupt or an excep-
tion. This practice works well in single task environments, but can cause problems in multitasking and multiple-
processor environments, where it is often desirable to prevent an application program from having direct control
over the handling of hardware interrupts. When using earlier IA-32 processors, this problem was often solved by
creating a virtual IF flag in software. The IA-32 processors (beginning with the Pentium processor) provide hard-
ware support for this virtual IF flag through the VIF and VIP flags.
The VIF flag is a virtualized version of the IF flag, which an application program running from within a virtual-8086
task can used to control the handling of maskable hardware interrupts. When the VIF flag is enabled, the CLI and
STI instructions operate on the VIF flag instead of the IF flag. When an 8086 program executes the CLI instruction,
the processor clears the VIF flag to request that the virtual-8086 monitor inhibit maskable hardware interrupts
from interrupting program execution; when it executes the STI instruction, the processor sets the VIF flag
requesting that the virtual-8086 monitor enable maskable hardware interrupts for the 8086 program. But actually
the IF flag, managed by the operating system, always controls whether maskable hardware interrupts are enabled.
Also, if under these circumstances an 8086 program tries to read or change the IF flag using the PUSHF or POPF
instructions, the processor will change the VIF flag instead, leaving IF unchanged.
The VIP flag provides software a means of recording the existence of a deferred (or pending) maskable hardware
interrupt. This flag is read by the processor but never explicitly written by the processor; it can only be written by
software.
If the IF flag is set and the VIF and VIP flags are enabled, and the processor receives a maskable hardware inter-
rupt (interrupt vector 0 through 255), the processor performs and the interrupt handler software should perform
the following operations:
1. The processor invokes the protected-mode interrupt handler for the interrupt received, as described in the
   following steps. These steps are almost identical to those described for method 1 interrupt and exception
   handling in Section 20.3.1.1, “Handling an Interrupt or Exception Through a Protected-Mode Trap or Interrupt
   Gate”:
    a. Switches to 32-bit protected mode and privilege level 0.
    b. Saves the state of the processor on the privilege-level 0 stack. The states of the EIP, CS, EFLAGS, ESP, SS,
       ES, DS, FS, and GS registers are saved (see Figure 20-4).
    c.   Clears the segment registers.

    d. Clears the VM flag in the EFLAGS register.
    e. Begins executing the selected protected-mode interrupt handler.
2. The recommended action of the protected-mode interrupt handler is to read the VM flag from the EFLAGS
   image on the stack. If this flag is set, the handler makes a call to the virtual-8086 monitor.
3. The virtual-8086 monitor should read the VIF flag in the EFLAGS register.
    — If the VIF flag is clear, the virtual-8086 monitor sets the VIP flag in the EFLAGS image on the stack to
      indicate that there is a deferred interrupt pending and returns to the protected-mode handler.
    — If the VIF flag is set, the virtual-8086 monitor can handle the interrupt if it “belongs” to the 8086 program
      running in the interrupted virtual-8086 task; otherwise, it can call the protected-mode interrupt handler to
      handle the interrupt.
4. The protected-mode handler executes a return to the program executing in virtual-8086 mode.
5. Upon returning to virtual-8086 mode, the processor continues execution of the 8086 program.
When the 8086 program is ready to receive maskable hardware interrupts, it executes the STI instruction to set the
VIF flag (enabling maskable hardware interrupts). Prior to setting the VIF flag, the processor automatically checks
the VIP flag and does one of the following, depending on the state of the flag:
•   If the VIP flag is clear (indicating no pending interrupts), the processor sets the VIF flag.
•   If the VIP flag is set (indicating a pending interrupt), the processor generates a general-protection exception
    (#GP).
The recommended action of the protected-mode general-protection exception handler is to then call the virtual-
8086 monitor and let it handle the pending interrupt. After handling the pending interrupt, the typical action of the
virtual-8086 monitor is to clear the VIP flag and set the VIF flag in the EFLAGS image on the stack, and then
execute a return to the virtual-8086 mode. The next time the processor receives a maskable hardware interrupt, it
will then handle it as described in steps 1 through 5 earlier in this section.
If the processor finds that both the VIF and VIP flags are set at the beginning of an instruction, it generates a
general-protection exception. This action allows the virtual-8086 monitor to handle the pending interrupt for the
virtual-8086 mode task for which the VIF flag is enabled. Note that this situation can only occur immediately
following execution of a POPF or IRET instruction or upon entering a virtual-8086 mode task through a task switch.
Note that the states of the VIF and VIP flags are not modified in real-address mode or during transitions between
real-address and protected modes.

                                                        NOTE
        The virtual interrupt mechanism described in this section is also available for use in protected
        mode, see Section 20.4, “Protected-Mode Virtual Interrupts”.

20.3.3          Class 3—Software Interrupt Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode
When the processor receives a software interrupt (an interrupt generated with the INT n instruction) while in
virtual-8086 mode, it can use any of six different methods to handle the interrupt. The method selected depends
on the settings of the VME flag in control register CR4, the IOPL field in the EFLAGS register, and the software inter-
rupt redirection bit map in the TSS. Table 20-2 lists the six methods of handling software interrupts in virtual-8086
mode and the respective settings of the VME flag, IOPL field, and the bits in the interrupt redirection bit map for
each method. The table also summarizes the various actions the processor takes for each method.
The VME flag enables the virtual mode extensions for the Pentium and later IA-32 processors. When this flag is
clear, the processor responds to interrupts and exceptions in virtual-8086 mode in the same manner as an Intel386
or Intel486 processor does. When this flag is set, the virtual mode extension provides the following enhancements
to virtual-8086 mode:
•   Speeds up the handling of software-generated interrupts in virtual-8086 mode by allowing the processor to
    bypass the virtual-8086 monitor and redirect software interrupts back to the interrupt handlers that are part of
    the currently running 8086 program.
•   Supports virtual interrupts for software written to run on the 8086 processor.

The IOPL value interacts with the VME flag and the bits in the interrupt redirection bit map to determine how
specific software interrupts should be handled.
The software interrupt redirection bit map (see Figure 20-5) is a 32-byte field in the TSS. This map is located
directly below the I/O permission bit map in the TSS. Each bit in the interrupt redirection bit map is mapped to an
interrupt vector. Bit 0 in the interrupt redirection bit map (which maps to vector zero in the interrupt table) is
located at the I/O base map address in the TSS minus 32 bytes. When a bit in this bit map is set, it indicates that
the associated software interrupt (interrupt generated with an INT n instruction) should be handled through the
protected-mode IDT and interrupt and exception handlers. When a bit in this bit map is clear, the processor redi-
rects the associated software interrupt back to the interrupt table in the 8086 program (located at linear address 0
in the program’s address space).

                                                                NOTE
        The software interrupt redirection bit map does not affect hardware generated interrupts and
        exceptions. Hardware generated interrupts and exceptions are always handled by the protected-
        mode interrupt and exception handlers.

                       Table 20-2. Software Interrupt Handling Methods While in Virtual-8086 Mode
                       Bit in
                       Redir.
Method VME       IOPL Bitmap*                                                Processor Action
   1       0       3         X     Interrupt directed to a protected-mode interrupt handler:
                                   •   Switches to privilege-level 0 stack
                                   •   Pushes GS, FS, DS and ES onto privilege-level 0 stack
                                   •   Pushes SS, ESP, EFLAGS, CS and EIP of interrupted task onto privilege-level 0 stack
                                   •   Clears VM, RF, NT, and TF flags
                                   •   If serviced through interrupt gate, clears IF flag
                                   •   Clears GS, FS, DS and ES to 0
                                   •   Sets CS and EIP from interrupt gate
   2       0      <3         X     Interrupt directed to protected-mode general-protection exception (#GP) handler.
   3       1      <3         1     Interrupt directed to a protected-mode general-protection exception (#GP) handler; VIF and VIP
                                   flag support for handling class 2 maskable hardware interrupts.
   4       1       3         1     Interrupt directed to protected-mode interrupt handler: (see method 1 processor action).
   5       1       3         0     Interrupt redirected to 8086 program interrupt handler:
                                   •   Pushes EFLAGS
                                   •   Pushes CS and EIP (lower 16 bits only)
                                   •   Clears IF flag
                                   •   Clears TF flag
                                   •   Loads CS and EIP (lower 16 bits only) from selected entry in the interrupt vector table of the
                                       current virtual-8086 task
   6       1      <3         0     Interrupt redirected to 8086 program interrupt handler; VIF and VIP flag support for handling class
                                   2 maskable hardware interrupts:
                                   •   Pushes EFLAGS with IOPL set to 3 and VIF copied to IF
                                   •   Pushes CS and EIP (lower 16 bits only)
                                   •   Clears the VIF flag
                                   •   Clears TF flag
                                   •   Loads CS and EIP (lower 16 bits only) from selected entry in the interrupt vector table of the
                                       current virtual-8086 task
NOTE:
* When set to 0, software interrupt is redirected back to the 8086 program interrupt handler; when set to 1, interrupt is directed to
  protected-mode handler.

                                     31             24 23   Task-State Segment (TSS)                 0
                   Last byte of       1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
                   bit
                   map must be
                                                              I/O Permission Bit Map

                                                 Software Interrupt Redirection Bit Map (32 Bytes)

                                               I/O Map Base                                              64H
                   I/O map
                   base must
                   not exceed
                   DFFFH.
                                                                                                         0

                                Figure 20-5. Software Interrupt Redirection Bit Map in TSS

Redirecting software interrupts back to the 8086 program potentially speeds up interrupt handling because a
switch back and forth between virtual-8086 mode and protected mode is not required. This latter interrupt-
handling technique is particularly useful for 8086 operating systems (such as MS-DOS) that use the INT n instruc-
tion to call operating system procedures.
The CPUID instruction can be used to verify that the virtual mode extension is implemented on the processor. Bit 1
of the feature flags register (EDX) indicates the availability of the virtual mode extension (see “CPUID—CPU Iden-
tification” in Chapter 3, “Instruction Set Reference, A-L”, of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Devel-
oper’s Manual, Volume 2A).
The following sections describe the six methods (or mechanisms) for handling software interrupts in virtual-8086
mode. See Section 20.3.2, “Class 2—Maskable Hardware Interrupt Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode Using the Virtual
Interrupt Mechanism”, for a description of the use of the VIF and VIP flags in the EFLAGS register for handling
maskable hardware interrupts.

20.3.3.1        Method 1: Software Interrupt Handling
When the VME flag in control register CR4 is clear and the IOPL field is 3, a Pentium or later IA-32 processor
handles software interrupts in the same manner as they are handled by an Intel386 or Intel486 processor. It
executes an implicit call to the interrupt handler in the protected-mode IDT pointed to by the interrupt vector. See
Section 20.3.1, “Class 1—Hardware Interrupt and Exception Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode”, for a complete
description of this mechanism and its possible uses.

20.3.3.2        Methods 2 and 3: Software Interrupt Handling
When a software interrupt occurs in virtual-8086 mode and the method 2 or 3 conditions are present, the processor
generates a general-protection exception (#GP). Method 2 is enabled when the VME flag is set to 0 and the IOPL
value is less than 3. Here the IOPL value is used to bypass the protected-mode interrupt handlers and cause any
software interrupt that occurs in virtual-8086 mode to be treated as a protected-mode general-protection excep-
tion (#GP). The general-protection exception handler calls the virtual-8086 monitor, which can then emulate an
8086-program interrupt handler or pass control back to the 8086 program’s handler, as described in Section
20.3.1.2, “Handling an Interrupt or Exception With an 8086 Program Interrupt or Exception Handler”.
Method 3 is enabled when the VME flag is set to 1, the IOPL value is less than 3, and the corresponding bit for the
software interrupt in the software interrupt redirection bit map is set to 1. Here, the processor performs the same

operation as it does for method 2 software interrupt handling. If the corresponding bit for the software interrupt in
the software interrupt redirection bit map is set to 0, the interrupt is handled using method 6 (see Section
20.3.3.5, “Method 6: Software Interrupt Handling”).

20.3.3.3    Method 4: Software Interrupt Handling
Method 4 handling is enabled when the VME flag is set to 1, the IOPL value is 3, and the bit for the interrupt vector
in the redirection bit map is set to 1. Method 4 software interrupt handling allows method 1 style handling when the
virtual mode extension is enabled; that is, the interrupt is directed to a protected-mode handler (see Section
20.3.3.1, “Method 1: Software Interrupt Handling”).

20.3.3.4    Method 5: Software Interrupt Handling
Method 5 software interrupt handling provides a streamlined method of redirecting software interrupts (invoked
with the INT n instruction) that occur in virtual 8086 mode back to the 8086 program’s interrupt vector table and
its interrupt handlers. Method 5 handling is enabled when the VME flag is set to 1, the IOPL value is 3, and the bit
for the interrupt vector in the redirection bit map is set to 0. The processor performs the following actions to make
an implicit call to the selected 8086 program interrupt handler:
1. Pushes the low-order 16 bits of the EFLAGS register onto the stack.
2. Pushes the current values of the CS and EIP registers onto the current stack. (Only the 16 least-significant bits
   of the EIP register are pushed and no stack switch occurs.)
3. Clears the IF flag in the EFLAGS register to disable interrupts.
4. Clears the TF flag, in the EFLAGS register.
5. Locates the 8086 program interrupt vector table at linear address 0 for the 8086-mode task.
6. Loads the CS and EIP registers with values from the interrupt vector table entry pointed to by the interrupt
   vector number. Only the 16 low-order bits of the EIP are loaded and the 16 high-order bits are set to 0. The
   interrupt vector table is assumed to be at linear address 0 of the current virtual-8086 task.
7. Begins executing the selected interrupt handler.
An IRET instruction at the end of the handler procedure reverses these steps to return program control to the inter-
rupted 8086 program.
Note that with method 5 handling, a mode switch from virtual-8086 mode to protected mode does not occur. The
processor remains in virtual-8086 mode throughout the interrupt-handling operation.
The method 5 handling actions are virtually identical to the actions the processor takes when handling software
interrupts in real-address mode. The benefit of using method 5 handling to access the 8086 program handlers is
that it avoids the overhead of methods 2 and 3 handling, which requires first going to the virtual-8086 monitor,
then to the 8086 program handler, then back again to the virtual-8086 monitor, before returning to the interrupted
8086 program (see Section 20.3.1.2, “Handling an Interrupt or Exception With an 8086 Program Interrupt or
Exception Handler”).

                                                       NOTE
        Methods 1 and 4 handling can handle a software interrupt in a virtual-8086 task with a regular
        protected-mode handler, but this approach requires all virtual-8086 tasks to use the same software
        interrupt handlers, which generally does not give sufficient latitude to the programs running in the
        virtual-8086 tasks, particularly MS-DOS programs.

20.3.3.5    Method 6: Software Interrupt Handling
Method 6 handling is enabled when the VME flag is set to 1, the IOPL value is less than 3, and the bit for the inter-
rupt or exception vector in the redirection bit map is set to 0. With method 6 interrupt handling, software interrupts
are handled in the same manner as was described for method 5 handling (see Section 20.3.3.4, “Method 5: Soft-
ware Interrupt Handling”).

Method 6 differs from method 5 in that with the IOPL value set to less than 3, the VIF and VIP flags in the EFLAGS
register are enabled, providing virtual interrupt support for handling class 2 maskable hardware interrupts (see
Section 20.3.2, “Class 2—Maskable Hardware Interrupt Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode Using the Virtual Interrupt
Mechanism”). These flags provide the virtual-8086 monitor with an efficient means of handling maskable hardware
interrupts that occur during a virtual-8086 mode task. Also, because the IOPL value is less than 3 and the VIF flag
is enabled, the information pushed on the stack by the processor when invoking the interrupt handler is slightly
different between methods 5 and 6 (see Table 20-2).

20.4            PROTECTED-MODE VIRTUAL INTERRUPTS
The IA-32 processors (beginning with the Pentium processor) also support the VIF and VIP flags in the EFLAGS
register in protected mode by setting the PVI (protected-mode virtual interrupt) flag in the CR4 register. Setting
the PVI flag allows applications running at privilege level 3 to execute the CLI and STI instructions without causing
a general-protection exception (#GP) or affecting hardware interrupts.
When the PVI flag is set to 1, the CPL is 3, and the IOPL is less than 3, the STI and CLI instructions set and clear
the VIF flag in the EFLAGS register, leaving IF unaffected. In this mode of operation, an application running in
protected mode and at a CPL of 3 can inhibit interrupts in the same manner as is described in Section 20.3.2, “Class
2—Maskable Hardware Interrupt Handling in Virtual-8086 Mode Using the Virtual Interrupt Mechanism”, for a
virtual-8086 mode task. When the application executes the CLI instruction, the processor clears the VIF flag. If the
processor receives a maskable hardware interrupt, the processor invokes the protected-mode interrupt handler.
This handler checks the state of the VIF flag in the EFLAGS register. If the VIF flag is clear (indicating that the active
task does not want to have interrupts handled now), the handler sets the VIP flag in the EFLAGS image on the stack
and returns to the privilege-level 3 application, which continues program execution. When the application executes
a STI instruction to set the VIF flag, the processor automatically invokes the general-protection exception handler,
which can then handle the pending interrupt. After handing the pending interrupt, the handler typically sets the VIF
flag and clears the VIP flag in the EFLAGS image on the stack and executes a return to the application program. The
next time the processor receives a maskable hardware interrupt, the processor will handle it in the normal manner
for interrupts received while the processor is operating at a CPL of 3.
As with the virtual mode extension (enabled with the VME flag in the CR4 register), the protected-mode virtual
interrupt extension only affects maskable hardware interrupts (interrupt vectors 32 through 255). NMI interrupts
and exceptions are handled in the normal manner.
When protected-mode virtual interrupts are disabled (that is, when the PVI flag in control register CR4 is set to 0,
the CPL is less than 3, or the IOPL value is 3), then the CLI and STI instructions execute in a manner compatible
with the Intel486 processor. That is, if the CPL is greater (less privileged) than the I/O privilege level (IOPL), a
general-protection exception occurs. If the IOPL value is 3, CLI and STI clear or set the IF flag, respectively.
PUSHF, POPF, IRET and INT are executed like in the Intel486 processor, regardless of whether protected-mode
virtual interrupts are enabled.
It is only possible to enter virtual-8086 mode through a task switch or the execution of an IRET instruction, and it
is only possible to leave virtual-8086 mode by faulting to a protected-mode interrupt handler (typically the general-
protection exception handler, which in turn calls the virtual 8086-mode monitor). In both cases, the EFLAGS
register is saved and restored. This is not true, however, in protected mode when the PVI flag is set and the
processor is not in virtual-8086 mode. Here, it is possible to call a procedure at a different privilege level, in which
case the EFLAGS register is not saved or modified. However, the states of VIF and VIP flags are never examined by
the processor when the CPL is not 3.

