                                                                                          CHAPTER 21

Program modules written to run on IA-32 processors can be either 16-bit modules or 32-bit modules. Table 21-1
shows the characteristic of 16-bit and 32-bit modules.

                               Table 21-1. Characteristics of 16-Bit and 32-Bit Program Modules
                    Characteristic                         16-Bit Program Modules             32-Bit Program Modules
    Segment Size                                 0 to 64 KBytes                     0 to 4 GBytes
    Operand Sizes                                8 bits and 16 bits                 8 bits and 32 bits
    Pointer Offset Size (Address Size)           16 bits                            32 bits
    Stack Pointer Size                           16 Bits                            32 Bits
    Control Transfers Allowed to Code Segments   16 Bits                            32 Bits
    of This Size

The IA-32 processors function most efficiently when executing 32-bit program modules. They can, however, also
execute 16-bit program modules, in any of the following ways:
•      In real-address mode.
•      In virtual-8086 mode.
•      System management mode (SMM).
•      As a protected-mode task, when the code, data, and stack segments for the task are all configured as a 16-bit
       segments.
•      By integrating 16-bit and 32-bit segments into a single protected-mode task.
•      By integrating 16-bit operations into 32-bit code segments.
Real-address mode, virtual-8086 mode, and SMM are native 16-bit modes. A legacy program assembled and/or
compiled to run on an Intel 8086 or Intel 286 processor should run in real-address mode or virtual-8086 mode
without modification. Sixteen-bit program modules can also be written to run in real-address mode for handling
system initialization or to run in SMM for handling system management functions. See Chapter 20, “8086 Emula-
tion,” for detailed information on real-address mode and virtual-8086 mode; see Chapter 34, “System Manage-
ment Mode,” for information on SMM.
This chapter describes how to integrate 16-bit program modules with 32-bit program modules when operating in
protected mode and how to mix 16-bit and 32-bit code within 32-bit code segments.

21.1            DEFINING 16-BIT AND 32-BIT PROGRAM MODULES
The following IA-32 architecture mechanisms are used to distinguish between and support 16-bit and 32-bit
segments and operations:
•      The D (default operand and address size) flag in code-segment descriptors.
•      The B (default stack size) flag in stack-segment descriptors.
•      16-bit and 32-bit call gates, interrupt gates, and trap gates.
•      Operand-size and address-size instruction prefixes.
•      16-bit and 32-bit general-purpose registers.
The D flag in a code-segment descriptor determines the default operand-size and address-size for the instructions
of a code segment. (In real-address mode and virtual-8086 mode, which do not use segment descriptors, the
default is 16 bits.) A code segment with its D flag set is a 32-bit segment; a code segment with its D flag clear is a
16-bit segment.

The B flag in the stack-segment descriptor specifies the size of stack pointer (the 32-bit ESP register or the 16-bit
SP register) used by the processor for implicit stack references. The B flag for all data descriptors also controls
upper address range for expand down segments.
When transferring program control to another code segment through a call gate, interrupt gate, or trap gate, the
operand size used during the transfer is determined by the type of gate used (16-bit or 32-bit), (not by the D-flag
or prefix of the transfer instruction). The gate type determines how return information is saved on the stack (or
stacks).
For most efficient and trouble-free operation of the processor, 32-bit programs or tasks should have the D flag in
the code-segment descriptor and the B flag in the stack-segment descriptor set, and 16-bit programs or tasks
should have these flags clear. Program control transfers from 16-bit segments to 32-bit segments (and vice versa)
are handled most efficiently through call, interrupt, or trap gates.
Instruction prefixes can be used to override the default operand size and address size of a code segment. These
prefixes can be used in real-address mode as well as in protected mode and virtual-8086 mode. An operand-size or
address-size prefix only changes the size for the duration of the instruction.

21.2           MIXING 16-BIT AND 32-BIT OPERATIONS WITHIN A CODE SEGMENT
The following two instruction prefixes allow mixing of 32-bit and 16-bit operations within one segment:
•   The operand-size prefix (66H)
•   The address-size prefix (67H)
These prefixes reverse the default size selected by the D flag in the code-segment descriptor. For example, the
processor can interpret the (MOV mem, reg) instruction in any of four ways:
•   In a 32-bit code segment:
    — Moves 32 bits from a 32-bit register to memory using a 32-bit effective address.
    — If preceded by an operand-size prefix, moves 16 bits from a 16-bit register to memory using a 32-bit
      effective address.
    — If preceded by an address-size prefix, moves 32 bits from a 32-bit register to memory using a 16-bit
      effective address.
    — If preceded by both an address-size prefix and an operand-size prefix, moves 16 bits from a 16-bit register
      to memory using a 16-bit effective address.
•   In a 16-bit code segment:
    — Moves 16 bits from a 16-bit register to memory using a 16-bit effective address.
    — If preceded by an operand-size prefix, moves 32 bits from a 32-bit register to memory using a 16-bit
      effective address.
    — If preceded by an address-size prefix, moves 16 bits from a 16-bit register to memory using a 32-bit
      effective address.
    — If preceded by both an address-size prefix and an operand-size prefix, moves 32 bits from a 32-bit register
      to memory using a 32-bit effective address.
The previous examples show that any instruction can generate any combination of operand size and address size
regardless of whether the instruction is in a 16- or 32-bit segment. The choice of the 16- or 32-bit default for a code
segment is normally based on the following criteria:
•   Performance — Always use 32-bit code segments when possible. They run much faster than 16-bit code
    segments on P6 family processors, and somewhat faster on earlier IA-32 processors.
•   The operating system the code segment will be running on — If the operating system is a 16-bit
    operating system, it may not support 32-bit program modules.
•   Mode of operation — If the code segment is being designed to run in real-address mode, virtual-8086 mode,
    or SMM, it must be a 16-bit code segment.

•   Backward compatibility to earlier IA-32 processors — If a code segment must be able to run on an Intel
    8086 or Intel 286 processor, it must be a 16-bit code segment.

21.3        SHARING DATA AMONG MIXED-SIZE CODE SEGMENTS
Data segments can be accessed from both 16-bit and 32-bit code segments. When a data segment that is larger
than 64 KBytes is to be shared among 16- and 32-bit code segments, the data that is to be accessed from the 16-
bit code segments must be located within the first 64 KBytes of the data segment. The reason for this is that 16-
bit pointers by definition can only point to the first 64 KBytes of a segment.
A stack that spans less than 64 KBytes can be shared by both 16- and 32-bit code segments. This class of stacks
includes:
•   Stacks in expand-up segments with the G (granularity) and B (big) flags in the stack-segment descriptor clear.
•   Stacks in expand-down segments with the G and B flags clear.
•   Stacks in expand-up segments with the G flag set and the B flag clear and where the stack is contained
    completely within the lower 64 KBytes. (Offsets greater than FFFFH can be used for data, other than the stack,
    which is not shared.)
See Section 3.4.5, “Segment Descriptors,” for a description of the G and B flags and the expand-down stack type.
The B flag cannot, in general, be used to change the size of stack used by a 16-bit code segment. This flag controls
the size of the stack pointer only for implicit stack references such as those caused by interrupts, exceptions, and
the PUSH, POP, CALL, and RET instructions. It does not control explicit stack references, such as accesses to
parameters or local variables. A 16-bit code segment can use a 32-bit stack only if the code is modified so that all
explicit references to the stack are preceded by the 32-bit address-size prefix, causing those references to use 32-
bit addressing and explicit writes to the stack pointer are preceded by a 32-bit operand-size prefix.
In 32-bit, expand-down segments, all offsets may be greater than 64 KBytes; therefore, 16-bit code cannot use
this kind of stack segment unless the code segment is modified to use 32-bit addressing.

21.4        TRANSFERRING CONTROL AMONG MIXED-SIZE CODE SEGMENTS
There are three ways for a procedure in a 16-bit code segment to safely make a call to a 32-bit code segment:
•   Make the call through a 32-bit call gate.
•   Make a 16-bit call to a 32-bit interface procedure. The interface procedure then makes a 32-bit call to the
    intended destination.
•   Modify the 16-bit procedure, inserting an operand-size prefix before the call, to change it to a 32-bit call.
Likewise, there are three ways for procedure in a 32-bit code segment to safely make a call to a 16-bit code
segment:
•   Make the call through a 16-bit call gate. Here, the EIP value at the CALL instruction cannot exceed FFFFH.
•   Make a 32-bit call to a 16-bit interface procedure. The interface procedure then makes a 16-bit call to the
    intended destination.
•   Modify the 32-bit procedure, inserting an operand-size prefix before the call, changing it to a 16-bit call. Be
    certain that the return offset does not exceed FFFFH.
These methods of transferring program control overcome the following architectural limitations imposed on calls
between 16-bit and 32-bit code segments:
•   Pointers from 16-bit code segments (which by default can only be 16 bits) cannot be used to address data or
    code located beyond FFFFH in a 32-bit segment.
•   The operand-size attributes for a CALL and its companion RETURN instruction must be the same to maintain
    stack coherency. This is also true for implicit calls to interrupt and exception handlers and their companion IRET
    instructions.
•   A 32-bit parameters (particularly a pointer parameter) greater than FFFFH cannot be squeezed into a 16-bit
    parameter location on a stack.

•   The size of the stack pointer (SP or ESP) changes when switching between 16-bit and 32-bit code segments.
These limitations are discussed in greater detail in the following sections.

21.4.1         Code-Segment Pointer Size
For control-transfer instructions that use a pointer to identify the next instruction (that is, those that do not use
gates), the operand-size attribute determines the size of the offset portion of the pointer. The implications of this
rule are as follows:
•   A JMP, CALL, or RET instruction from a 32-bit segment to a 16-bit segment is always possible using a 32-bit
    operand size, providing the 32-bit pointer does not exceed FFFFH.
•   A JMP, CALL, or RET instruction from a 16-bit segment to a 32-bit segment cannot address a destination greater
    than FFFFH, unless the instruction is given an operand-size prefix.
See Section 21.4.5, “Writing Interface Procedures,” for an interface procedure that can transfer program control
from 16-bit segments to destinations in 32-bit segments beyond FFFFH.

21.4.2         Stack Management for Control Transfer
Because the stack is managed differently for 16-bit procedure calls than for 32-bit calls, the operand-size attribute
of the RET instruction must match that of the CALL instruction (see Figure 21-1). On a 16-bit call, the processor
pushes the contents of the 16-bit IP register and (for calls between privilege levels) the 16-bit SP register. The
matching RET instruction must also use a 16-bit operand size to pop these 16-bit values from the stack into the 16-
bit registers.
A 32-bit CALL instruction pushes the contents of the 32-bit EIP register and (for inter-privilege-level calls) the 32-
bit ESP register. Here, the matching RET instruction must use a 32-bit operand size to pop these 32-bit values from
the stack into the 32-bit registers. If the two parts of a CALL/RET instruction pair do not have matching operand
sizes, the stack will not be managed correctly and the values of the instruction pointer and stack pointer will not be
restored to correct values.

                                                 Without Privilege Transition

                                    After 16-bit Call                       After 32-bit Call
                                   31                 0                    31                   0

                                    PARM 2 PARM 1                                PARM 2
                          Stack
                          Growth
                                        CS      IP            SP                 PARM 1

                                                                                        CS

                                                                                  EIP               ESP

                                                     With Privilege Transition

                                    After 16-bit Call                       After 32-bit Call
                                   31                 0                    31                   0

                                        SS     SP                                       SS

                                    PARM 2 PARM 1                                 ESP
                          Stack
                          Growth
                                        CS      IP            SP                 PARM 2

                                                                                 PARM 1

                                                                                        CS

                                                                                  EIP               ESP

                               Undefined

                                   Figure 21-1. Stack after Far 16- and 32-Bit Calls

While executing 32-bit code, if a call is made to a 16-bit code segment which is at the same or a more privileged
level (that is, the DPL of the called code segment is less than or equal to the CPL of the calling code segment)
through a 16-bit call gate, then the upper 16-bits of the ESP register may be unreliable upon returning to the 32-
bit code segment (that is, after executing a RET in the 16-bit code segment).
When the CALL instruction and its matching RET instruction are in code segments that have D flags with the same
values (that is, both are 32-bit code segments or both are 16-bit code segments), the default settings may be
used. When the CALL instruction and its matching RET instruction are in segments which have different D-flag
settings, an operand-size prefix must be used.

21.4.2.1     Controlling the Operand-Size Attribute For a Call
Three things can determine the operand-size of a call:
•   The D flag in the segment descriptor for the calling code segment.
•   An operand-size instruction prefix.
•   The type of call gate (16-bit or 32-bit), if a call is made through a call gate.
When a call is made with a pointer (rather than a call gate), the D flag for the calling code segment determines the
operand-size for the CALL instruction. This operand-size attribute can be overridden by prepending an operand-
size prefix to the CALL instruction. So, for example, if the D flag for a code segment is set for 16 bits and the
operand-size prefix is used with a CALL instruction, the processor will cause the information stored on the stack to

be stored in 32-bit format. If the call is to a 32-bit code segment, the instructions in that code segment will be able
to read the stack coherently. Also, a RET instruction from the 32-bit code segment without an operand-size prefix
will maintain stack coherency with the 16-bit code segment being returned to.
When a CALL instruction references a call-gate descriptor, the type of call is determined by the type of call gate (16-
bit or 32-bit). The offset to the destination in the code segment being called is taken from the gate descriptor;
therefore, if a 32-bit call gate is used, a procedure in a 16-bit code segment can call a procedure located more than
64 KBytes from the base of a 32-bit code segment, because a 32-bit call gate uses a 32-bit offset.
Note that regardless of the operand size of the call and how it is determined, the size of the stack pointer used (SP
or ESP) is always controlled by the B flag in the stack-segment descriptor currently in use (that is, when B is clear,
SP is used, and when B is set, ESP is used).
An unmodified 16-bit code segment that has run successfully on an 8086 processor or in real-mode on a later IA-
32 architecture processor will have its D flag clear and will not use operand-size override prefixes. As a result, all
CALL instructions in this code segment will use the 16-bit operand-size attribute. Procedures in these code
segments can be modified to safely call procedures to 32-bit code segments in either of two ways:
•   Relink the CALL instruction to point to 32-bit call gates (see Section 21.4.2.2, “Passing Parameters With a
    Gate”).
•   Add a 32-bit operand-size prefix to each CALL instruction.

21.4.2.2       Passing Parameters With a Gate
When referencing 32-bit gates with 16-bit procedures, it is important to consider the number of parameters passed
in each procedure call. The count field of the gate descriptor specifies the size of the parameter string to copy from
the current stack to the stack of a more privileged (numerically lower privilege level) procedure. The count field of
a 16-bit gate specifies the number of 16-bit words to be copied, whereas the count field of a 32-bit gate specifies
the number of 32-bit doublewords to be copied. The count field for a 32-bit gate must thus be half the size of the
number of words being placed on the stack by a 16-bit procedure. Also, the 16-bit procedure must use an even
number of words as parameters.

21.4.3         Interrupt Control Transfers
A program-control transfer caused by an exception or interrupt is always carried out through an interrupt or trap
gate (located in the IDT). Here, the type of the gate (16-bit or 32-bit) determines the operand-size attribute used
in the implicit call to the exception or interrupt handler procedure in another code segment.
A 32-bit interrupt or trap gate provides a safe interface to a 32-bit exception or interrupt handler when the excep-
tion or interrupt occurs in either a 32-bit or a 16-bit code segment. It is sometimes impractical, however, to place
exception or interrupt handlers in 16-bit code segments, because only 16-bit return addresses are saved on the
stack. If an exception or interrupt occurs in a 32-bit code segment when the EIP was greater than FFFFH, the 16-
bit handler procedure cannot provide the correct return address.

21.4.4         Parameter Translation
When segment offsets or pointers (which contain segment offsets) are passed as parameters between 16-bit and
32-bit procedures, some translation is required. If a 32-bit procedure passes a pointer to data located beyond 64
KBytes to a 16-bit procedure, the 16-bit procedure cannot use it. Except for this limitation, interface code can
perform any format conversion between 32-bit and 16-bit pointers that may be needed.
Parameters passed by value between 32-bit and 16-bit code also may require translation between 32-bit and 16-
bit formats. The form of the translation is application-dependent.

21.4.5         Writing Interface Procedures
Placing interface code between 32-bit and 16-bit procedures can be the solution to the following interface prob-
lems:

•   Allowing procedures in 16-bit code segments to call procedures with offsets greater than FFFFH in 32-bit code
    segments.
•   Matching operand-size attributes between companion CALL and RET instructions.
•   Translating parameters (data), including managing parameter strings with a variable count or an odd number
    of 16-bit words.
•   The possible invalidation of the upper bits of the ESP register.
The interface procedure is simplified where these rules are followed.
1. The interface procedure must reside in a 32-bit code segment (the D flag for the code-segment descriptor is
   set).
2. All procedures that may be called by 16-bit procedures must have offsets not greater than FFFFH.
3. All return addresses saved by 16-bit procedures must have offsets not greater than FFFFH.
The interface procedure becomes more complex if any of these rules are violated. For example, if a 16-bit proce-
dure calls a 32-bit procedure with an entry point beyond FFFFH, the interface procedure will need to provide the
offset to the entry point. The mapping between 16- and 32-bit addresses is only performed automatically when a
call gate is used, because the gate descriptor for a call gate contains a 32-bit address. When a call gate is not used,
the interface code must provide the 32-bit address.
The structure of the interface procedure depends on the types of calls it is going to support, as follows:
•   Calls from 16-bit procedures to 32-bit procedures — Calls to the interface procedure from a 16-bit code
    segment are made with 16-bit CALL instructions (by default, because the D flag for the calling code-segment
    descriptor is clear), and 16-bit operand-size prefixes are used with RET instructions to return from the interface
    procedure to the calling procedure. Calls from the interface procedure to 32-bit procedures are performed with
    32-bit CALL instructions (by default, because the D flag for the interface procedure’s code segment is set), and
    returns from the called procedures to the interface procedure are performed with 32-bit RET instructions (also
    by default).
•   Calls from 32-bit procedures to 16-bit procedures — Calls to the interface procedure from a 32-bit code
    segment are made with 32-bit CALL instructions (by default), and returns to the calling procedure from the
    interface procedure are made with 32-bit RET instructions (also by default). Calls from the interface procedure
    to 16-bit procedures require the CALL instructions to have the operand-size prefixes, and returns from the
    called procedures to the interface procedure are performed with 16-bit RET instructions (by default).

