                                                                 CHAPTER 23

23.1        OVERVIEW
This chapter describes the basics of virtual machine architecture and an overview of the virtual-machine extensions
(VMX) that support virtualization of processor hardware for multiple software environments.
Information about VMX instructions is provided in Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual,
Volume 2B. Other aspects of VMX and system programming considerations are described in chapters of Intel® 64
and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3B.

23.2        VIRTUAL MACHINE ARCHITECTURE
Virtual-machine extensions define processor-level support for virtual machines on IA-32 processors. Two principal
classes of software are supported:
•   Virtual-machine monitors (VMM) — A VMM acts as a host and has full control of the processor(s) and other
    platform hardware. A VMM presents guest software (see next paragraph) with an abstraction of a virtual
    processor and allows it to execute directly on a logical processor. A VMM is able to retain selective control of
    processor resources, physical memory, interrupt management, and I/O.
•   Guest software — Each virtual machine (VM) is a guest software environment that supports a stack consisting
    of operating system (OS) and application software. Each operates independently of other virtual machines and
    uses on the same interface to processor(s), memory, storage, graphics, and I/O provided by a physical
    platform. The software stack acts as if it were running on a platform with no VMM. Software executing in a
    virtual machine must operate with reduced privilege so that the VMM can retain control of platform resources.

23.3        INTRODUCTION TO VMX OPERATION
Processor support for virtualization is provided by a form of processor operation called VMX operation. There are
two kinds of VMX operation: VMX root operation and VMX non-root operation. In general, a VMM will run in VMX
root operation and guest software will run in VMX non-root operation. Transitions between VMX root operation and
VMX non-root operation are called VMX transitions. There are two kinds of VMX transitions. Transitions into VMX
non-root operation are called VM entries. Transitions from VMX non-root operation to VMX root operation are called
VM exits.
Processor behavior in VMX root operation is very much as it is outside VMX operation. The principal differences are
that a set of new instructions (the VMX instructions) is available and that the values that can be loaded into certain
control registers are limited (see Section 23.8).
Processor behavior in VMX non-root operation is restricted and modified to facilitate virtualization. Instead of their
ordinary operation, certain instructions (including the new VMCALL instruction) and events cause VM exits to the
VMM. Because these VM exits replace ordinary behavior, the functionality of software in VMX non-root operation is
limited. It is this limitation that allows the VMM to retain control of processor resources.
There is no software-visible bit whose setting indicates whether a logical processor is in VMX non-root operation.
This fact may allow a VMM to prevent guest software from determining that it is running in a virtual machine.
Because VMX operation places restrictions even on software running with current privilege level (CPL) 0, guest
software can run at the privilege level for which it was originally designed. This capability may simplify the devel-
opment of a VMM.

23.4           LIFE CYCLE OF VMM SOFTWARE
Figure 23-1 illustrates the life cycle of a VMM and its guest software as well as the interactions between them. The
following items summarize that life cycle:
•   Software enters VMX operation by executing a VMXON instruction.
•   Using VM entries, a VMM can then enter guests into virtual machines (one at a time). The VMM effects a
    VM entry using instructions VMLAUNCH and VMRESUME; it regains control using VM exits.
•   VM exits transfer control to an entry point specified by the VMM. The VMM can take action appropriate to the
    cause of the VM exit and can then return to the virtual machine using a VM entry.
•   Eventually, the VMM may decide to shut itself down and leave VMX operation. It does so by executing the
    VMXOFF instruction.

                               Guest 0                                   Guest 1

                          VM Exit                   VM Entry                   VM Exit

                        VMXON                     VM Monitor                   VMXOFF

                         Figure 23-1. Interaction of a Virtual-Machine Monitor and Guests

23.5           VIRTUAL-MACHINE CONTROL STRUCTURE
VMX non-root operation and VMX transitions are controlled by a data structure called a virtual-machine control
structure (VMCS).
Access to the VMCS is managed through a component of processor state called the VMCS pointer (one per logical
processor). The value of the VMCS pointer is the 64-bit address of the VMCS. The VMCS pointer is read and written
using the instructions VMPTRST and VMPTRLD. The VMM configures a VMCS using the VMREAD, VMWRITE, and
VMCLEAR instructions.
A VMM could use a different VMCS for each virtual machine that it supports. For a virtual machine with multiple
logical processors (virtual processors), the VMM could use a different VMCS for each virtual processor.

23.6           DISCOVERING SUPPORT FOR VMX
Before system software enters into VMX operation, it must discover the presence of VMX support in the processor.
System software can determine whether a processor supports VMX operation using CPUID. If
CPUID.1:ECX.VMX[bit 5] = 1, then VMX operation is supported. See Chapter 3, “Instruction Set Reference, A-L” of
Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2A.
The VMX architecture is designed to be extensible so that future processors in VMX operation can support addi-
tional features not present in first-generation implementations of the VMX architecture. The availability of exten-
sible VMX features is reported to software using a set of VMX capability MSRs (see Appendix A, “VMX Capability
Reporting Facility”).

23.7         ENABLING AND ENTERING VMX OPERATION
Before system software can enter VMX operation, it enables VMX by setting CR4.VMXE[bit 13] = 1. VMX operation
is then entered by executing the VMXON instruction. VMXON causes an invalid-opcode exception (#UD) if executed
with CR4.VMXE = 0. Once in VMX operation, it is not possible to clear CR4.VMXE (see Section 23.8). System soft-
ware leaves VMX operation by executing the VMXOFF instruction. CR4.VMXE can be cleared outside of VMX opera-
tion after executing of VMXOFF.
VMXON is also controlled by the IA32_FEATURE_CONTROL MSR (MSR address 3AH). This MSR is cleared to zero
when a logical processor is reset. The relevant bits of the MSR are:
•   Bit 0 is the lock bit. If this bit is clear, VMXON causes a general-protection exception. If the lock bit is set,
    WRMSR to this MSR causes a general-protection exception; the MSR cannot be modified until a power-up reset
    condition. System BIOS can use this bit to provide a setup option for BIOS to disable support for VMX. To
    enable VMX support in a platform, BIOS must set bit 1, bit 2, or both (see below), as well as the lock bit.
•   Bit 1 enables VMXON in SMX operation. If this bit is clear, execution of VMXON in SMX operation causes a
    general-protection exception. Attempts to set this bit on logical processors that do not support both VMX
    operation (see Section 23.6) and SMX operation (see Chapter 6, “Safer Mode Extensions Reference,” in Intel®
    64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2D) cause general-protection exceptions.
•   Bit 2 enables VMXON outside SMX operation. If this bit is clear, execution of VMXON outside SMX
    operation causes a general-protection exception. Attempts to set this bit on logical processors that do not
    support VMX operation (see Section 23.6) cause general-protection exceptions.

                                                               NOTE
         A logical processor is in SMX operation if GETSEC[SEXIT] has not been executed since the last
         execution of GETSEC[SENTER]. A logical processor is outside SMX operation if GETSEC[SENTER]
         has not been executed or if GETSEC[SEXIT] was executed after the last execution of
         GETSEC[SENTER]. See Chapter 6, “Safer Mode Extensions Reference,” in Intel® 64 and IA-32
         Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2D.

Before executing VMXON, software should allocate a naturally aligned 4-KByte region of memory that a logical
processor may use to support VMX operation.1 This region is called the VMXON region. The address of the VMXON
region (the VMXON pointer) is provided in an operand to VMXON. Section 24.11.5, “VMXON Region,” details how
software should initialize and access the VMXON region.

23.8         RESTRICTIONS ON VMX OPERATION
VMX operation places restrictions on processor operation. These are detailed below:
•   In VMX operation, processors may fix certain bits in CR0 and CR4 to specific values and not support other
    values. VMXON fails if any of these bits contains an unsupported value (see “VMXON—Enter VMX Operation” in
    Chapter 30). Any attempt to set one of these bits to an unsupported value while in VMX operation (including
    VMX root operation) using any of the CLTS, LMSW, or MOV CR instructions causes a general-protection
    exception. VM entry or VM exit cannot set any of these bits to an unsupported value. Software should consult
    the VMX capability MSRs IA32_VMX_CR0_FIXED0 and IA32_VMX_CR0_FIXED1 to determine how bits in CR0
    are fixed (see Appendix A.7). For CR4, software should consult the VMX capability MSRs
    IA32_VMX_CR4_FIXED0 and IA32_VMX_CR4_FIXED1 (see Appendix A.8).

                                                              NOTES
         The first processors to support VMX operation require that the following bits be 1 in VMX operation:
         CR0.PE, CR0.NE, CR0.PG, and CR4.VMXE. The restrictions on CR0.PE and CR0.PG imply that VMX
         operation is supported only in paged protected mode (including IA-32e mode). Therefore, guest
         software cannot be run in unpaged protected mode or in real-address mode. See Section 31.2,

1. Future processors may require that a different amount of memory be reserved. If so, this fact is reported to software using the
   VMX capability-reporting mechanism.

         “Supporting Processor Operating Modes in Guest Environments,” for a discussion of how a VMM
         might support guest software that expects to run in unpaged protected mode or in real-address
         mode.
         Later processors support a VM-execution control called “unrestricted guest” (see Section 24.6.2).
         If this control is 1, CR0.PE and CR0.PG may be 0 in VMX non-root operation (even if the capability
         MSR IA32_VMX_CR0_FIXED0 reports otherwise).1 Such processors allow guest software to run in
         unpaged protected mode or in real-address mode.

•   VMXON fails if a logical processor is in A20M mode (see “VMXON—Enter VMX Operation” in Chapter 30). Once
    the processor is in VMX operation, A20M interrupts are blocked. Thus, it is impossible to be in A20M mode in
    VMX operation.
•   The INIT signal is blocked whenever a logical processor is in VMX root operation. It is not blocked in VMX non-
    root operation. Instead, INITs cause VM exits (see Section 25.2, “Other Causes of VM Exits”).
•   Intel® Processor Trace (Intel PT) can be used in VMX operation only if IA32_VMX_MISC[14] is read as 1 (see
    Appendix A.6). On processors that support Intel PT but which do not allow it to be used in VMX operation,
    execution of VMXON clears IA32_RTIT_CTL.TraceEn (see “VMXON—Enter VMX Operation” in Chapter 30); any
    attempt to set that bit while in VMX operation (including VMX root operation) using the WRMSR instruction
    causes a general-protection exception.

1. “Unrestricted guest” is a secondary processor-based VM-execution control. If bit 31 of the primary processor-based VM-execution
   controls is 0, VMX non-root operation functions as if the “unrestricted guest” VM-execution control were 0. See Section 24.6.2.

