                                                                             CHAPTER 24

24.1         OVERVIEW
A logical processor uses virtual-machine control data structures (VMCSs) while it is in VMX operation. These
manage transitions into and out of VMX non-root operation (VM entries and VM exits) as well as processor behavior
in VMX non-root operation. This structure is manipulated by the new instructions VMCLEAR, VMPTRLD, VMREAD,
and VMWRITE.
A VMM can use a different VMCS for each virtual machine that it supports. For a virtual machine with multiple
logical processors (virtual processors), the VMM can use a different VMCS for each virtual processor.
A logical processor associates a region in memory with each VMCS. This region is called the VMCS region.1 Soft-
ware references a specific VMCS using the 64-bit physical address of the region (a VMCS pointer). VMCS pointers
must be aligned on a 4-KByte boundary (bits 11:0 must be zero). These pointers must not set bits beyond the
processor’s physical-address width.2,3
A logical processor may maintain a number of VMCSs that are active. The processor may optimize VMX operation
by maintaining the state of an active VMCS in memory, on the processor, or both. At any given time, at most one
of the active VMCSs is the current VMCS. (This document frequently uses the term “the VMCS” to refer to the
current VMCS.) The VMLAUNCH, VMREAD, VMRESUME, and VMWRITE instructions operate only on the current
VMCS.
The following items describe how a logical processor determines which VMCSs are active and which is current:
•   The memory operand of the VMPTRLD instruction is the address of a VMCS. After execution of the instruction,
    that VMCS is both active and current on the logical processor. Any other VMCS that had been active remains so,
    but no other VMCS is current.
•   The VMCS link pointer field in the current VMCS (see Section 24.4.2) is itself the address of a VMCS. If VM entry
    is performed successfully with the 1-setting of the “VMCS shadowing” VM-execution control, the VMCS
    referenced by the VMCS link pointer field becomes active on the logical processor. The identity of the current
    VMCS does not change.
•   The memory operand of the VMCLEAR instruction is also the address of a VMCS. After execution of the
    instruction, that VMCS is neither active nor current on the logical processor. If the VMCS had been current on
    the logical processor, the logical processor no longer has a current VMCS.
The VMPTRST instruction stores the address of the logical processor’s current VMCS into a specified memory loca-
tion (it stores the value FFFFFFFF_FFFFFFFFH if there is no current VMCS).
The launch state of a VMCS determines which VM-entry instruction should be used with that VMCS: the
VMLAUNCH instruction requires a VMCS whose launch state is “clear”; the VMRESUME instruction requires a VMCS
whose launch state is “launched”. A logical processor maintains a VMCS’s launch state in the corresponding VMCS
region. The following items describe how a logical processor manages the launch state of a VMCS:
•   If the launch state of the current VMCS is “clear”, successful execution of the VMLAUNCH instruction changes
    the launch state to “launched”.
•   The memory operand of the VMCLEAR instruction is the address of a VMCS. After execution of the instruction,
    the launch state of that VMCS is “clear”.
•   There are no other ways to modify the launch state of a VMCS (it cannot be modified using VMWRITE) and there
    is no direct way to discover it (it cannot be read using VMREAD).

1. The amount of memory required for a VMCS region is at most 4 KBytes. The exact size is implementation specific and can be deter-
   mined by consulting the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC to determine the size of the VMCS region (see Appendix A.1).
2. Software can determine a processor’s physical-address width by executing CPUID with 80000008H in EAX. The physical-address
   width is returned in bits 7:0 of EAX.
3. If IA32_VMX_BASIC[48] is read as 1, these pointers must not set any bits in the range 63:32; see Appendix A.1.

Figure 24-1 illustrates the different states of a VMCS. It uses “X” to refer to the VMCS and “Y” to refer to any other
VMCS. Thus: “VMPTRLD X” always makes X current and active; “VMPTRLD Y” always makes X not current (because
it makes Y current); VMLAUNCH makes the launch state of X “launched” if X was current and its launch state was
“clear”; and VMCLEAR X always makes X inactive and not current and makes its launch state “clear”.
The figure does not illustrate operations that do not modify the VMCS state relative to these parameters (e.g.,
execution of VMPTRLD X when X is already current). Note that VMCLEAR X makes X “inactive, not current, and
clear,” even if X’s current state is not defined (e.g., even if X has not yet been initialized). See Section 24.11.3.

                      Active                                        Inactive                          Active
                    Not Current                VMCLEAR X           Not Current      VMCLEAR X       Not Current
                       Clear                                          Clear                          Launched

                                                                   VMCLEAR X
                      VMPTRLD X

                                  VMPTRLD Y

                                                                                                     VMPTRLD X

                                                                                                                 VMPTRLD Y
                                                      R X

                                                                                        VM
                                                    EA LD
                                                        X
                                                 CL TR

                                                                                          C
                                                                                          LE
                                               VM M P

                                                                                            A
                                                                                              R
                                                 V

                                                                    Anything

                                                                                                X
                                                                      Else

                       Active                                                                        Active
                       Current                                     VMLAUNCH                          Current
                        Clear                                                                       Launched

                                                       Figure 24-1. States of VMCS X

Because a shadow VMCS (see Section 24.10) cannot be used for VM entry, the launch state of a shadow VMCS is
not meaningful. Figure 24-1 does not illustrate all the ways in which a shadow VMCS may be made active.

24.2           FORMAT OF THE VMCS REGION
A VMCS region comprises up to 4-KBytes.1 The format of a VMCS region is given in Table 24-1.

                                                 Table 24-1. Format of the VMCS Region

 Byte Offset                        Contents

 0                                  Bits 30:0: VMCS revision identifier
                                    Bit 31: shadow-VMCS indicator (see Section 24.10)

 4                                  VMX-abort indicator

 8                                  VMCS data (implementation-specific format)

The first 4 bytes of the VMCS region contain the VMCS revision identifier at bits 30:0.2 Processors that maintain
VMCS data in different formats (see below) use different VMCS revision identifiers. These identifiers enable soft-

1. The exact size is implementation specific and can be determined by consulting the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC to deter-
   mine the size of the VMCS region (see Appendix A.1).

ware to avoid using a VMCS region formatted for one processor on a processor that uses a different format.1 Bit 31
of this 4-byte region indicates whether the VMCS is a shadow VMCS (see Section 24.10).
Software should write the VMCS revision identifier to the VMCS region before using that region for a VMCS. The
VMCS revision identifier is never written by the processor; VMPTRLD fails if its operand references a VMCS region
whose VMCS revision identifier differs from that used by the processor. (VMPTRLD also fails if the shadow-VMCS
indicator is 1 and the processor does not support the 1-setting of the “VMCS shadowing” VM-execution control; see
Section 24.6.2) Software can discover the VMCS revision identifier that a processor uses by reading the VMX capa-
bility MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC (see Appendix A.1).
Software should clear or set the shadow-VMCS indicator depending on whether the VMCS is to be an ordinary
VMCS or a shadow VMCS (see Section 24.10). VMPTRLD fails if the shadow-VMCS indicator is set and the processor
does not support the 1-setting of the “VMCS shadowing” VM-execution control. Software can discover support for
this setting by reading the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_PROCBASED_CTLS2 (see Appendix A.3.3).
The next 4 bytes of the VMCS region are used for the VMX-abort indicator. The contents of these bits do not
control processor operation in any way. A logical processor writes a non-zero value into these bits if a VMX abort
occurs (see Section 27.7). Software may also write into this field.
The remainder of the VMCS region is used for VMCS data (those parts of the VMCS that control VMX non-root
operation and the VMX transitions). The format of these data is implementation-specific. VMCS data are discussed
in Section 24.3 through Section 24.9. To ensure proper behavior in VMX operation, software should maintain the
VMCS region and related structures (enumerated in Section 24.11.4) in writeback cacheable memory. Future
implementations may allow or require a different memory type2. Software should consult the VMX capability MSR
IA32_VMX_BASIC (see Appendix A.1).

24.3          ORGANIZATION OF VMCS DATA
The VMCS data are organized into six logical groups:
•    Guest-state area. Processor state is saved into the guest-state area on VM exits and loaded from there on
     VM entries.
•    Host-state area. Processor state is loaded from the host-state area on VM exits.
•    VM-execution control fields. These fields control processor behavior in VMX non-root operation. They
     determine in part the causes of VM exits.
•    VM-exit control fields. These fields control VM exits.
•    VM-entry control fields. These fields control VM entries.
•    VM-exit information fields. These fields receive information on VM exits and describe the cause and the
     nature of VM exits. On some processors, these fields are read-only.3
The VM-execution control fields, the VM-exit control fields, and the VM-entry control fields are sometimes referred
to collectively as VMX controls.

2. Earlier versions of this manual specified that the VMCS revision identifier was a 32-bit field. For all processors produced prior to this
   change, bit 31 of the VMCS revision identifier was 0.
1. Logical processors that use the same VMCS revision identifier use the same size for VMCS regions.
2. Alternatively, software may map any of these regions or structures with the UC memory type. Doing so is strongly discouraged
   unless necessary as it will cause the performance of transitions using those structures to suffer significantly. In addition, the pro-
   cessor will continue to use the memory type reported in the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC with exceptions noted in Appen-
   dix A.1.
3.   Software can discover whether these fields can be written by reading the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_MISC (see Appendix A.6).

24.4            GUEST-STATE AREA
This section describes fields contained in the guest-state area of the VMCS. As noted earlier, processor state is
loaded from these fields on every VM entry (see Section 26.3.2) and stored into these fields on every VM exit (see
Section 27.3).

24.4.1          Guest Register State
The following fields in the guest-state area correspond to processor registers:
•       Control registers CR0, CR3, and CR4 (64 bits each; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64 archi-
        tecture).
•       Debug register DR7 (64 bits; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture).
•       RSP, RIP, and RFLAGS (64 bits each; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture).1
•       The following fields for each of the registers CS, SS, DS, ES, FS, GS, LDTR, and TR:
        — Selector (16 bits).
        — Base address (64 bits; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture). The base-address
          fields for CS, SS, DS, and ES have only 32 architecturally-defined bits; nevertheless, the corresponding
          VMCS fields have 64 bits on processors that support Intel 64 architecture.
        — Segment limit (32 bits). The limit field is always a measure in bytes.
        — Access rights (32 bits). The format of this field is given in Table 24-2 and detailed as follows:
           •   The low 16 bits correspond to bits 23:8 of the upper 32 bits of a 64-bit segment descriptor. While bits
               19:16 of code-segment and data-segment descriptors correspond to the upper 4 bits of the segment
               limit, the corresponding bits (bits 11:8) are reserved in this VMCS field.
           •   Bit 16 indicates an unusable segment. Attempts to use such a segment fault except in 64-bit mode.
               In general, a segment register is unusable if it has been loaded with a null selector.2
           •   Bits 31:17 are reserved.

                                              Table 24-2. Format of Access Rights

    Bit Position(s)          Field

    3:0                      Segment type

    4                        S — Descriptor type (0 = system; 1 = code or data)

    6:5                      DPL — Descriptor privilege level

    7                        P — Segment present

    11:8                     Reserved

    12                       AVL — Available for use by system software

1. This chapter uses the notation RAX, RIP, RSP, RFLAGS, etc. for processor registers because most processors that support VMX oper-
   ation also support Intel 64 architecture. For processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture, this notation refers to the 32-bit
   forms of those registers (EAX, EIP, ESP, EFLAGS, etc.). In a few places, notation such as EAX is used to refer specifically to lower 32
   bits of the indicated register.
2. There are a few exceptions to this statement. For example, a segment with a non-null selector may be unusable following a task
   switch that fails after its commit point; see “Interrupt 10—Invalid TSS Exception (#TS)” in Section 6.14, “Exception and Interrupt
   Handling in 64-bit Mode,” of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A. In contrast, the TR reg-
   ister is usable after processor reset despite having a null selector; see Table 10-1 in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software
   Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A.

                                         Table 24-2. Format of Access Rights (Contd.)

    Bit Position(s)          Field

    13                       Reserved (except for CS)
                             L — 64-bit mode active (for CS only)

    14                       D/B — Default operation size (0 = 16-bit segment; 1 = 32-bit segment)

    15                       G — Granularity

    16                       Segment unusable (0 = usable; 1 = unusable)

    31:17                    Reserved

      The base address, segment limit, and access rights compose the “hidden” part (or “descriptor cache”) of each
      segment register. These data are included in the VMCS because it is possible for a segment register’s descriptor
      cache to be inconsistent with the segment descriptor in memory (in the GDT or the LDT) referenced by the
      segment register’s selector.
      The value of the DPL field for SS is always equal to the logical processor’s current privilege level (CPL).1
•     The following fields for each of the registers GDTR and IDTR:
      — Base address (64 bits; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture).
      — Limit (32 bits). The limit fields contain 32 bits even though these fields are specified as only 16 bits in the
        architecture.
•     The following MSRs:
      — IA32_DEBUGCTL (64 bits)
      — IA32_SYSENTER_CS (32 bits)
      — IA32_SYSENTER_ESP and IA32_SYSENTER_EIP (64 bits; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64
        architecture)
      — IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL (64 bits). This field is supported only on processors that support the 1-setting
        of the “load IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL” VM-entry control.
      — IA32_PAT (64 bits). This field is supported only on processors that support either the 1-setting of the “load
        IA32_PAT” VM-entry control or that of the “save IA32_PAT” VM-exit control.
      — IA32_EFER (64 bits). This field is supported only on processors that support either the 1-setting of the “load
        IA32_EFER” VM-entry control or that of the “save IA32_EFER” VM-exit control.
      — IA32_BNDCFGS (64 bits). This field is supported only on processors that support either the 1-setting of the
        “load IA32_BNDCFGS” VM-entry control or that of the “clear IA32_BNDCFGS” VM-exit control.
•     The register SMBASE (32 bits). This register contains the base address of the logical processor’s SMRAM image.

24.4.2          Guest Non-Register State
In addition to the register state described in Section 24.4.1, the guest-state area includes the following fields that
characterize guest state but which do not correspond to processor registers:
•     Activity state (32 bits). This field identifies the logical processor’s activity state. When a logical processor is
      executing instructions normally, it is in the active state. Execution of certain instructions and the occurrence
      of certain events may cause a logical processor to transition to an inactive state in which it ceases to execute
      instructions.
      The following activity states are defined:2
      — 0: Active. The logical processor is executing instructions normally.

1. In protected mode, CPL is also associated with the RPL field in the CS selector. However, the RPL fields are not meaningful in real-
   address mode or in virtual-8086 mode.

        — 1: HLT. The logical processor is inactive because it executed the HLT instruction.
        — 2: Shutdown. The logical processor is inactive because it incurred a triple fault1 or some other serious
          error.
        — 3: Wait-for-SIPI. The logical processor is inactive because it is waiting for a startup-IPI (SIPI).
        Future processors may include support for other activity states. Software should read the VMX capability MSR
        IA32_VMX_MISC (see Appendix A.6) to determine what activity states are supported.
•       Interruptibility state (32 bits). The IA-32 architecture includes features that permit certain events to be
        blocked for a period of time. This field contains information about such blocking. Details and the format of this
        field are given in Table 24-3.

                                          Table 24-3. Format of Interruptibility State

    Bit              Bit Name          Notes
    Position(s)

    0                Blocking by STI   See the “STI—Set Interrupt Flag” section in Chapter 4 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures
                                       Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2B.
                                       Execution of STI with RFLAGS.IF = 0 blocks interrupts (and, optionally, other events) for one
                                       instruction after its execution. Setting this bit indicates that this blocking is in effect.

    1                Blocking by       See the “MOV—Move a Value from the Stack” from Chapter 4 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32
                     MOV SS            Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2B, and “POP—Pop a Value from the
                                       Stack” from Chapter 4 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual,
                                       Volume 2B, and Section 6.8.3 in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s
                                       Manual, Volume 3A.
                                       Execution of a MOV to SS or a POP to SS blocks interrupts for one instruction after its
                                       execution. In addition, certain debug exceptions are inhibited between a MOV to SS or a POP to
                                       SS and a subsequent instruction. Setting this bit indicates that the blocking of all these events
                                       is in effect. This document uses the term “blocking by MOV SS,” but it applies equally to POP SS.

    2                Blocking by SMI   See Section 34.2. System-management interrupts (SMIs) are disabled while the processor is in
                                       system-management mode (SMM). Setting this bit indicates that blocking of SMIs is in effect.

    3                Blocking by NMI   See Section 6.7.1 in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual,
                                       Volume 3A and Section 34.8.
                                       Delivery of a non-maskable interrupt (NMI) or a system-management interrupt (SMI) blocks
                                       subsequent NMIs until the next execution of IRET. See Section 25.3 for how this behavior of
                                       IRET may change in VMX non-root operation. Setting this bit indicates that blocking of NMIs is
                                       in effect. Clearing this bit does not imply that NMIs are not (temporarily) blocked for other
                                       reasons.
                                       If the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control (see Section 24.6.1) is 1, this bit does not control the
                                       blocking of NMIs. Instead, it refers to “virtual-NMI blocking” (the fact that guest software is not
                                       ready for an NMI).

    4                Enclave           A VM exit saves this bit as 1 to indicate that the VM exit was incident to enclave mode.
                     interruption

    31:5             Reserved          VM entry will fail if these bits are not 0. See Section 26.3.1.5.

•       Pending debug exceptions (64 bits; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture). IA-32
        processors may recognize one or more debug exceptions without immediately delivering them.2 This field
        contains information about such exceptions. This field is described in Table 24-4.

2. Execution of the MWAIT instruction may put a logical processor into an inactive state. However, this VMCS field never reflects this
   state. See Section 27.1.
1. A triple fault occurs when a logical processor encounters an exception while attempting to deliver a double fault.

                                      Table 24-4. Format of Pending-Debug-Exceptions

    Bit            Bit Name           Notes
    Position(s)

    3:0            B3 – B0            When set, each of these bits indicates that the corresponding breakpoint condition was met.
                                      Any of these bits may be set even if the corresponding enabling bit in DR7 is not set.

    11:4           Reserved           VM entry fails if these bits are not 0. See Section 26.3.1.5.

    12             Enabled            When set, this bit indicates that at least one data or I/O breakpoint was met and was enabled in
                   breakpoint         DR7.

    13             Reserved           VM entry fails if this bit is not 0. See Section 26.3.1.5.

    14             BS                 When set, this bit indicates that a debug exception would have been triggered by single-step
                                      execution mode.

    15             Reserved           VM entry fails if this bit is not 0. See Section 26.3.1.5.

    16             RTM                When set, this bit indicates that a debug exception (#DB) or a breakpoint exception (#BP)
                                      occurred inside an RTM region while advanced debugging of RTM transactional regions was
                                      enabled (see Section 16.3.7, “RTM-Enabled Debugger Support,” of Intel® 64 and IA-32
                                      Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1).1

    63:17          Reserved           VM entry fails if these bits are not 0. See Section 26.3.1.5. Bits 63:32 exist only on processors
                                      that support Intel 64 architecture.

NOTES:
1. In general, the format of this field matches that of DR6. However, DR6 clears bit 16 to indicate an RTM-related exception, while this
   field sets the bit to indicate that condition.

•     VMCS link pointer (64 bits). If the “VMCS shadowing” VM-execution control is 1, the VMREAD and VMWRITE
      instructions access the VMCS referenced by this pointer (see Section 24.10). Otherwise, software should set
      this field to FFFFFFFF_FFFFFFFFH to avoid VM-entry failures (see Section 26.3.1.5).
•     VMX-preemption timer value (32 bits). This field is supported only on processors that support the 1-setting
      of the “activate VMX-preemption timer” VM-execution control. This field contains the value that the VMX-
      preemption timer will use following the next VM entry with that setting. See Section 25.5.1 and Section 26.6.4.
•     Page-directory-pointer-table entries (PDPTEs; 64 bits each). These four (4) fields (PDPTE0, PDPTE1,
      PDPTE2, and PDPTE3) are supported only on processors that support the 1-setting of the “enable EPT” VM-
      execution control. They correspond to the PDPTEs referenced by CR3 when PAE paging is in use (see Section
      4.4 in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A). They are used only if
      the “enable EPT” VM-execution control is 1.
•     Guest interrupt status (16 bits). This field is supported only on processors that support the 1-setting of the
      “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control. It characterizes part of the guest’s virtual-APIC state and
      does not correspond to any processor or APIC registers. It comprises two 8-bit subfields:
      — Requesting virtual interrupt (RVI). This is the low byte of the guest interrupt status. The processor
        treats this value as the vector of the highest priority virtual interrupt that is requesting service. (The value
        0 implies that there is no such interrupt.)
      — Servicing virtual interrupt (SVI). This is the high byte of the guest interrupt status. The processor
        treats this value as the vector of the highest priority virtual interrupt that is in service. (The value 0 implies
        that there is no such interrupt.)

2. For example, execution of a MOV to SS or a POP to SS may inhibit some debug exceptions for one instruction. See Section 6.8.3 of
   Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A. In addition, certain events incident to an instruction
   (for example, an INIT signal) may take priority over debug traps generated by that instruction. See Table 6-2 in the Intel® 64 and
   IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A.

    See Chapter 29 for more information on the use of this field.
•   PML index (16 bits). This field is supported only on processors that support the 1-setting of the “enable PML”
    VM-execution control. It contains the logical index of the next entry in the page-modification log. Because the
    page-modification log comprises 512 entries, the PML index is typically a value in the range 0–511. Details of
    the page-modification log and use of the PML index are given in Section 28.2.5.

24.5           HOST-STATE AREA
This section describes fields contained in the host-state area of the VMCS. As noted earlier, processor state is
loaded from these fields on every VM exit (see Section 27.5).
All fields in the host-state area correspond to processor registers:
•   CR0, CR3, and CR4 (64 bits each; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture).
•   RSP and RIP (64 bits each; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture).
•   Selector fields (16 bits each) for the segment registers CS, SS, DS, ES, FS, GS, and TR. There is no field in the
    host-state area for the LDTR selector.
•   Base-address fields for FS, GS, TR, GDTR, and IDTR (64 bits each; 32 bits on processors that do not support
    Intel 64 architecture).
•   The following MSRs:
    — IA32_SYSENTER_CS (32 bits)
    — IA32_SYSENTER_ESP and IA32_SYSENTER_EIP (64 bits; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64
      architecture).
    — IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL (64 bits). This field is supported only on processors that support the 1-setting of
      the “load IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL” VM-exit control.
    — IA32_PAT (64 bits). This field is supported only on processors that support the 1-setting of the “load
      IA32_PAT” VM-exit control.
    — IA32_EFER (64 bits). This field is supported only on processors that support the 1-setting of the “load
      IA32_EFER” VM-exit control.
In addition to the state identified here, some processor state components are loaded with fixed values on every
VM exit; there are no fields corresponding to these components in the host-state area. See Section 27.5 for details
of how state is loaded on VM exits.

24.6           VM-EXECUTION CONTROL FIELDS
The VM-execution control fields govern VMX non-root operation. These are described in Section 24.6.1 through
Section 24.6.8.

24.6.1         Pin-Based VM-Execution Controls
The pin-based VM-execution controls constitute a 32-bit vector that governs the handling of asynchronous events
(for example: interrupts).1 Table 24-5 lists the controls. See Chapter 27 for how these controls affect processor
behavior in VMX non-root operation.

1. Some asynchronous events cause VM exits regardless of the settings of the pin-based VM-execution controls (see Section 25.2).

                                 Table 24-5. Definitions of Pin-Based VM-Execution Controls
 Bit Position(s) Name                  Description
 0                External-interrupt   If this control is 1, external interrupts cause VM exits. Otherwise, they are delivered normally
                  exiting              through the guest interrupt-descriptor table (IDT). If this control is 1, the value of RFLAGS.IF
                                       does not affect interrupt blocking.
 3                NMI exiting          If this control is 1, non-maskable interrupts (NMIs) cause VM exits. Otherwise, they are
                                       delivered normally using descriptor 2 of the IDT. This control also determines interactions
                                       between IRET and blocking by NMI (see Section 25.3).
 5                Virtual NMIs         If this control is 1, NMIs are never blocked and the “blocking by NMI” bit (bit 3) in the
                                       interruptibility-state field indicates “virtual-NMI blocking” (see Table 24-3). This control also
                                       interacts with the “NMI-window exiting” VM-execution control (see Section 24.6.2).
 6                Activate VMX-        If this control is 1, the VMX-preemption timer counts down in VMX non-root operation; see
                  preemption timer     Section 25.5.1. A VM exit occurs when the timer counts down to zero; see Section 25.2.
 7                Process posted       If this control is 1, the processor treats interrupts with the posted-interrupt notification vector
                  interrupts           (see Section 24.6.8) specially, updating the virtual-APIC page with posted-interrupt requests
                                       (see Section 29.6).

All other bits in this field are reserved, some to 0 and some to 1. Software should consult the VMX capability MSRs
IA32_VMX_PINBASED_CTLS and IA32_VMX_TRUE_PINBASED_CTLS (see Appendix A.3.1) to determine how to
set reserved bits. Failure to set reserved bits properly causes subsequent VM entries to fail (see Section 26.2.1.1).
The first processors to support the virtual-machine extensions supported only the 1-settings of bits 1, 2, and 4.
The VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_PINBASED_CTLS will always report that these bits must be 1. Logical proces-
sors that support the 0-settings of any of these bits will support the VMX capability MSR
IA32_VMX_TRUE_PINBASED_CTLS MSR, and software should consult this MSR to discover support for the 0-
settings of these bits. Software that is not aware of the functionality of any one of these bits should set that bit to 1.

24.6.2       Processor-Based VM-Execution Controls
The processor-based VM-execution controls constitute two 32-bit vectors that govern the handling of synchronous
events, mainly those caused by the execution of specific instructions.1 These are the primary processor-based
VM-execution controls and the secondary processor-based VM-execution controls.
Table 24-6 lists the primary processor-based VM-execution controls. See Chapter 25 for more details of how these
controls affect processor behavior in VMX non-root operation.

                      Table 24-6. Definitions of Primary Processor-Based VM-Execution Controls
 Bit Position(s) Name                  Description
 2                Interrupt-window     If this control is 1, a VM exit occurs at the beginning of any instruction if RFLAGS.IF = 1 and
                  exiting              there are no other blocking of interrupts (see Section 24.4.2).
 3                Use TSC offsetting   This control determines whether executions of RDTSC, executions of RDTSCP, and executions
                                       of RDMSR that read from the IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR return a value modified by
                                       the TSC offset field (see Section 24.6.5 and Section 25.3).
 7                HLT exiting          This control determines whether executions of HLT cause VM exits.
 9                INVLPG exiting       This determines whether executions of INVLPG cause VM exits.
 10               MWAIT exiting        This control determines whether executions of MWAIT cause VM exits.
 11               RDPMC exiting        This control determines whether executions of RDPMC cause VM exits.
 12               RDTSC exiting        This control determines whether executions of RDTSC and RDTSCP cause VM exits.

1. Some instructions cause VM exits regardless of the settings of the processor-based VM-execution controls (see Section 25.1.2), as
   do task switches (see Section 25.2).

                Table 24-6. Definitions of Primary Processor-Based VM-Execution Controls (Contd.)
 Bit Position(s) Name                Description
 15             CR3-load exiting     In conjunction with the CR3-target controls (see Section 24.6.7), this control determines
                                     whether executions of MOV to CR3 cause VM exits. See Section 25.1.3.
                                     The first processors to support the virtual-machine extensions supported only the 1-setting
                                     of this control.
 16             CR3-store exiting    This control determines whether executions of MOV from CR3 cause VM exits.
                                     The first processors to support the virtual-machine extensions supported only the 1-setting
                                     of this control.
 19             CR8-load exiting     This control determines whether executions of MOV to CR8 cause VM exits.
 20             CR8-store exiting    This control determines whether executions of MOV from CR8 cause VM exits.
 21             Use TPR shadow       Setting this control to 1 enables TPR virtualization and other APIC-virtualization features. See
                                     Chapter 29.
 22             NMI-window           If this control is 1, a VM exit occurs at the beginning of any instruction if there is no virtual-
                exiting              NMI blocking (see Section 24.4.2).
 23             MOV-DR exiting       This control determines whether executions of MOV DR cause VM exits.
 24             Unconditional I/O    This control determines whether executions of I/O instructions (IN, INS/INSB/INSW/INSD, OUT,
                exiting              and OUTS/OUTSB/OUTSW/OUTSD) cause VM exits.
 25             Use I/O bitmaps      This control determines whether I/O bitmaps are used to restrict executions of I/O instructions
                                     (see Section 24.6.4 and Section 25.1.3).
                                     For this control, “0” means “do not use I/O bitmaps” and “1” means “use I/O bitmaps.” If the I/O
                                     bitmaps are used, the setting of the “unconditional I/O exiting” control is ignored.
 27             Monitor trap flag    If this control is 1, the monitor trap flag debugging feature is enabled. See Section 25.5.2.
 28             Use MSR bitmaps      This control determines whether MSR bitmaps are used to control execution of the RDMSR
                                     and WRMSR instructions (see Section 24.6.9 and Section 25.1.3).
                                     For this control, “0” means “do not use MSR bitmaps” and “1” means “use MSR bitmaps.” If the
                                     MSR bitmaps are not used, all executions of the RDMSR and WRMSR instructions cause
                                     VM exits.
 29             MONITOR exiting      This control determines whether executions of MONITOR cause VM exits.
 30             PAUSE exiting        This control determines whether executions of PAUSE cause VM exits.
 31             Activate secondary This control determines whether the secondary processor-based VM-execution controls are
                controls           used. If this control is 0, the logical processor operates as if all the secondary processor-based
                                   VM-execution controls were also 0.

All other bits in this field are reserved, some to 0 and some to 1. Software should consult the VMX capability MSRs
IA32_VMX_PROCBASED_CTLS and IA32_VMX_TRUE_PROCBASED_CTLS (see Appendix A.3.2) to determine how
to set reserved bits. Failure to set reserved bits properly causes subsequent VM entries to fail (see Section
26.2.1.1).
The first processors to support the virtual-machine extensions supported only the 1-settings of bits 1, 4–6, 8, 13–
16, and 26. The VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_PROCBASED_CTLS will always report that these bits must be 1.
Logical processors that support the 0-settings of any of these bits will support the VMX capability MSR
IA32_VMX_TRUE_PROCBASED_CTLS MSR, and software should consult this MSR to discover support for the 0-
settings of these bits. Software that is not aware of the functionality of any one of these bits should set that bit to 1.
Bit 31 of the primary processor-based VM-execution controls determines whether the secondary processor-based
VM-execution controls are used. If that bit is 0, VM entry and VMX non-root operation function as if all the
secondary processor-based VM-execution controls were 0. Processors that support only the 0-setting of bit 31 of
the primary processor-based VM-execution controls do not support the secondary processor-based VM-execution
controls.

Table 24-7 lists the secondary processor-based VM-execution controls. See Chapter 25 for more details of how
these controls affect processor behavior in VMX non-root operation.

                 Table 24-7. Definitions of Secondary Processor-Based VM-Execution Controls
Bit Position(s) Name               Description
0             Virtualize APIC      If this control is 1, the logical processor treats specially accesses to the page with the APIC-
              accesses             access address. See Section 29.4.
1             Enable EPT           If this control is 1, extended page tables (EPT) are enabled. See Section 28.2.
2             Descriptor-table     This control determines whether executions of LGDT, LIDT, LLDT, LTR, SGDT, SIDT, SLDT, and
              exiting              STR cause VM exits.
3             Enable RDTSCP        If this control is 0, any execution of RDTSCP causes an invalid-opcode exception (#UD).
4             Virtualize x2APIC    If this control is 1, the logical processor treats specially RDMSR and WRMSR to APIC MSRs (in
              mode                 the range 800H–8FFH). See Section 29.5.
5             Enable VPID          If this control is 1, cached translations of linear addresses are associated with a virtual-
                                   processor identifier (VPID). See Section 28.1.
6             WBINVD exiting       This control determines whether executions of WBINVD cause VM exits.
7             Unrestricted guest   This control determines whether guest software may run in unpaged protected mode or in real-
                                   address mode.
8             APIC-register        If this control is 1, the logical processor virtualizes certain APIC accesses. See Section 29.4 and
              virtualization       Section 29.5.
9             Virtual-interrupt    This controls enables the evaluation and delivery of pending virtual interrupts as well as the
              delivery             emulation of writes to the APIC registers that control interrupt prioritization.
10            PAUSE-loop exiting This control determines whether a series of executions of PAUSE can cause a VM exit (see
                                 Section 24.6.13 and Section 25.1.3).
11            RDRAND exiting       This control determines whether executions of RDRAND cause VM exits.
12            Enable INVPCID       If this control is 0, any execution of INVPCID causes a #UD.
13            Enable               Setting this control to 1 enables use of the VMFUNC instruction in VMX non-root operation. See
              VM functions         Section 25.5.5.
14            VMCS shadowing       If this control is 1, executions of VMREAD and VMWRITE in VMX non-root operation may access
                                   a shadow VMCS (instead of causing VM exits). See Section 24.10 and Section 30.3.
15            Enable ENCLS         If this control is 1, executions of ENCLS consult the ENCLS-exiting bitmap to determine whether
              exiting              the instruction causes a VM exit. See Section 24.6.16 and Section 25.1.3.
16            RDSEED exiting       This control determines whether executions of RDSEED cause VM exits.
17            Enable PML           If this control is 1, an access to a guest-physical address that sets an EPT dirty bit first adds an
                                   entry to the page-modification log. See Section 28.2.5.
18            EPT-violation #VE    If this control is 1, EPT violations may cause virtualization exceptions (#VE) instead of VM exits.
                                   See Section 25.5.6.
19            Conceal VMX non- If this control is 1, Intel Processor Trace suppresses data packets that indicate the use of
              root operation from virtualization (see Chapter 36).
              Intel PT
20            Enable               If this control is 0, any execution of XSAVES or XRSTORS causes a #UD.
              XSAVES/XRSTORS
22            Mode-based          If this control is 1, EPT execute permissions are based on whether the linear address being
              execute control for accessed is supervisor mode or user mode. See Chapter 28.
              EPT
25            Use TSC scaling      This control determines whether executions of RDTSC, executions of RDTSCP, and executions
                                   of RDMSR that read from the IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR return a value modified by the
                                   TSC multiplier field (see Section 24.6.5 and Section 25.3).

All other bits in this field are reserved to 0. Software should consult the VMX capability MSR
IA32_VMX_PROCBASED_CTLS2 (see Appendix A.3.3) to determine which bits may be set to 1. Failure to clear
reserved bits causes subsequent VM entries to fail (see Section 26.2.1.1).

24.6.3          Exception Bitmap
The exception bitmap is a 32-bit field that contains one bit for each exception. When an exception occurs, its
vector is used to select a bit in this field. If the bit is 1, the exception causes a VM exit. If the bit is 0, the exception
is delivered normally through the IDT, using the descriptor corresponding to the exception’s vector.
Whether a page fault (exception with vector 14) causes a VM exit is determined by bit 14 in the exception bitmap
as well as the error code produced by the page fault and two 32-bit fields in the VMCS (the page-fault error-code
mask and page-fault error-code match). See Section 25.2 for details.

24.6.4          I/O-Bitmap Addresses
The VM-execution control fields include the 64-bit physical addresses of I/O bitmaps A and B (each of which are
4 KBytes in size). I/O bitmap A contains one bit for each I/O port in the range 0000H through 7FFFH; I/O bitmap B
contains bits for ports in the range 8000H through FFFFH.
A logical processor uses these bitmaps if and only if the “use I/O bitmaps” control is 1. If the bitmaps are used,
execution of an I/O instruction causes a VM exit if any bit in the I/O bitmaps corresponding to a port it accesses is
1. See Section 25.1.3 for details. If the bitmaps are used, their addresses must be 4-KByte aligned.

24.6.5          Time-Stamp Counter Offset and Multiplier
The VM-execution control fields include a 64-bit TSC-offset field. If the “RDTSC exiting” control is 0 and the “use
TSC offsetting” control is 1, this field controls executions of the RDTSC and RDTSCP instructions. It also controls
executions of the RDMSR instruction that read from the IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR. For all of these, the
value of the TSC offset is added to the value of the time-stamp counter, and the sum is returned to guest software
in EDX:EAX.
Processors that support the 1-setting of the “use TSC scaling” control also support a 64-bit TSC-multiplier field.
If this control is 1 (and the “RDTSC exiting” control is 0 and the “use TSC offsetting” control is 1), this field also
affects the executions of the RDTSC, RDTSCP, and RDMSR instructions identified above. Specifically, the contents
of the time-stamp counter is first multiplied by the TSC multiplier before adding the TSC offset.
See Chapter 27 for a detailed treatment of the behavior of RDTSC, RDTSCP, and RDMSR in VMX non-root operation.

24.6.6          Guest/Host Masks and Read Shadows for CR0 and CR4
VM-execution control fields include guest/host masks and read shadows for the CR0 and CR4 registers. These
fields control executions of instructions that access those registers (including CLTS, LMSW, MOV CR, and SMSW).
They are 64 bits on processors that support Intel 64 architecture and 32 bits on processors that do not.
In general, bits set to 1 in a guest/host mask correspond to bits “owned” by the host:
•   Guest attempts to set them (using CLTS, LMSW, or MOV to CR) to values differing from the corresponding bits
    in the corresponding read shadow cause VM exits.
•   Guest reads (using MOV from CR or SMSW) return values for these bits from the corresponding read shadow.
Bits cleared to 0 correspond to bits “owned” by the guest; guest attempts to modify them succeed and guest reads
return values for these bits from the control register itself.
See Chapter 27 for details regarding how these fields affect VMX non-root operation.

24.6.7        CR3-Target Controls
The VM-execution control fields include a set of 4 CR3-target values and a CR3-target count. The CR3-target
values each have 64 bits on processors that support Intel 64 architecture and 32 bits on processors that do not.
The CR3-target count has 32 bits on all processors.
An execution of MOV to CR3 in VMX non-root operation does not cause a VM exit if its source operand matches one
of these values. If the CR3-target count is n, only the first n CR3-target values are considered; if the CR3-target
count is 0, MOV to CR3 always causes a VM exit
There are no limitations on the values that can be written for the CR3-target values. VM entry fails (see Section
26.2) if the CR3-target count is greater than 4.
Future processors may support a different number of CR3-target values. Software should read the VMX capability
MSR IA32_VMX_MISC (see Appendix A.6) to determine the number of values supported.

24.6.8        Controls for APIC Virtualization
There are three mechanisms by which software accesses registers of the logical processor’s local APIC:
•   If the local APIC is in xAPIC mode, it can perform memory-mapped accesses to addresses in the 4-KByte page
    referenced by the physical address in the IA32_APIC_BASE MSR (see Section 10.4.4, “Local APIC Status and
    Location” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A and Intel® 64
    Architecture Processor Topology Enumeration).1
•   If the local APIC is in x2APIC mode, it can accesses the local APIC’s registers using the RDMSR and WRMSR
    instructions (see Intel® 64 Architecture Processor Topology Enumeration).
•   In 64-bit mode, it can access the local APIC’s task-priority register (TPR) using the MOV CR8 instruction.
There are five processor-based VM-execution controls (see Section 24.6.2) that control such accesses. There are
“use TPR shadow”, “virtualize APIC accesses”, “virtualize x2APIC mode”, “virtual-interrupt delivery”, and “APIC-
register virtualization”. These controls interact with the following fields:
•   APIC-access address (64 bits). This field contains the physical address of the 4-KByte APIC-access page.
    If the “virtualize APIC accesses” VM-execution control is 1, access to this page may cause VM exits or be
    virtualized by the processor. See Section 29.4.
    The APIC-access address exists only on processors that support the 1-setting of the “virtualize APIC accesses”
    VM-execution control.
•   Virtual-APIC address (64 bits). This field contains the physical address of the 4-KByte virtual-APIC page.
    The processor uses the virtual-APIC page to virtualize certain accesses to APIC registers and to manage virtual
    interrupts; see Chapter 29.
    Depending on the setting of the controls indicated earlier, the virtual-APIC page may be accessed by the
    following operations:
    — The MOV CR8 instructions (see Section 29.3).
    — Accesses to the APIC-access page if, in addition, the “virtualize APIC accesses” VM-execution control is 1
      (see Section 29.4).
    — The RDMSR and WRMSR instructions if, in addition, the value of ECX is in the range 800H–8FFH (indicating
      an APIC MSR) and the “virtualize x2APIC mode” VM-execution control is 1 (see Section 29.5).
    If the “use TPR shadow” VM-execution control is 1, VM entry ensures that the virtual-APIC address is 4-KByte
    aligned. The virtual-APIC address exists only on processors that support the 1-setting of the “use TPR shadow”
    VM-execution control.
•   TPR threshold (32 bits). Bits 3:0 of this field determine the threshold below which bits 7:4 of VTPR (see
    Section 29.1.1) cannot fall. If the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control is 0, a VM exit occurs after
    an operation (e.g., an execution of MOV to CR8) that reduces the value of those bits below the TPR threshold.
    See Section 29.1.2.

1. If the local APIC does not support x2APIC mode, it is always in xAPIC mode.

    The TPR threshold exists only on processors that support the 1-setting of the “use TPR shadow” VM-execution
    control.
•   EOI-exit bitmap (4 fields; 64 bits each). These fields are supported only on processors that support the 1-
    setting of the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control. They are used to determine which virtualized
    writes to the APIC’s EOI register cause VM exits:
    — EOI_EXIT0 contains bits for vectors from 0 (bit 0) to 63 (bit 63).
    — EOI_EXIT1 contains bits for vectors from 64 (bit 0) to 127 (bit 63).
    — EOI_EXIT2 contains bits for vectors from 128 (bit 0) to 191 (bit 63).
    — EOI_EXIT3 contains bits for vectors from 192 (bit 0) to 255 (bit 63).
    See Section 29.1.4 for more information on the use of this field.
•   Posted-interrupt notification vector (16 bits). This field is supported only on processors that support the 1-
    setting of the “process posted interrupts” VM-execution control. Its low 8 bits contain the interrupt vector that
    is used to notify a logical processor that virtual interrupts have been posted. See Section 29.6 for more
    information on the use of this field.
•   Posted-interrupt descriptor address (64 bits). This field is supported only on processors that support the
    1-setting of the “process posted interrupts” VM-execution control. It is the physical address of a 64-byte
    aligned posted interrupt descriptor. See Section 29.6 for more information on the use of this field.

24.6.9          MSR-Bitmap Address
On processors that support the 1-setting of the “use MSR bitmaps” VM-execution control, the VM-execution control
fields include the 64-bit physical address of four contiguous MSR bitmaps, which are each 1-KByte in size. This
field does not exist on processors that do not support the 1-setting of that control. The four bitmaps are:
•   Read bitmap for low MSRs (located at the MSR-bitmap address). This contains one bit for each MSR address
    in the range 00000000H to 00001FFFH. The bit determines whether an execution of RDMSR applied to that
    MSR causes a VM exit.
•   Read bitmap for high MSRs (located at the MSR-bitmap address plus 1024). This contains one bit for each
    MSR address in the range C0000000H toC0001FFFH. The bit determines whether an execution of RDMSR
    applied to that MSR causes a VM exit.
•   Write bitmap for low MSRs (located at the MSR-bitmap address plus 2048). This contains one bit for each
    MSR address in the range 00000000H to 00001FFFH. The bit determines whether an execution of WRMSR
    applied to that MSR causes a VM exit.
•   Write bitmap for high MSRs (located at the MSR-bitmap address plus 3072). This contains one bit for each
    MSR address in the range C0000000H toC0001FFFH. The bit determines whether an execution of WRMSR
    applied to that MSR causes a VM exit.
A logical processor uses these bitmaps if and only if the “use MSR bitmaps” control is 1. If the bitmaps are used, an
execution of RDMSR or WRMSR causes a VM exit if the value of RCX is in neither of the ranges covered by the
bitmaps or if the appropriate bit in the MSR bitmaps (corresponding to the instruction and the RCX value) is 1. See
Section 25.1.3 for details. If the bitmaps are used, their address must be 4-KByte aligned.

24.6.10 Executive-VMCS Pointer
The executive-VMCS pointer is a 64-bit field used in the dual-monitor treatment of system-management interrupts
(SMIs) and system-management mode (SMM). SMM VM exits save this field as described in Section 34.15.2.
VM entries that return from SMM use this field as described in Section 34.15.4.

24.6.11 Extended-Page-Table Pointer (EPTP)
The extended-page-table pointer (EPTP) contains the address of the base of EPT PML4 table (see Section
28.2.2), as well as other EPT configuration information. The format of this field is shown in Table 24-8.

                                    Table 24-8. Format of Extended-Page-Table Pointer

    Bit             Field
    Position(s)

    2:0             EPT paging-structure memory type (see Section 28.2.6):
                      0 = Uncacheable (UC)
                      6 = Write-back (WB)

                    Other values are reserved.1

    5:3             This value is 1 less than the EPT page-walk length (see Section 28.2.2)

    6               Setting this control to 1 enables accessed and dirty flags for EPT (see Section 28.2.4)2

    11:7            Reserved

    N–1:12          Bits N–1:12 of the physical address of the 4-KByte aligned EPT PML4 table3

    63:N            Reserved

NOTES:
1. Software should read the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_EPT_VPID_CAP (see Appendix A.10) to determine what EPT paging-struc-
   ture memory types are supported.
2. Not all processors support accessed and dirty flags for EPT. Software should read the VMX capability MSR
   IA32_VMX_EPT_VPID_CAP (see Appendix A.10) to determine whether the processor supports this feature.
3. N is the physical-address width supported by the logical processor. Software can determine a processor’s physical-address width by
   executing CPUID with 80000008H in EAX. The physical-address width is returned in bits 7:0 of EAX.

The EPTP exists only on processors that support the 1-setting of the “enable EPT” VM-execution control.

24.6.12 Virtual-Processor Identifier (VPID)
The virtual-processor identifier (VPID) is a 16-bit field. It exists only on processors that support the 1-setting
of the “enable VPID” VM-execution control. See Section 28.1 for details regarding the use of this field.

24.6.13 Controls for PAUSE-Loop Exiting
On processors that support the 1-setting of the “PAUSE-loop exiting” VM-execution control, the VM-execution
control fields include the following 32-bit fields:
•       PLE_Gap. Software can configure this field as an upper bound on the amount of time between two successive
        executions of PAUSE in a loop.
•       PLE_Window. Software can configure this field as an upper bound on the amount of time a guest is allowed to
        execute in a PAUSE loop.
These fields measure time based on a counter that runs at the same rate as the timestamp counter (TSC). See
Section 25.1.3 for more details regarding PAUSE-loop exiting.

24.6.14 VM-Function Controls
The VM-function controls constitute a 64-bit vector that governs use of the VMFUNC instruction in VMX non-root
operation. This field is supported only on processors that support the 1-settings of both the “activate secondary
controls” primary processor-based VM-execution control and the “enable VM functions” secondary processor-
based VM-execution control.
Table 24-9 lists the VM-function controls. See Section 25.5.5 for more details of how these controls affect processor
behavior in VMX non-root operation.

                                  Table 24-9. Definitions of VM-Function Controls
 Bit Position(s) Name              Description
 0              EPTP switching     The EPTP-switching VM function changes the EPT pointer to a value chosen from the EPTP list.
                                   See Section 25.5.5.3.

All other bits in this field are reserved to 0. Software should consult the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_VMFUNC
(see Appendix A.11) to determine which bits are reserved. Failure to clear reserved bits causes subsequent
VM entries to fail (see Section 26.2.1.1).
Processors that support the 1-setting of the “EPTP switching” VM-function control also support a 64-bit field called
the EPTP-list address. This field contains the physical address of the 4-KByte EPTP list. The EPTP list comprises
512 8-Byte entries (each an EPTP value) and is used by the EPTP-switching VM function (see Section 25.5.5.3).

24.6.15 VMCS Shadowing Bitmap Addresses
On processors that support the 1-setting of the “VMCS shadowing” VM-execution control, the VM-execution control
fields include the 64-bit physical addresses of the VMREAD bitmap and the VMWRITE bitmap. Each bitmap is 4
KBytes in size and thus contains 32 KBits. The addresses are the VMREAD-bitmap address and the VMWRITE-
bitmap address.
If the “VMCS shadowing” VM-execution control is 1, executions of VMREAD and VMWRITE may consult these
bitmaps (see Section 24.10 and Section 30.3).

24.6.16 ENCLS-Exiting Bitmap
The ENCLS-exiting bitmap is a 64-bit field. If the “enable ENCLS exiting” VM-execution control is 1, execution of
ENCLS causes a VM exit if the bit in this field corresponding to the value of EAX is 1. If the bit is 0, the instruction
executes normally. See Section 25.1.3 for more information.

24.6.17 Control Field for Page-Modification Logging
The PML address is a 64-bit field. It is the 4-KByte aligned address of the page-modification log. The page-
modification log consists of 512 64-bit entries. It is used for the page-modification logging feature. Details of the
page-modification logging are given in Section 28.2.5.
If the “enable PML” VM-execution control is 1, VM entry ensures that the PML address is 4-KByte aligned. The PML
address exists only on processors that support the 1-setting of the “enable PML” VM-execution control.

24.6.18 Controls for Virtualization Exceptions
On processors that support the 1-setting of the “EPT-violation #VE” VM-execution control, the VM-execution
control fields include the following:
•    Virtualization-exception information address (64 bits). This field contains the physical address of the
     virtualization-exception information area. When a logical processor encounters a virtualization exception,
     it saves virtualization-exception information at the virtualization-exception information address; see Section
     25.5.6.2.

•    EPTP index (16 bits). When an EPT violation causes a virtualization exception, the processor writes the value
     of this field to the virtualization-exception information area. The EPTP-switching VM function updates this field
     (see Section 25.5.5.3).

24.6.19 XSS-Exiting Bitmap
On processors that support the 1-setting of the “enable XSAVES/XRSTORS” VM-execution control, the VM-execu-
tion control fields include a 64-bit XSS-exiting bitmap. If the “enable XSAVES/XRSTORS” VM-execution control is
1, executions of XSAVES and XRSTORS may consult this bitmap (see Section 25.1.3 and Section 25.3).

24.7         VM-EXIT CONTROL FIELDS
The VM-exit control fields govern the behavior of VM exits. They are discussed in Section 24.7.1 and Section
24.7.2.

24.7.1       VM-Exit Controls
The VM-exit controls constitute a 32-bit vector that governs the basic operation of VM exits. Table 24-10 lists the
controls supported. See Chapter 27 for complete details of how these controls affect VM exits.
                                      Table 24-10. Definitions of VM-Exit Controls
Bit Position(s) Name                 Description
2                Save debug          This control determines whether DR7 and the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR are saved on VM exit.
                 controls            The first processors to support the virtual-machine extensions supported only the 1-setting
                                     of this control.
9                Host address-       On processors that support Intel 64 architecture, this control determines whether a logical
                 space size          processor is in 64-bit mode after the next VM exit. Its value is loaded into CS.L,
                                     IA32_EFER.LME, and IA32_EFER.LMA on every VM exit.1
                                     This control must be 0 on processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture.
12               Load                This control determines whether the IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL MSR is loaded on VM exit.
                 IA32_PERF_GLOB
                 AL_CTRL
15               Acknowledge         This control affects VM exits due to external interrupts:
                 interrupt on exit   • If such a VM exit occurs and this control is 1, the logical processor acknowledges the
                                       interrupt controller, acquiring the interrupt’s vector. The vector is stored in the VM-exit
                                       interruption-information field, which is marked valid.
                                     • If such a VM exit occurs and this control is 0, the interrupt is not acknowledged and the
                                       VM-exit interruption-information field is marked invalid.
18               Save IA32_PAT       This control determines whether the IA32_PAT MSR is saved on VM exit.
19               Load IA32_PAT       This control determines whether the IA32_PAT MSR is loaded on VM exit.
20               Save IA32_EFER      This control determines whether the IA32_EFER MSR is saved on VM exit.
21               Load IA32_EFER      This control determines whether the IA32_EFER MSR is loaded on VM exit.
22               Save VMX-           This control determines whether the value of the VMX-preemption timer is saved on VM exit.
                 preemption timer
                 value
23               Clear               This control determines whether the IA32_BNDCFGS MSR is cleared on VM exit.
                 IA32_BNDCFGS
24               Conceal VM exits    If this control is 1, Intel Processor Trace does not produce a paging information packet (PIP) on
                 from Intel PT       a VM exit (see Chapter 36).

NOTES:
1. Since Intel 64 architecture specifies that IA32_EFER.LMA is always set to the logical-AND of CR0.PG and IA32_EFER.LME, and since
   CR0.PG is always 1 in VMX operation, IA32_EFER.LMA is always identical to IA32_EFER.LME in VMX operation.

All other bits in this field are reserved, some to 0 and some to 1. Software should consult the VMX capability MSRs
IA32_VMX_EXIT_CTLS and IA32_VMX_TRUE_EXIT_CTLS (see Appendix A.4) to determine how it should set the
reserved bits. Failure to set reserved bits properly causes subsequent VM entries to fail (see Section 26.2.1.2).
The first processors to support the virtual-machine extensions supported only the 1-settings of bits 0–8, 10, 11,
13, 14, 16, and 17. The VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_EXIT_CTLS always reports that these bits must be 1.
Logical processors that support the 0-settings of any of these bits will support the VMX capability MSR
IA32_VMX_TRUE_EXIT_CTLS MSR, and software should consult this MSR to discover support for the 0-settings of
these bits. Software that is not aware of the functionality of any one of these bits should set that bit to 1.

24.7.2          VM-Exit Controls for MSRs
A VMM may specify lists of MSRs to be stored and loaded on VM exits. The following VM-exit control fields deter-
mine how MSRs are stored on VM exits:

•   VM-exit MSR-store count (32 bits). This field specifies the number of MSRs to be stored on VM exit. It is
    recommended that this count not exceed 512 bytes.1 Otherwise, unpredictable processor behavior (including a
    machine check) may result during VM exit.
•   VM-exit MSR-store address (64 bits). This field contains the physical address of the VM-exit MSR-store area.
    The area is a table of entries, 16 bytes per entry, where the number of entries is given by the VM-exit MSR-store
    count. The format of each entry is given in Table 24-11. If the VM-exit MSR-store count is not zero, the address
    must be 16-byte aligned.

                                            Table 24-11. Format of an MSR Entry
 Bit Position(s)       Contents
 31:0                  MSR index
 63:32                 Reserved
 127:64                MSR data

See Section 27.4 for how this area is used on VM exits.
The following VM-exit control fields determine how MSRs are loaded on VM exits:
•   VM-exit MSR-load count (32 bits). This field contains the number of MSRs to be loaded on VM exit. It is
    recommended that this count not exceed 512 bytes. Otherwise, unpredictable processor behavior (including a
    machine check) may result during VM exit.2
•   VM-exit MSR-load address (64 bits). This field contains the physical address of the VM-exit MSR-load area.
    The area is a table of entries, 16 bytes per entry, where the number of entries is given by the VM-exit MSR-load
    count (see Table 24-11). If the VM-exit MSR-load count is not zero, the address must be 16-byte aligned.
See Section 27.6 for how this area is used on VM exits.

24.8            VM-ENTRY CONTROL FIELDS
The VM-entry control fields govern the behavior of VM entries. They are discussed in Sections 24.8.1 through
24.8.3.

1. Future implementations may allow more MSRs to be stored reliably. Software should consult the VMX capability MSR
   IA32_VMX_MISC to determine the number supported (see Appendix A.6).
2. Future implementations may allow more MSRs to be loaded reliably. Software should consult the VMX capability MSR
   IA32_VMX_MISC to determine the number supported (see Appendix A.6).

24.8.1       VM-Entry Controls
The VM-entry controls constitute a 32-bit vector that governs the basic operation of VM entries. Table 24-12 lists
the controls supported. See Chapter 24 for how these controls affect VM entries.

                                        Table 24-12. Definitions of VM-Entry Controls
 Bit Position(s) Name                  Description
 2                Load debug           This control determines whether DR7 and the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR are loaded on VM entry.
                  controls             The first processors to support the virtual-machine extensions supported only the 1-setting of
                                       this control.
 9                IA-32e mode guest On processors that support Intel 64 architecture, this control determines whether the logical
                                    processor is in IA-32e mode after VM entry. Its value is loaded into IA32_EFER.LMA as part of
                                    VM entry.1
                                       This control must be 0 on processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture.
 10               Entry to SMM         This control determines whether the logical processor is in system-management mode (SMM)
                                       after VM entry. This control must be 0 for any VM entry from outside SMM.
 11               Deactivate dual-     If set to 1, the default treatment of SMIs and SMM is in effect after the VM entry (see Section
                  monitor treatment    34.15.7). This control must be 0 for any VM entry from outside SMM.
 13               Load            This control determines whether the IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL MSR is loaded on VM entry.
                  IA32_PERF_GLOBA
                  L_CTRL
 14               Load IA32_PAT        This control determines whether the IA32_PAT MSR is loaded on VM entry.
 15               Load IA32_EFER       This control determines whether the IA32_EFER MSR is loaded on VM entry.
 16               Load                 This control determines whether the IA32_BNDCFGS MSR is loaded on VM entry.
                  IA32_BNDCFGS
 17               Conceal VM entries If this control is 1, Intel Processor Trace does not produce a paging information packet (PIP) on
                  from Intel PT      a VM entry (see Chapter 36).

NOTES:
1. Bit 5 of the IA32_VMX_MISC MSR is read as 1 on any logical processor that supports the 1-setting of the “unrestricted guest” VM-
   execution control. If it is read as 1, every VM exit stores the value of IA32_EFER.LMA into the “IA-32e mode guest” VM-entry control
   (see Section 27.2).

All other bits in this field are reserved, some to 0 and some to 1. Software should consult the VMX capability MSRs
IA32_VMX_ENTRY_CTLS and IA32_VMX_TRUE_ENTRY_CTLS (see Appendix A.5) to determine how it should set
the reserved bits. Failure to set reserved bits properly causes subsequent VM entries to fail (see Section 26.2.1.3).
The first processors to support the virtual-machine extensions supported only the 1-settings of bits 0–8 and 12.
The VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_ENTRY_CTLS always reports that these bits must be 1. Logical processors that
support the 0-settings of any of these bits will support the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_TRUE_ENTRY_CTLS
MSR, and software should consult this MSR to discover support for the 0-settings of these bits. Software that is not
aware of the functionality of any one of these bits should set that bit to 1.

24.8.2       VM-Entry Controls for MSRs
A VMM may specify a list of MSRs to be loaded on VM entries. The following VM-entry control fields manage this
functionality:
•     VM-entry MSR-load count (32 bits). This field contains the number of MSRs to be loaded on VM entry. It is
      recommended that this count not exceed 512 bytes. Otherwise, unpredictable processor behavior (including a
      machine check) may result during VM entry.1

1. Future implementations may allow more MSRs to be loaded reliably. Software should consult the VMX capability MSR
   IA32_VMX_MISC to determine the number supported (see Appendix A.6).

•      VM-entry MSR-load address (64 bits). This field contains the physical address of the VM-entry MSR-load
       area. The area is a table of entries, 16 bytes per entry, where the number of entries is given by the VM-entry
       MSR-load count. The format of entries is described in Table 24-11. If the VM-entry MSR-load count is not zero,
       the address must be 16-byte aligned.
See Section 26.4 for details of how this area is used on VM entries.

24.8.3          VM-Entry Controls for Event Injection
VM entry can be configured to conclude by delivering an event through the IDT (after all guest state and MSRs have
been loaded). This process is called event injection and is controlled by the following three VM-entry control
fields:
•      VM-entry interruption-information field (32 bits). This field provides details about the event to be injected.
       Table 24-13 describes the field.

                            Table 24-13. Format of the VM-Entry Interruption-Information Field
 Bit Position(s)    Content
 7:0                Vector of interrupt or exception
 10:8               Interruption type:
                      0: External interrupt
                      1: Reserved
                      2: Non-maskable interrupt (NMI)
                      3: Hardware exception
                      4: Software interrupt
                      5: Privileged software exception
                      6: Software exception
                      7: Other event
 11                 Deliver error code (0 = do not deliver; 1 = deliver)
 30:12              Reserved
 31                 Valid

       — The vector (bits 7:0) determines which entry in the IDT is used or which other event is injected.
       — The interruption type (bits 10:8) determines details of how the injection is performed. In general, a VMM
         should use the type hardware exception for all exceptions other than breakpoint exceptions (#BP;
         generated by INT3) and overflow exceptions (#OF; generated by INTO); it should use the type software
         exception for #BP and #OF. The type other event is used for injection of events that are not delivered
         through the IDT.
       — For exceptions, the deliver-error-code bit (bit 11) determines whether delivery pushes an error code on
         the guest stack.
       — VM entry injects an event if and only if the valid bit (bit 31) is 1. The valid bit in this field is cleared on
         every VM exit (see Section 27.2).
•      VM-entry exception error code (32 bits). This field is used if and only if the valid bit (bit 31) and the deliver-
       error-code bit (bit 11) are both set in the VM-entry interruption-information field.
•      VM-entry instruction length (32 bits). For injection of events whose type is software interrupt, software
       exception, or privileged software exception, this field is used to determine the value of RIP that is pushed on
       the stack.
See Section 26.5 for details regarding the mechanics of event injection, including the use of the interruption type
and the VM-entry instruction length.
VM exits clear the valid bit (bit 31) in the VM-entry interruption-information field.

24.9            VM-EXIT INFORMATION FIELDS
The VMCS contains a section of fields that contain information about the most recent VM exit.
On some processors, attempts to write to these fields with VMWRITE fail (see “VMWRITE—Write Field to Virtual-
Machine Control Structure” in Chapter 30).1

24.9.1           Basic VM-Exit Information
The following VM-exit information fields provide basic information about a VM exit:
•      Exit reason (32 bits). This field encodes the reason for the VM exit and has the structure given in Table 24-14.

                                               Table 24-14. Format of Exit Reason

     Bit Position(s)    Contents

     15:0               Basic exit reason

     26:16              Reserved (cleared to 0)

     27                 A VM exit saves this bit as 1 to indicate that the VM exit was incident to enclave mode.

     28                 Pending MTF VM exit

     29                 VM exit from VMX root operation

     30                 Reserved (cleared to 0)

     31                 VM-entry failure (0 = true VM exit; 1 = VM-entry failure)

       — Bits 15:0 provide basic information about the cause of the VM exit (if bit 31 is clear) or of the VM-entry
         failure (if bit 31 is set). Appendix C enumerates the basic exit reasons.
       — Bit 28 is set only by an SMM VM exit (see Section 34.15.2) that took priority over an MTF VM exit (see
         Section 25.5.2) that would have occurred had the SMM VM exit not occurred. See Section 34.15.2.3.
       — Bit 29 is set if and only if the processor was in VMX root operation at the time the VM exit occurred. This can
         happen only for SMM VM exits. See Section 34.15.2.
       — Because some VM-entry failures load processor state from the host-state area (see Section 26.7), software
         must be able to distinguish such cases from true VM exits. Bit 31 is used for that purpose.
•      Exit qualification (64 bits; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture). This field contains
       additional information about the cause of VM exits due to the following: debug exceptions; page-fault
       exceptions; start-up IPIs (SIPIs); task switches; INVEPT; INVLPG;INVVPID; LGDT; LIDT; LLDT; LTR; SGDT;
       SIDT; SLDT; STR; VMCLEAR; VMPTRLD; VMPTRST; VMREAD; VMWRITE; VMXON; control-register accesses;
       MOV DR; I/O instructions; and MWAIT. The format of the field depends on the cause of the VM exit. See Section
       27.2.1 for details.
•      Guest-linear address (64 bits; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture). This field is
       used in the following cases:
       — VM exits due to attempts to execute LMSW with a memory operand.
       — VM exits due to attempts to execute INS or OUTS.
       — VM exits due to system-management interrupts (SMIs) that arrive immediately after retirement of I/O
         instructions.
       — Certain VM exits due to EPT violations
       See Section 27.2.1 and Section 34.15.2.3 for details of when and how this field is used.

1.     Software can discover whether these fields can be written by reading the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_MISC (see Appendix A.6).

•      Guest-physical address (64 bits). This field is used VM exits due to EPT violations and EPT misconfigurations.
       See Section 27.2.1 for details of when and how this field is used.

24.9.2          Information for VM Exits Due to Vectored Events
Event-specific information is provided for VM exits due to the following vectored events: exceptions (including
those generated by the instructions INT3, INTO, BOUND, and UD2); external interrupts that occur while the
“acknowledge interrupt on exit” VM-exit control is 1; and non-maskable interrupts (NMIs). This information is
provided in the following fields:
•      VM-exit interruption information (32 bits). This field receives basic information associated with the event
       causing the VM exit. Table 24-15 describes this field.

                            Table 24-15. Format of the VM-Exit Interruption-Information Field
 Bit Position(s)    Content
 7:0                Vector of interrupt or exception
 10:8               Interruption type:
                      0: External interrupt
                      1: Not used
                      2: Non-maskable interrupt (NMI)
                      3: Hardware exception
                      4 – 5: Not used
                      6: Software exception
                      7: Not used
 11                 Error code valid (0 = invalid; 1 = valid)
 12                 NMI unblocking due to IRET
 30:13              Reserved (cleared to 0)
 31                 Valid

•      VM-exit interruption error code (32 bits). For VM exits caused by hardware exceptions that would have
       delivered an error code on the stack, this field receives that error code.
Section 27.2.2 provides details of how these fields are saved on VM exits.

24.9.3          Information for VM Exits That Occur During Event Delivery
Additional information is provided for VM exits that occur during event delivery in VMX non-root operation.1 This
information is provided in the following fields:
•      IDT-vectoring information (32 bits). This field receives basic information associated with the event that was
       being delivered when the VM exit occurred. Table 24-16 describes this field.

1. This includes cases in which the event delivery was caused by event injection as part of VM entry; see Section 26.5.1.2.

                                 Table 24-16. Format of the IDT-Vectoring Information Field
 Bit Position(s)    Content
 7:0                Vector of interrupt or exception
 10:8               Interruption type:
                      0: External interrupt
                      1: Not used
                      2: Non-maskable interrupt (NMI)
                      3: Hardware exception
                      4: Software interrupt
                      5: Privileged software exception
                      6: Software exception
                      7: Not used
 11                 Error code valid (0 = invalid; 1 = valid)
 12                 Undefined
 30:13              Reserved (cleared to 0)
 31                 Valid

•      IDT-vectoring error code (32 bits). For VM exits the occur during delivery of hardware exceptions that would
       have delivered an error code on the stack, this field receives that error code.
See Section 27.2.3 provides details of how these fields are saved on VM exits.

24.9.4         Information for VM Exits Due to Instruction Execution
The following fields are used for VM exits caused by attempts to execute certain instructions in VMX non-root oper-
ation:
•      VM-exit instruction length (32 bits). For VM exits resulting from instruction execution, this field receives the
       length in bytes of the instruction whose execution led to the VM exit.1 See Section 27.2.4 for details of when
       and how this field is used.
•      VM-exit instruction information (32 bits). This field is used for VM exits due to attempts to execute INS,
       INVEPT, INVVPID, LIDT, LGDT, LLDT, LTR, OUTS, SIDT, SGDT, SLDT, STR, VMCLEAR, VMPTRLD, VMPTRST,
       VMREAD, VMWRITE, or VMXON.2 The format of the field depends on the cause of the VM exit. See Section
       27.2.4 for details.
The following fields (64 bits each; 32 bits on processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture) are used only for
VM exits due to SMIs that arrive immediately after retirement of I/O instructions. They provide information about
that I/O instruction:
•      I/O RCX. The value of RCX before the I/O instruction started.
•      I/O RSI. The value of RSI before the I/O instruction started.
•      I/O RDI. The value of RDI before the I/O instruction started.
•      I/O RIP. The value of RIP before the I/O instruction started (the RIP that addressed the I/O instruction).

24.9.5         VM-Instruction Error Field
The 32-bit VM-instruction error field does not provide information about the most recent VM exit. In fact, it is
not modified on VM exits. Instead, it provides information about errors encountered by a non-faulting execution of
one of the VMX instructions.

1. This field is also used for VM exits that occur during the delivery of a software interrupt or software exception.
2. Whether the processor provides this information on VM exits due to attempts to execute INS or OUTS can be determined by con-
   sulting the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC (see Appendix A.1).

24.10           VMCS TYPES: ORDINARY AND SHADOW
Every VMCS is either an ordinary VMCS or a shadow VMCS. A VMCS’s type is determined by the shadow-VMCS
indicator in the VMCS region (this is the value of bit 31 of the first 4 bytes of the VMCS region; see Table 24-1): 0
indicates an ordinary VMCS, while 1 indicates a shadow VMCS. Shadow VMCSs are supported only on processors
that support the 1-setting of the “VMCS shadowing” VM-execution control (see Section 24.6.2).
A shadow VMCS differs from an ordinary VMCS in two ways:
•   An ordinary VMCS can be used for VM entry but a shadow VMCS cannot. Attempts to perform VM entry when
    the current VMCS is a shadow VMCS fail (see Section 26.1).
•   The VMREAD and VMWRITE instructions can be used in VMX non-root operation to access a shadow VMCS but
    not an ordinary VMCS. This fact results from the following:
    — If the “VMCS shadowing” VM-execution control is 0, execution of the VMREAD and VMWRITE instructions in
      VMX non-root operation always cause VM exits (see Section 25.1.3).
    — If the “VMCS shadowing” VM-execution control is 1, execution of the VMREAD and VMWRITE instructions in
      VMX non-root operation can access the VMCS referenced by the VMCS link pointer (see Section 30.3).
    — If the “VMCS shadowing” VM-execution control is 1, VM entry ensures that any VMCS referenced by the
      VMCS link pointer is a shadow VMCS (see Section 26.3.1.5).
In VMX root operation, both types of VMCSs can be accessed with the VMREAD and VMWRITE instructions.
Software should not modify the shadow-VMCS indicator in the VMCS region of a VMCS that is active. Doing so may
cause the VMCS to become corrupted (see Section 24.11.1). Before modifying the shadow-VMCS indicator, soft-
ware should execute VMCLEAR for the VMCS to ensure that it is not active.

24.11           SOFTWARE USE OF THE VMCS AND RELATED STRUCTURES
This section details guidelines that software should observe when using a VMCS and related structures. It also
provides descriptions of consequences for failing to follow guidelines.

24.11.1 Software Use of Virtual-Machine Control Structures
To ensure proper processor behavior, software should observe certain guidelines when using an active VMCS.
No VMCS should ever be active on more than one logical processor. If a VMCS is to be “migrated” from one logical
processor to another, the first logical processor should execute VMCLEAR for the VMCS (to make it inactive on that
logical processor and to ensure that all VMCS data are in memory) before the other logical processor executes
VMPTRLD for the VMCS (to make it active on the second logical processor).1 A VMCS that is made active on more
than one logical processor may become corrupted (see below).
Software should not modify the shadow-VMCS indicator (see Table 24-1) in the VMCS region of a VMCS that is
active. Doing so may cause the VMCS to become corrupted. Before modifying the shadow-VMCS indicator, software
should execute VMCLEAR for the VMCS to ensure that it is not active.
Software should use the VMREAD and VMWRITE instructions to access the different fields in the current VMCS (see
Section 24.11.2). Software should never access or modify the VMCS data of an active VMCS using ordinary
memory operations, in part because the format used to store the VMCS data is implementation-specific and not
architecturally defined, and also because a logical processor may maintain some VMCS data of an active VMCS on
the processor and not in the VMCS region. The following items detail some of the hazards of accessing VMCS data
using ordinary memory operations:
•   Any data read from a VMCS with an ordinary memory read does not reliably reflect the state of the VMCS.
    Results may vary from time to time or from logical processor to logical processor.

1. As noted in Section 24.1, execution of the VMPTRLD instruction makes a VMCS is active. In addition, VM entry makes active any
   shadow VMCS referenced by the VMCS link pointer in the current VMCS. If a shadow VMCS is made active by VM entry, it is neces-
   sary to execute VMCLEAR for that VMCS before allowing that VMCS to become active on another logical processor.

•       Writing to a VMCS with an ordinary memory write is not guaranteed to have a deterministic effect on the VMCS.
        Doing so may cause the VMCS to become corrupted (see below).
(Software can avoid these hazards by removing any linear-address mappings to a VMCS region before executing a
VMPTRLD for that region and by not remapping it until after executing VMCLEAR for that region.)
If a logical processor leaves VMX operation, any VMCSs active on that logical processor may be corrupted (see
below). To prevent such corruption of a VMCS that may be used either after a return to VMX operation or on
another logical processor, software should execute VMCLEAR for that VMCS before executing the VMXOFF instruc-
tion or removing power from the processor (e.g., as part of a transition to the S3 and S4 power states).
This section has identified operations that may cause a VMCS to become corrupted. These operations may cause
the VMCS’s data to become undefined. Behavior may be unpredictable if that VMCS used subsequently on any
logical processor. The following items detail some hazards of VMCS corruption:
•       VM entries may fail for unexplained reasons or may load undesired processor state.
•       The processor may not correctly support VMX non-root operation as documented in Chapter 27 and may
        generate unexpected VM exits.
•       VM exits may load undesired processor state, save incorrect state into the VMCS, or cause the logical processor
        to transition to a shutdown state.

24.11.2 VMREAD, VMWRITE, and Encodings of VMCS Fields
Every field of the VMCS is associated with a 32-bit value that is its encoding. The encoding is provided in an
operand to VMREAD and VMWRITE when software wishes to read or write that field. These instructions fail if given,
in 64-bit mode, an operand that sets an encoding bit beyond bit 32. See Chapter 30 for a description of these
instructions.
The structure of the 32-bit encodings of the VMCS components is determined principally by the width of the fields
and their function in the VMCS. See Table 24-17.

                                    Table 24-17. Structure of VMCS Component Encoding

    Bit Position(s)     Contents

    0                   Access type (0 = full; 1 = high); must be full for 16-bit, 32-bit, and natural-width fields

    9:1                 Index

    11:10               Type:
                          0: control
                          1: VM-exit information
                          2: guest state
                          3: host state

    12                  Reserved (must be 0)

    14:13               Width:
                          0: 16-bit
                          1: 64-bit
                          2: 32-bit
                          3: natural-width

    31:15               Reserved (must be 0)

The following items detail the meaning of the bits in each encoding:
•       Field width. Bits 14:13 encode the width of the field.
        — A value of 0 indicates a 16-bit field.
        — A value of 1 indicates a 64-bit field.

    — A value of 2 indicates a 32-bit field.
    — A value of 3 indicates a natural-width field. Such fields have 64 bits on processors that support Intel 64
      architecture and 32 bits on processors that do not.
    Fields whose encodings use value 1 are specially treated to allow 32-bit software access to all 64 bits of the
    field. Such access is allowed by defining, for each such field, an encoding that allows direct access to the high
    32 bits of the field. See below.
•   Field type. Bits 11:10 encode the type of VMCS field: control, guest-state, host-state, or VM-exit information.
    (The last category also includes the VM-instruction error field.)
•   Index. Bits 9:1 distinguish components with the same field width and type.
•   Access type. Bit 0 must be 0 for all fields except for 64-bit fields (those with field-width 1; see above). A
    VMREAD or VMWRITE using an encoding with this bit cleared to 0 accesses the entire field. For a 64-bit field
    with field-width 1, a VMREAD or VMWRITE using an encoding with this bit set to 1 accesses only the high 32 bits
    of the field.
Appendix B gives the encodings of all fields in the VMCS.
The following describes the operation of VMREAD and VMWRITE based on processor mode, VMCS-field width, and
access type:
•   16-bit fields:
    — A VMREAD returns the value of the field in bits 15:0 of the destination operand; other bits of the destination
      operand are cleared to 0.
    — A VMWRITE writes the value of bits 15:0 of the source operand into the VMCS field; other bits of the source
      operand are not used.
•   32-bit fields:
    — A VMREAD returns the value of the field in bits 31:0 of the destination operand; in 64-bit mode, bits 63:32
      of the destination operand are cleared to 0.
    — A VMWRITE writes the value of bits 31:0 of the source operand into the VMCS field; in 64-bit mode,
      bits 63:32 of the source operand are not used.
•   64-bit fields and natural-width fields using the full access type outside IA-32e mode.
    — A VMREAD returns the value of bits 31:0 of the field in its destination operand; bits 63:32 of the field are
      ignored.
    — A VMWRITE writes the value of its source operand to bits 31:0 of the field and clears bits 63:32 of the field.
•   64-bit fields and natural-width fields using the full access type in 64-bit mode (only on processors that support
    Intel 64 architecture).
    — A VMREAD returns the value of the field in bits 63:0 of the destination operand
    — A VMWRITE writes the value of bits 63:0 of the source operand into the VMCS field.
•   64-bit fields using the high access type.
    — A VMREAD returns the value of bits 63:32 of the field in bits 31:0 of the destination operand; in 64-bit
      mode, bits 63:32 of the destination operand are cleared to 0.
    — A VMWRITE writes the value of bits 31:0 of the source operand to bits 63:32 of the field; in 64-bit mode,
      bits 63:32 of the source operand are not used.
Software seeking to read a 64-bit field outside IA-32e mode can use VMREAD with the full access type (reading
bits 31:0 of the field) and VMREAD with the high access type (reading bits 63:32 of the field); the order of the two
VMREAD executions is not important. Software seeking to modify a 64-bit field outside IA-32e mode should first
use VMWRITE with the full access type (establishing bits 31:0 of the field while clearing bits 63:32) and then use
VMWRITE with the high access type (establishing bits 63:32 of the field).

24.11.3 Initializing a VMCS
Software should initialize fields in a VMCS (using VMWRITE) before using the VMCS for VM entry. Failure to do so
may result in unpredictable behavior; for example, a VM entry may fail for unexplained reasons, or a successful
transition (VM entry or VM exit) may load processor state with unexpected values.
It is not necessary to initialize fields that the logical processor will not use. (For example, it is not necessary to
unitize the MSR-bitmap address if the “use MSR bitmaps” VM-execution control is 0.)
A processor maintains some VMCS information that cannot be modified with the VMWRITE instruction; this
includes a VMCS’s launch state (see Section 24.1). Such information may be stored in the VMCS data portion of a
VMCS region. Because the format of this information is implementation-specific, there is no way for software to
know, when it first allocates a region of memory for use as a VMCS region, how the processor will determine this
information from the contents of the memory region.
In addition to its other functions, the VMCLEAR instruction initializes any implementation-specific information in
the VMCS region referenced by its operand. To avoid the uncertainties of implementation-specific behavior, soft-
ware should execute VMCLEAR on a VMCS region before making the corresponding VMCS active with VMPTRLD for
the first time. (Figure 24-1 illustrates how execution of VMCLEAR puts a VMCS into a well-defined state.)
The following software usage is consistent with these limitations:
•   VMCLEAR should be executed for a VMCS before it is used for VM entry for the first time.
•   VMLAUNCH should be used for the first VM entry using a VMCS after VMCLEAR has been executed for that
    VMCS.
•   VMRESUME should be used for any subsequent VM entry using a VMCS (until the next execution of VMCLEAR
    for the VMCS).
It is expected that, in general, VMRESUME will have lower latency than VMLAUNCH. Since “migrating” a VMCS from
one logical processor to another requires use of VMCLEAR (see Section 24.11.1), which sets the launch state of the
VMCS to “clear”, such migration requires the next VM entry to be performed using VMLAUNCH. Software devel-
opers can avoid the performance cost of increased VM-entry latency by avoiding unnecessary migration of a VMCS
from one logical processor to another.

24.11.4 Software Access to Related Structures
In addition to data in the VMCS region itself, VMX non-root operation can be controlled by data structures that are
referenced by pointers in a VMCS (for example, the I/O bitmaps). While the pointers to these data structures are
parts of the VMCS, the data structures themselves are not. They are not accessible using VMREAD and VMWRITE
but by ordinary memory writes.
Software should ensure that each such data structure is modified only when no logical processor with a current
VMCS that references it is in VMX non-root operation. Doing otherwise may lead to unpredictable behavior
(including behaviors identified in Section 24.11.1).

24.11.5 VMXON Region
Before executing VMXON, software allocates a region of memory (called the VMXON region)1 that the logical
processor uses to support VMX operation. The physical address of this region (the VMXON pointer) is provided in
an operand to VMXON. The VMXON pointer is subject to the limitations that apply to VMCS pointers:
•   The VMXON pointer must be 4-KByte aligned (bits 11:0 must be zero).
•   The VMXON pointer must not set any bits beyond the processor’s physical-address width.2,3

1. The amount of memory required for the VMXON region is the same as that required for a VMCS region. This size is implementation
   specific and can be determined by consulting the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC (see Appendix A.1).
2. Software can determine a processor’s physical-address width by executing CPUID with 80000008H in EAX. The physical-address
   width is returned in bits 7:0 of EAX.
3. If IA32_VMX_BASIC[48] is read as 1, the VMXON pointer must not set any bits in the range 63:32; see Appendix A.1.

Before executing VMXON, software should write the VMCS revision identifier (see Section 24.2) to the VMXON
region. (Specifically, it should write the 31-bit VMCS revision identifier to bits 30:0 of the first 4 bytes of the VMXON
region; bit 31 should be cleared to 0.) It need not initialize the VMXON region in any other way. Software should
use a separate region for each logical processor and should not access or modify the VMXON region of a logical
processor between execution of VMXON and VMXOFF on that logical processor. Doing otherwise may lead to unpre-
dictable behavior (including behaviors identified in Section 24.11.1).

