                                                                                             CHAPTER 25

In a virtualized environment using VMX, the guest software stack typically runs on a logical processor in VMX non-
root operation. This mode of operation is similar to that of ordinary processor operation outside of the virtualized
environment. This chapter describes the differences between VMX non-root operation and ordinary processor oper-
ation with special attention to causes of VM exits (which bring a logical processor from VMX non-root operation to
root operation). The differences between VMX non-root operation and ordinary processor operation are described
in the following sections:
•   Section 25.1, “Instructions That Cause VM Exits”
•   Section 25.2, “Other Causes of VM Exits”
•   Section 25.3, “Changes to Instruction Behavior in VMX Non-Root Operation”
•   Section 25.4, “Other Changes in VMX Non-Root Operation”
•   Section 25.5, “Features Specific to VMX Non-Root Operation”
•   Section 25.6, “Unrestricted Guests”
Chapter 26, “VM Entries,” describes the data control structures that govern VMX non-root operation. Chapter 26,
“VM Entries,” describes the operation of VM entries by which the processor transitions from VMX root operation to
VMX non-root operation. Chapter 25, “VMX Non-Root Operation,” describes the operation of VM exits by which the
processor transitions from VMX non-root operation to VMX root operation.
Chapter 28, “VMX Support for Address Translation,” describes two features that support address translation in VMX
non-root operation. Chapter 29, “APIC Virtualization and Virtual Interrupts,” describes features that support virtu-
alization of interrupts and the Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller (APIC) in VMX non-root operation.

25.1         INSTRUCTIONS THAT CAUSE VM EXITS
Certain instructions may cause VM exits if executed in VMX non-root operation. Unless otherwise specified, such
VM exits are “fault-like,” meaning that the instruction causing the VM exit does not execute and no processor state
is updated by the instruction. Section 27.1 details architectural state in the context of a VM exit.
Section 25.1.1 defines the prioritization between faults and VM exits for instructions subject to both. Section
25.1.2 identifies instructions that cause VM exits whenever they are executed in VMX non-root operation (and thus
can never be executed in VMX non-root operation). Section 25.1.3 identifies instructions that cause VM exits
depending on the settings of certain VM-execution control fields (see Section 24.6).

25.1.1        Relative Priority of Faults and VM Exits
The following principles describe the ordering between existing faults and VM exits:
•   Certain exceptions have priority over VM exits. These include invalid-opcode exceptions, faults based on
    privilege level,1 and general-protection exceptions that are based on checking I/O permission bits in the task-
    state segment (TSS). For example, execution of RDMSR with CPL = 3 generates a general-protection exception
    and not a VM exit.2
•   Faults incurred while fetching instruction operands have priority over VM exits that are conditioned based on
    the contents of those operands (see LMSW in Section 25.1.3).
•   VM exits caused by execution of the INS and OUTS instructions (resulting either because the “unconditional I/O
    exiting” VM-execution control is 1 or because the “use I/O bitmaps control is 1) have priority over the following
    faults:

1. These include faults generated by attempts to execute, in virtual-8086 mode, privileged instructions that are not recognized in that
   mode.
2. MOV DR is an exception to this rule; see Section 25.1.3.

    — A general-protection fault due to the relevant segment (ES for INS; DS for OUTS unless overridden by an
      instruction prefix) being unusable
    — A general-protection fault due to an offset beyond the limit of the relevant segment
    — An alignment-check exception
•   Fault-like VM exits have priority over exceptions other than those mentioned above. For example, RDMSR of a
    non-existent MSR with CPL = 0 generates a VM exit and not a general-protection exception.
When Section 25.1.2 or Section 25.1.3 (below) identify an instruction execution that may lead to a VM exit, it is
assumed that the instruction does not incur a fault that takes priority over a VM exit.

25.1.2         Instructions That Cause VM Exits Unconditionally
The following instructions cause VM exits when they are executed in VMX non-root operation: CPUID, GETSEC,1
INVD, and XSETBV. This is also true of instructions introduced with VMX, which include: INVEPT, INVVPID,
VMCALL,2 VMCLEAR, VMLAUNCH, VMPTRLD, VMPTRST, VMRESUME, VMXOFF, and VMXON.

25.1.3         Instructions That Cause VM Exits Conditionally
Certain instructions cause VM exits in VMX non-root operation depending on the setting of the VM-execution
controls. The following instructions can cause “fault-like” VM exits based on the conditions described:3
•   CLTS. The CLTS instruction causes a VM exit if the bits in position 3 (corresponding to CR0.TS) are set in both
    the CR0 guest/host mask and the CR0 read shadow.
•   ENCLS. The ENCLS instruction causes a VM exit if the “enable ENCLS exiting” VM-execution control is 1 and
    one of the following is true:
    — The value of EAX is less than 63 and the corresponding bit in the ENCLS-exiting bitmap is 1 (see Section
      24.6.16).
    — The value of EAX is greater than or equal to 63 and bit 63 in the ENCLS-exiting bitmap is 1.
•   HLT. The HLT instruction causes a VM exit if the “HLT exiting” VM-execution control is 1.
•   IN, INS/INSB/INSW/INSD, OUT, OUTS/OUTSB/OUTSW/OUTSD. The behavior of each of these instruc-
    tions is determined by the settings of the “unconditional I/O exiting” and “use I/O bitmaps” VM-execution
    controls:
    — If both controls are 0, the instruction executes normally.
    — If the “unconditional I/O exiting” VM-execution control is 1 and the “use I/O bitmaps” VM-execution control
      is 0, the instruction causes a VM exit.
    — If the “use I/O bitmaps” VM-execution control is 1, the instruction causes a VM exit if it attempts to access
      an I/O port corresponding to a bit set to 1 in the appropriate I/O bitmap (see Section 24.6.4). If an I/O
      operation “wraps around” the 16-bit I/O-port space (accesses ports FFFFH and 0000H), the I/O instruction
      causes a VM exit (the “unconditional I/O exiting” VM-execution control is ignored if the “use I/O bitmaps”
      VM-execution control is 1).
    See Section 25.1.1 for information regarding the priority of VM exits relative to faults that may be caused by
    the INS and OUTS instructions.
•   INVLPG. The INVLPG instruction causes a VM exit if the “INVLPG exiting” VM-execution control is 1.
•   INVPCID. The INVPCID instruction causes a VM exit if the “INVLPG exiting” and “enable INVPCID”
    VM-execution controls are both 1.

1. An execution of GETSEC in VMX non-root operation causes a VM exit if CR4.SMXE[Bit 14] = 1 regardless of the value of CPL or RAX.
   An execution of GETSEC causes an invalid-opcode exception (#UD) if CR4.SMXE[Bit 14] = 0.
2. Under the dual-monitor treatment of SMIs and SMM, executions of VMCALL cause SMM VM exits in VMX root operation outside SMM.
   See Section 34.15.2.
3. Many of the items in this section refer to secondary processor-based VM-execution controls. If bit 31 of the primary processor-
   based VM-execution controls is 0, VMX non-root operation functions as if these controls were all 0. See Section 24.6.2.

•   LGDT, LIDT, LLDT, LTR, SGDT, SIDT, SLDT, STR. These instructions cause VM exits if the “descriptor-table
    exiting” VM-execution control is 1.
•   LMSW. In general, the LMSW instruction causes a VM exit if it would write, for any bit set in the low 4 bits of
    the CR0 guest/host mask, a value different than the corresponding bit in the CR0 read shadow. LMSW never
    clears bit 0 of CR0 (CR0.PE); thus, LMSW causes a VM exit if either of the following are true:
    — The bits in position 0 (corresponding to CR0.PE) are set in both the CR0 guest/mask and the source
      operand, and the bit in position 0 is clear in the CR0 read shadow.
    — For any bit position in the range 3:1, the bit in that position is set in the CR0 guest/mask and the values of
      the corresponding bits in the source operand and the CR0 read shadow differ.
•   MONITOR. The MONITOR instruction causes a VM exit if the “MONITOR exiting” VM-execution control is 1.
•   MOV from CR3. The MOV from CR3 instruction causes a VM exit if the “CR3-store exiting” VM-execution
    control is 1. The first processors to support the virtual-machine extensions supported only the 1-setting of this
    control.
•   MOV from CR8. The MOV from CR8 instruction causes a VM exit if the “CR8-store exiting” VM-execution
    control is 1.
•   MOV to CR0. The MOV to CR0 instruction causes a VM exit unless the value of its source operand matches, for
    the position of each bit set in the CR0 guest/host mask, the corresponding bit in the CR0 read shadow. (If every
    bit is clear in the CR0 guest/host mask, MOV to CR0 cannot cause a VM exit.)
•   MOV to CR3. The MOV to CR3 instruction causes a VM exit unless the “CR3-load exiting” VM-execution control
    is 0 or the value of its source operand is equal to one of the CR3-target values specified in the VMCS. If the
    CR3-target count in n, only the first n CR3-target values are considered; if the CR3-target count is 0, MOV to
    CR3 always causes a VM exit.
    The first processors to support the virtual-machine extensions supported only the 1-setting of the “CR3-load
    exiting” VM-execution control. These processors always consult the CR3-target controls to determine whether
    an execution of MOV to CR3 causes a VM exit.
•   MOV to CR4. The MOV to CR4 instruction causes a VM exit unless the value of its source operand matches, for
    the position of each bit set in the CR4 guest/host mask, the corresponding bit in the CR4 read shadow.
•   MOV to CR8. The MOV to CR8 instruction causes a VM exit if the “CR8-load exiting” VM-execution control is 1.
•   MOV DR. The MOV DR instruction causes a VM exit if the “MOV-DR exiting” VM-execution control is 1. Such
    VM exits represent an exception to the principles identified in Section 25.1.1 in that they take priority over the
    following: general-protection exceptions based on privilege level; and invalid-opcode exceptions that occur
    because CR4.DE=1 and the instruction specified access to DR4 or DR5.
•   MWAIT. The MWAIT instruction causes a VM exit if the “MWAIT exiting” VM-execution control is 1. If this
    control is 0, the behavior of the MWAIT instruction may be modified (see Section 25.3).
•   PAUSE. The behavior of each of this instruction depends on CPL and the settings of the “PAUSE exiting” and
    “PAUSE-loop exiting” VM-execution controls:
    — CPL = 0.
       •   If the “PAUSE exiting” and “PAUSE-loop exiting” VM-execution controls are both 0, the PAUSE
           instruction executes normally.
       •   If the “PAUSE exiting” VM-execution control is 1, the PAUSE instruction causes a VM exit (the “PAUSE-
           loop exiting” VM-execution control is ignored if CPL = 0 and the “PAUSE exiting” VM-execution control
           is 1).
       •   If the “PAUSE exiting” VM-execution control is 0 and the “PAUSE-loop exiting” VM-execution control is
           1, the following treatment applies.
           The processor determines the amount of time between this execution of PAUSE and the previous
           execution of PAUSE at CPL 0. If this amount of time exceeds the value of the VM-execution control field
           PLE_Gap, the processor considers this execution to be the first execution of PAUSE in a loop. (It also
           does so for the first execution of PAUSE at CPL 0 after VM entry.)
           Otherwise, the processor determines the amount of time since the most recent execution of PAUSE that
           was considered to be the first in a loop. If this amount of time exceeds the value of the VM-execution
           control field PLE_Window, a VM exit occurs.

               For purposes of these computations, time is measured based on a counter that runs at the same rate as
               the timestamp counter (TSC).
    — CPL > 0.
        •      If the “PAUSE exiting” VM-execution control is 0, the PAUSE instruction executes normally.
        •      If the “PAUSE exiting” VM-execution control is 1, the PAUSE instruction causes a VM exit.
        The “PAUSE-loop exiting” VM-execution control is ignored if CPL > 0.
•   RDMSR. The RDMSR instruction causes a VM exit if any of the following are true:
    — The “use MSR bitmaps” VM-execution control is 0.
    — The value of ECX is not in the ranges 00000000H – 00001FFFH and C0000000H – C0001FFFH.
    — The value of ECX is in the range 00000000H – 00001FFFH and bit n in read bitmap for low MSRs is 1, where
      n is the value of ECX.
    — The value of ECX is in the range C0000000H – C0001FFFH and bit n in read bitmap for high MSRs is 1,
      where n is the value of ECX & 00001FFFH.
    See Section 24.6.9 for details regarding how these bitmaps are identified.
•   RDPMC. The RDPMC instruction causes a VM exit if the “RDPMC exiting” VM-execution control is 1.
•   RDRAND. The RDRAND instruction causes a VM exit if the “RDRAND exiting” VM-execution control is 1.
•   RDSEED. The RDSEED instruction causes a VM exit if the “RDSEED exiting” VM-execution control is 1.
•   RDTSC. The RDTSC instruction causes a VM exit if the “RDTSC exiting” VM-execution control is 1.
•   RDTSCP. The RDTSCP instruction causes a VM exit if the “RDTSC exiting” and “enable RDTSCP” VM-execution
    controls are both 1.
•   RSM. The RSM instruction causes a VM exit if executed in system-management mode (SMM).1
•   VMREAD. The VMREAD instruction causes a VM exit if any of the following are true:
    — The “VMCS shadowing” VM-execution control is 0.
    — Bits 63:15 (bits 31:15 outside 64-bit mode) of the register source operand are not all 0.
    — Bit n in VMREAD bitmap is 1, where n is the value of bits 14:0 of the register source operand. See Section
      24.6.15 for details regarding how the VMREAD bitmap is identified.
    If the VMREAD instruction does not cause a VM exit, it reads from the VMCS referenced by the VMCS link
    pointer. See Chapter 30, “VMREAD—Read Field from Virtual-Machine Control Structure” for details of the
    operation of the VMREAD instruction.
•   VMWRITE. The VMWRITE instruction causes a VM exit if any of the following are true:
    — The “VMCS shadowing” VM-execution control is 0.
    — Bits 63:15 (bits 31:15 outside 64-bit mode) of the register source operand are not all 0.
    — Bit n in VMWRITE bitmap is 1, where n is the value of bits 14:0 of the register source operand. See Section
      24.6.15 for details regarding how the VMWRITE bitmap is identified.
    If the VMWRITE instruction does not cause a VM exit, it writes to the VMCS referenced by the VMCS link
    pointer. See Chapter 30, “VMWRITE—Write Field to Virtual-Machine Control Structure” for details of the
    operation of the VMWRITE instruction.
•   WBINVD. The WBINVD instruction causes a VM exit if the “WBINVD exiting” VM-execution control is 1.
•   WRMSR. The WRMSR instruction causes a VM exit if any of the following are true:
    — The “use MSR bitmaps” VM-execution control is 0.
    — The value of ECX is not in the ranges 00000000H – 00001FFFH and C0000000H – C0001FFFH.
    — The value of ECX is in the range 00000000H – 00001FFFH and bit n in write bitmap for low MSRs is 1,
      where n is the value of ECX.

1. Execution of the RSM instruction outside SMM causes an invalid-opcode exception regardless of whether the processor is in VMX
   operation. It also does so in VMX root operation in SMM; see Section 34.15.3.

    — The value of ECX is in the range C0000000H – C0001FFFH and bit n in write bitmap for high MSRs is 1,
      where n is the value of ECX & 00001FFFH.
    See Section 24.6.9 for details regarding how these bitmaps are identified.
•   XRSTORS. The XRSTORS instruction causes a VM exit if the “enable XSAVES/XRSTORS” VM-execution control
    is 1and any bit is set in the logical-AND of the following three values: EDX:EAX, the IA32_XSS MSR, and the
    XSS-exiting bitmap (see Section 24.6.19).
•   XSAVES. The XSAVES instruction causes a VM exit if the “enable XSAVES/XRSTORS” VM-execution control is
    1 and any bit is set in the logical-AND of the following three values: EDX:EAX, the IA32_XSS MSR, and the XSS-
    exiting bitmap (see Section 24.6.19).

25.2        OTHER CAUSES OF VM EXITS
In addition to VM exits caused by instruction execution, the following events can cause VM exits:
•   Exceptions. Exceptions (faults, traps, and aborts) cause VM exits based on the exception bitmap (see Section
    24.6.3). If an exception occurs, its vector (in the range 0–31) is used to select a bit in the exception bitmap. If
    the bit is 1, a VM exit occurs; if the bit is 0, the exception is delivered normally through the guest IDT. This use
    of the exception bitmap applies also to exceptions generated by the instructions INT3, INTO, BOUND, and UD2.
    Page faults (exceptions with vector 14) are specially treated. When a page fault occurs, a processor consults
    (1) bit 14 of the exception bitmap; (2) the error code produced with the page fault [PFEC]; (3) the page-fault
    error-code mask field [PFEC_MASK]; and (4) the page-fault error-code match field [PFEC_MATCH]. It checks if
    PFEC & PFEC_MASK = PFEC_MATCH. If there is equality, the specification of bit 14 in the exception bitmap is
    followed (for example, a VM exit occurs if that bit is set). If there is inequality, the meaning of that bit is
    reversed (for example, a VM exit occurs if that bit is clear).
    Thus, if software desires VM exits on all page faults, it can set bit 14 in the exception bitmap to 1 and set the
    page-fault error-code mask and match fields each to 00000000H. If software desires VM exits on no page
    faults, it can set bit 14 in the exception bitmap to 1, the page-fault error-code mask field to 00000000H, and
    the page-fault error-code match field to FFFFFFFFH.
•   Triple fault. A VM exit occurs if the logical processor encounters an exception while attempting to call the
    double-fault handler and that exception itself does not cause a VM exit due to the exception bitmap. This
    applies to the case in which the double-fault exception was generated within VMX non-root operation, the case
    in which the double-fault exception was generated during event injection by VM entry, and to the case in which
    VM entry is injecting a double-fault exception.
•   External interrupts. An external interrupt causes a VM exit if the “external-interrupt exiting” VM-execution
    control is 1. (See Section 25.6 for an exception.) Otherwise, the interrupt is delivered normally through the
    IDT. (If a logical processor is in the shutdown state or the wait-for-SIPI state, external interrupts are blocked.
    The interrupt is not delivered through the IDT and no VM exit occurs.)
•   Non-maskable interrupts (NMIs). An NMI causes a VM exit if the “NMI exiting” VM-execution control is 1.
    Otherwise, it is delivered using descriptor 2 of the IDT. (If a logical processor is in the wait-for-SIPI state, NMIs
    are blocked. The NMI is not delivered through the IDT and no VM exit occurs.)
•   INIT signals. INIT signals cause VM exits. A logical processor performs none of the operations normally
    associated with these events. Such exits do not modify register state or clear pending events as they would
    outside of VMX operation. (If a logical processor is in the wait-for-SIPI state, INIT signals are blocked. They do
    not cause VM exits in this case.)
•   Start-up IPIs (SIPIs). SIPIs cause VM exits. If a logical processor is not in the wait-for-SIPI activity state
    when a SIPI arrives, no VM exit occurs and the SIPI is discarded. VM exits due to SIPIs do not perform any of
    the normal operations associated with those events: they do not modify register state as they would outside of
    VMX operation. (If a logical processor is not in the wait-for-SIPI state, SIPIs are blocked. They do not cause
    VM exits in this case.)
•   Task switches. Task switches are not allowed in VMX non-root operation. Any attempt to effect a task switch
    in VMX non-root operation causes a VM exit. See Section 25.4.2.
•   System-management interrupts (SMIs). If the logical processor is using the dual-monitor treatment of
    SMIs and system-management mode (SMM), SMIs cause SMM VM exits. See Section 34.15.2.1

•   VMX-preemption timer. A VM exit occurs when the timer counts down to zero. See Section 25.5.1 for details
    of operation of the VMX-preemption timer.
    Debug-trap exceptions and higher priority events take priority over VM exits caused by the VMX-preemption
    timer. VM exits caused by the VMX-preemption timer take priority over VM exits caused by the “NMI-window
    exiting” VM-execution control and lower priority events.
    These VM exits wake a logical processor from the same inactive states as would a non-maskable interrupt.
    Specifically, they wake a logical processor from the shutdown state and from the states entered using the HLT
    and MWAIT instructions. These VM exits do not occur if the logical processor is in the wait-for-SIPI state.
In addition, there are controls that cause VM exits based on the readiness of guest software to receive interrupts:
•   If the “interrupt-window exiting” VM-execution control is 1, a VM exit occurs before execution of any instruction
    if RFLAGS.IF = 1 and there is no blocking of events by STI or by MOV SS (see Table 24-3). Such a VM exit
    occurs immediately after VM entry if the above conditions are true (see Section 26.6.5).
    Non-maskable interrupts (NMIs) and higher priority events take priority over VM exits caused by this control.
    VM exits caused by this control take priority over external interrupts and lower priority events.
    These VM exits wake a logical processor from the same inactive states as would an external interrupt. Specifi-
    cally, they wake a logical processor from the states entered using the HLT and MWAIT instructions. These
    VM exits do not occur if the logical processor is in the shutdown state or the wait-for-SIPI state.
•   If the “NMI-window exiting” VM-execution control is 1, a VM exit occurs before execution of any instruction if
    there is no virtual-NMI blocking and there is no blocking of events by MOV SS (see Table 24-3). (A logical
    processor may also prevent such a VM exit if there is blocking of events by STI.) Such a VM exit occurs
    immediately after VM entry if the above conditions are true (see Section 26.6.6).
    VM exits caused by the VMX-preemption timer and higher priority events take priority over VM exits caused by
    this control. VM exits caused by this control take priority over non-maskable interrupts (NMIs) and lower
    priority events.
    These VM exits wake a logical processor from the same inactive states as would an NMI. Specifically, they wake
    a logical processor from the shutdown state and from the states entered using the HLT and MWAIT instructions.
    These VM exits do not occur if the logical processor is in the wait-for-SIPI state.

25.3           CHANGES TO INSTRUCTION BEHAVIOR IN VMX NON-ROOT OPERATION
The behavior of some instructions is changed in VMX non-root operation. Some of these changes are determined
by the settings of certain VM-execution control fields. The following items detail such changes:1
•   CLTS. Behavior of the CLTS instruction is determined by the bits in position 3 (corresponding to CR0.TS) in the
    CR0 guest/host mask and the CR0 read shadow:
    — If bit 3 in the CR0 guest/host mask is 0, CLTS clears CR0.TS normally (the value of bit 3 in the CR0 read
      shadow is irrelevant in this case), unless CR0.TS is fixed to 1 in VMX operation (see Section 23.8), in which
      case CLTS causes a general-protection exception.
    — If bit 3 in the CR0 guest/host mask is 1 and bit 3 in the CR0 read shadow is 0, CLTS completes but does not
      change the contents of CR0.TS.
    — If the bits in position 3 in the CR0 guest/host mask and the CR0 read shadow are both 1, CLTS causes a
      VM exit.
•   INVPCID. Behavior of the INVPCID instruction is determined first by the setting of the “enable INVPCID”
    VM-execution control:
    — If the “enable INVPCID” VM-execution control is 0, INVPCID causes an invalid-opcode exception (#UD).
      This exception takes priority over any other exception the instruction may incur.

1. Under the dual-monitor treatment of SMIs and SMM, SMIs also cause SMM VM exits if they occur in VMX root operation outside SMM.
   If the processor is using the default treatment of SMIs and SMM, SMIs are delivered as described in Section 34.14.1.
1. Some of the items in this section refer to secondary processor-based VM-execution controls. If bit 31 of the primary processor-
   based VM-execution controls is 0, VMX non-root operation functions as if these controls were all 0. See Section 24.6.2.

    — If the “enable INVPCID” VM-execution control is 1, treatment is based on the setting of the “INVLPG
      exiting” VM-execution control:
       •   If the “INVLPG exiting” VM-execution control is 0, INVPCID operates normally.
       •   If the “INVLPG exiting” VM-execution control is 1, INVPCID causes a VM exit.
•   IRET. Behavior of IRET with regard to NMI blocking (see Table 24-3) is determined by the settings of the “NMI
    exiting” and “virtual NMIs” VM-execution controls:
    — If the “NMI exiting” VM-execution control is 0, IRET operates normally and unblocks NMIs. (If the “NMI
      exiting” VM-execution control is 0, the “virtual NMIs” control must be 0; see Section 26.2.1.1.)
    — If the “NMI exiting” VM-execution control is 1, IRET does not affect blocking of NMIs. If, in addition, the
      “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 1, the logical processor tracks virtual-NMI blocking. In this case,
      IRET removes any virtual-NMI blocking.
    The unblocking of NMIs or virtual NMIs specified above occurs even if IRET causes a fault.
•   LMSW. Outside of VMX non-root operation, LMSW loads its source operand into CR0[3:0], but it does not clear
    CR0.PE if that bit is set. In VMX non-root operation, an execution of LMSW that does not cause a VM exit (see
    Section 25.1.3) leaves unmodified any bit in CR0[3:0] corresponding to a bit set in the CR0 guest/host mask.
    An attempt to set any other bit in CR0[3:0] to a value not supported in VMX operation (see Section 23.8)
    causes a general-protection exception. Attempts to clear CR0.PE are ignored without fault.
•   MOV from CR0. The behavior of MOV from CR0 is determined by the CR0 guest/host mask and the CR0 read
    shadow. For each position corresponding to a bit clear in the CR0 guest/host mask, the destination operand is
    loaded with the value of the corresponding bit in CR0. For each position corresponding to a bit set in the CR0
    guest/host mask, the destination operand is loaded with the value of the corresponding bit in the CR0 read
    shadow. Thus, if every bit is cleared in the CR0 guest/host mask, MOV from CR0 reads normally from CR0; if
    every bit is set in the CR0 guest/host mask, MOV from CR0 returns the value of the CR0 read shadow.
    Depending on the contents of the CR0 guest/host mask and the CR0 read shadow, bits may be set in the
    destination that would never be set when reading directly from CR0.
•   MOV from CR3. If the “enable EPT” VM-execution control is 1 and an execution of MOV from CR3 does not
    cause a VM exit (see Section 25.1.3), the value loaded from CR3 is a guest-physical address; see Section
    28.2.1.
•   MOV from CR4. The behavior of MOV from CR4 is determined by the CR4 guest/host mask and the CR4 read
    shadow. For each position corresponding to a bit clear in the CR4 guest/host mask, the destination operand is
    loaded with the value of the corresponding bit in CR4. For each position corresponding to a bit set in the CR4
    guest/host mask, the destination operand is loaded with the value of the corresponding bit in the CR4 read
    shadow. Thus, if every bit is cleared in the CR4 guest/host mask, MOV from CR4 reads normally from CR4; if
    every bit is set in the CR4 guest/host mask, MOV from CR4 returns the value of the CR4 read shadow.
    Depending on the contents of the CR4 guest/host mask and the CR4 read shadow, bits may be set in the
    destination that would never be set when reading directly from CR4.
•   MOV from CR8. If the MOV from CR8 instruction does not cause a VM exit (see Section 25.1.3), its behavior
    is modified if the “use TPR shadow” VM-execution control is 1; see Section 29.3.
•   MOV to CR0. An execution of MOV to CR0 that does not cause a VM exit (see Section 25.1.3) leaves
    unmodified any bit in CR0 corresponding to a bit set in the CR0 guest/host mask. Treatment of attempts to
    modify other bits in CR0 depends on the setting of the “unrestricted guest” VM-execution control:
    — If the control is 0, MOV to CR0 causes a general-protection exception if it attempts to set any bit in CR0 to
      a value not supported in VMX operation (see Section 23.8).
    — If the control is 1, MOV to CR0 causes a general-protection exception if it attempts to set any bit in CR0
      other than bit 0 (PE) or bit 31 (PG) to a value not supported in VMX operation. It remains the case,
      however, that MOV to CR0 causes a general-protection exception if it would result in CR0.PE = 0 and
      CR0.PG = 1 or if it would result in CR0.PG = 1, CR4.PAE = 0, and IA32_EFER.LME = 1.
•   MOV to CR3. If the “enable EPT” VM-execution control is 1 and an execution of MOV to CR3 does not cause a
    VM exit (see Section 25.1.3), the value loaded into CR3 is treated as a guest-physical address; see Section
    28.2.1.
    — If PAE paging is not being used, the instruction does not use the guest-physical address to access memory
      and it does not cause it to be translated through EPT.1

    — If PAE paging is being used, the instruction translates the guest-physical address through EPT and uses the
      result to load the four (4) page-directory-pointer-table entries (PDPTEs). The instruction does not use the
      guest-physical addresses the PDPTEs to access memory and it does not cause them to be translated
      through EPT.
•   MOV to CR4. An execution of MOV to CR4 that does not cause a VM exit (see Section 25.1.3) leaves
    unmodified any bit in CR4 corresponding to a bit set in the CR4 guest/host mask. Such an execution causes a
    general-protection exception if it attempts to set any bit in CR4 (not corresponding to a bit set in the CR4
    guest/host mask) to a value not supported in VMX operation (see Section 23.8).
•   MOV to CR8. If the MOV to CR8 instruction does not cause a VM exit (see Section 25.1.3), its behavior is
    modified if the “use TPR shadow” VM-execution control is 1; see Section 29.3.
•   MWAIT. Behavior of the MWAIT instruction (which always causes an invalid-opcode exception—#UD—if
    CPL > 0) is determined by the setting of the “MWAIT exiting” VM-execution control:
    — If the “MWAIT exiting” VM-execution control is 1, MWAIT causes a VM exit.
    — If the “MWAIT exiting” VM-execution control is 0, MWAIT operates normally if one of the following are true:
      (1) ECX[0] is 0; (2) RFLAGS.IF = 1; or both of the following are true: (a) the “interrupt-window exiting” VM-
      execution control is 0; and (b) the logical processor has not recognized a pending virtual interrupt (see
      Section 29.2.1).
    — If the “MWAIT exiting” VM-execution control is 0, ECX[0] = 1, and RFLAGS.IF = 0, MWAIT does not cause
      the processor to enter an implementation-dependent optimized state if either the “interrupt-window
      exiting” VM-execution control is 1 or the logical processor has recognized a pending virtual interrupt;
      instead, control passes to the instruction following the MWAIT instruction.
•   RDMSR. Section 25.1.3 identifies when executions of the RDMSR instruction cause VM exits. If such an
    execution causes neither a fault due to CPL > 0 nor a VM exit, the instruction’s behavior may be modified for
    certain values of ECX:
    — If ECX contains 10H (indicating the IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR), the value returned by the
      instruction is determined by the setting of the “use TSC offsetting” VM-execution control:
        •      If the control is 0, RDMSR operates normally, loading EAX:EDX with the value of the
               IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR.
        •      If the control is 1, the value returned is determined by the setting of the “use TSC scaling” VM-execution
               control:
               —   If the control is 0, RDMSR loads EAX:EDX with the sum of the value of the
                   IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR and the value of the TSC offset.
               —   If the control is 1, RDMSR first computes the product of the value of the
                   IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR and the value of the TSC multiplier. It then shifts the value of
                   the product right 48 bits and loads EAX:EDX with the sum of that shifted value and the value of the
                   TSC offset.
        The 1-setting of the “use TSC-offsetting” VM-execution control does not affect executions of RDMSR if ECX
        contains 6E0H (indicating the IA32_TSC_DEADLINE MSR). Such executions return the APIC-timer deadline
        relative to the actual timestamp counter without regard to the TSC offset.
    — If ECX is in the range 800H–8FFH (indicating an APIC MSR), instruction behavior may be modified if the
      “virtualize x2APIC mode” VM-execution control is 1; see Section 29.5.
•   RDPID. Behavior of the RDPID instruction is determined first by the setting of the “enable RDTSCP”
    VM-execution control:
    — If the “enable RDTSCP” VM-execution control is 0, RDPID causes an invalid-opcode exception (#UD).
    — If the “enable RDTSCP” VM-execution control is 1, RDPID operates normally.
•   RDTSC. Behavior of the RDTSC instruction is determined by the settings of the “RDTSC exiting” and “use TSC
    offsetting” VM-execution controls:

1. A logical processor uses PAE paging if CR0.PG = 1, CR4.PAE = 1 and IA32_EFER.LMA = 0. See Section 4.4 in the Intel® 64 and IA-32
   Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A.

    — If both controls are 0, RDTSC operates normally.
    — If the “RDTSC exiting” VM-execution control is 0 and the “use TSC offsetting” VM-execution control is 1, the
      value returned is determined by the setting of the “use TSC scaling” VM-execution control:
        •   If the control is 0, RDTSC loads EAX:EDX with the sum of the value of the IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER
            MSR and the value of the TSC offset.
        •   If the control is 1, RDTSC first computes the product of the value of the IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER
            MSR and the value of the TSC multiplier. It then shifts the value of the product right 48 bits and loads
            EAX:EDX with the sum of that shifted value and the value of the TSC offset.
    — If the “RDTSC exiting” VM-execution control is 1, RDTSC causes a VM exit.
•   RDTSCP. Behavior of the RDTSCP instruction is determined first by the setting of the “enable RDTSCP”
    VM-execution control:
    — If the “enable RDTSCP” VM-execution control is 0, RDTSCP causes an invalid-opcode exception (#UD). This
      exception takes priority over any other exception the instruction may incur.
    — If the “enable RDTSCP” VM-execution control is 1, treatment is based on the settings of the “RDTSC exiting”
      and “use TSC offsetting” VM-execution controls:
        •   If both controls are 0, RDTSCP operates normally.
        •   If the “RDTSC exiting” VM-execution control is 0 and the “use TSC offsetting” VM-execution control is 1,
            the value returned is determined by the setting of the “use TSC scaling” VM-execution control:
            —    If the control is 0, RDTSCP loads EAX:EDX with the sum of the value of the
                 IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR and the value of the TSC offset.
            —    If the control is 1, RDTSCP first computes the product of the value of the
                 IA32_TIME_STAMP_COUNTER MSR and the value of the TSC multiplier. It then shifts the value of
                 the product right 48 bits and loads EAX:EDX with the sum of that shifted value and the value of the
                 TSC offset.
            In either case, RDTSCP also loads ECX with the value of bits 31:0 of the IA32_TSC_AUX MSR.
        •   If the “RDTSC exiting” VM-execution control is 1, RDTSCP causes a VM exit.
•   SMSW. The behavior of SMSW is determined by the CR0 guest/host mask and the CR0 read shadow. For each
    position corresponding to a bit clear in the CR0 guest/host mask, the destination operand is loaded with the
    value of the corresponding bit in CR0. For each position corresponding to a bit set in the CR0 guest/host mask,
    the destination operand is loaded with the value of the corresponding bit in the CR0 read shadow. Thus, if every
    bit is cleared in the CR0 guest/host mask, MOV from CR0 reads normally from CR0; if every bit is set in the CR0
    guest/host mask, MOV from CR0 returns the value of the CR0 read shadow.
    Note the following: (1) for any memory destination or for a 16-bit register destination, only the low 16 bits of
    the CR0 guest/host mask and the CR0 read shadow are used (bits 63:16 of a register destination are left
    unchanged); (2) for a 32-bit register destination, only the low 32 bits of the CR0 guest/host mask and the CR0
    read shadow are used (bits 63:32 of the destination are cleared); and (3) depending on the contents of the
    CR0 guest/host mask and the CR0 read shadow, bits may be set in the destination that would never be set
    when reading directly from CR0.
•   WRMSR. Section 25.1.3 identifies when executions of the WRMSR instruction cause VM exits. If such an
    execution neither a fault due to CPL > 0 nor a VM exit, the instruction’s behavior may be modified for certain
    values of ECX:
    — If ECX contains 79H (indicating IA32_BIOS_UPDT_TRIG MSR), no microcode update is loaded, and control
      passes to the next instruction. This implies that microcode updates cannot be loaded in VMX non-root
      operation.
    — On processors that support Intel PT but which do not allow it to be used in VMX operation, if ECX contains
      570H (indicating the IA32_RTIT_CTL MSR), the instruction causes a general-protection exception if it
      attempts IA32_RTIT_CTL.TraceEn.1

1. Software should read the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_MISC to determine whether the processor allows Intel PT to be used in
   VMX operation (see Appendix A.6).

    — If ECX contains 808H (indicating the TPR MSR), 80BH (the EOI MSR), or 83FH (self-IPI MSR), instruction
      behavior may modified if the “virtualize x2APIC mode” VM-execution control is 1; see Section 29.5.
•   XRSTORS. Behavior of the XRSTORS instruction is determined first by the setting of the “enable
    XSAVES/XRSTORS” VM-execution control:
    — If the “enable XSAVES/XRSTORS” VM-execution control is 0, XRSTORS causes an invalid-opcode exception
      (#UD).
    — If the “enable XSAVES/XRSTORS” VM-execution control is 1, treatment is based on the value of the XSS-
      exiting bitmap (see Section 24.6.19):
        •       XRSTORS causes a VM exit if any bit is set in the logical-AND of the following three values: EDX:EAX,
                the IA32_XSS MSR, and the XSS-exiting bitmap.
        •       Otherwise, XRSTORS operates normally.
•   XSAVES. Behavior of the XSAVES instruction is determined first by the setting of the “enable
    XSAVES/XRSTORS” VM-execution control:
    — If the “enable XSAVES/XRSTORS” VM-execution control is 0, XSAVES causes an invalid-opcode exception
      (#UD).
    — If the “enable XSAVES/XRSTORS” VM-execution control is 1, treatment is based on the value of the XSS-
      exiting bitmap (see Section 24.6.19):
        •       XSAVES causes a VM exit if any bit is set in the logical-AND of the following three values: EDX:EAX, the
                IA32_XSS MSR, and the XSS-exiting bitmap.
        •       Otherwise, XSAVES operates normally.

25.4            OTHER CHANGES IN VMX NON-ROOT OPERATION
Treatments of event blocking and of task switches differ in VMX non-root operation as described in the following
sections.

25.4.1          Event Blocking
Event blocking is modified in VMX non-root operation as follows:
•   If the “external-interrupt exiting” VM-execution control is 1, RFLAGS.IF does not control the blocking of
    external interrupts. In this case, an external interrupt that is not blocked for other reasons causes a VM exit
    (even if RFLAGS.IF = 0).
•   If the “external-interrupt exiting” VM-execution control is 1, external interrupts may or may not be blocked by
    STI or by MOV SS (behavior is implementation-specific).
•   If the “NMI exiting” VM-execution control is 1, non-maskable interrupts (NMIs) may or may not be blocked by
    STI or by MOV SS (behavior is implementation-specific).

25.4.2          Treatment of Task Switches
Task switches are not allowed in VMX non-root operation. Any attempt to effect a task switch in VMX non-root oper-
ation causes a VM exit. However, the following checks are performed (in the order indicated), possibly resulting in
a fault, before there is any possibility of a VM exit due to task switch:
1. If a task gate is being used, appropriate checks are made on its P bit and on the proper values of the relevant
   privilege fields. The following cases detail the privilege checks performed:
    a. If CALL, INT n, or JMP accesses a task gate in IA-32e mode, a general-protection exception occurs.
    b. If CALL, INT n, INT3, INTO, or JMP accesses a task gate outside IA-32e mode, privilege-levels checks are
       performed on the task gate but, if they pass, privilege levels are not checked on the referenced task-state
       segment (TSS) descriptor.

   c.   If CALL or JMP accesses a TSS descriptor directly in IA-32e mode, a general-protection exception occurs.
   d. If CALL or JMP accesses a TSS descriptor directly outside IA-32e mode, privilege levels are checked on the
      TSS descriptor.
   e. If a non-maskable interrupt (NMI), an exception, or an external interrupt accesses a task gate in the IDT in
      IA-32e mode, a general-protection exception occurs.
   f.   If a non-maskable interrupt (NMI), an exception other than breakpoint exceptions (#BP) and overflow
        exceptions (#OF), or an external interrupt accesses a task gate in the IDT outside IA-32e mode, no
        privilege checks are performed.
   g. If IRET is executed with RFLAGS.NT = 1 in IA-32e mode, a general-protection exception occurs.
   h. If IRET is executed with RFLAGS.NT = 1 outside IA-32e mode, a TSS descriptor is accessed directly and no
      privilege checks are made.
2. Checks are made on the new TSS selector (for example, that is within GDT limits).
3. The new TSS descriptor is read. (A page fault results if a relevant GDT page is not present).
4. The TSS descriptor is checked for proper values of type (depends on type of task switch), P bit, S bit, and limit.
Only if checks 1–4 all pass (do not generate faults) might a VM exit occur. However, the ordering between a VM exit
due to a task switch and a page fault resulting from accessing the old TSS or the new TSS is implementation-
specific. Some processors may generate a page fault (instead of a VM exit due to a task switch) if accessing either
TSS would cause a page fault. Other processors may generate a VM exit due to a task switch even if accessing
either TSS would cause a page fault.
If an attempt at a task switch through a task gate in the IDT causes an exception (before generating a VM exit due
to the task switch) and that exception causes a VM exit, information about the event whose delivery that accessed
the task gate is recorded in the IDT-vectoring information fields and information about the exception that caused
the VM exit is recorded in the VM-exit interruption-information fields. See Section 27.2. The fact that a task gate
was being accessed is not recorded in the VMCS.
If an attempt at a task switch through a task gate in the IDT causes VM exit due to the task switch, information
about the event whose delivery accessed the task gate is recorded in the IDT-vectoring fields of the VMCS. Since
the cause of such a VM exit is a task switch and not an interruption, the valid bit for the VM-exit interruption infor-
mation field is 0. See Section 27.2.

25.5        FEATURES SPECIFIC TO VMX NON-ROOT OPERATION
Some VM-execution controls support features that are specific to VMX non-root operation. These are the VMX-
preemption timer (Section 25.5.1) and the monitor trap flag (Section 25.5.2), translation of guest-physical
addresses (Section 25.5.3), VM functions (Section 25.5.5), and virtualization exceptions (Section 25.5.6).

25.5.1      VMX-Preemption Timer
If the last VM entry was performed with the 1-setting of “activate VMX-preemption timer” VM-execution control,
the VMX-preemption timer counts down (from the value loaded by VM entry; see Section 26.6.4) in VMX non-
root operation. When the timer counts down to zero, it stops counting down and a VM exit occurs (see Section
25.2).
The VMX-preemption timer counts down at rate proportional to that of the timestamp counter (TSC). Specifically,
the timer counts down by 1 every time bit X in the TSC changes due to a TSC increment. The value of X is in the
range 0–31 and can be determined by consulting the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_MISC (see Appendix A.6).
The VMX-preemption timer operates in the C-states C0, C1, and C2; it also operates in the shutdown and wait-for-
SIPI states. If the timer counts down to zero in any state other than the wait-for SIPI state, the logical processor
transitions to the C0 C-state and causes a VM exit; the timer does not cause a VM exit if it counts down to zero in
the wait-for-SIPI state. The timer is not decremented in C-states deeper than C2.
Treatment of the timer in the case of system management interrupts (SMIs) and system-management mode
(SMM) depends on whether the treatment of SMIs and SMM:

•   If the default treatment of SMIs and SMM (see Section 34.14) is active, the VMX-preemption timer counts
    across an SMI to VMX non-root operation, subsequent execution in SMM, and the return from SMM via the RSM
    instruction. However, the timer can cause a VM exit only from VMX non-root operation. If the timer expires
    during SMI, in SMM, or during RSM, a timer-induced VM exit occurs immediately after RSM with its normal
    priority unless it is blocked based on activity state (Section 25.2).
•   If the dual-monitor treatment of SMIs and SMM (see Section 34.15) is active, transitions into and out of SMM
    are VM exits and VM entries, respectively. The treatment of the VMX-preemption timer by those transitions is
    mostly the same as for ordinary VM exits and VM entries; Section 34.15.2 and Section 34.15.4 detail some
    differences.

25.5.2          Monitor Trap Flag
The monitor trap flag is a debugging feature that causes VM exits to occur on certain instruction boundaries in
VMX non-root operation. Such VM exits are called MTF VM exits. An MTF VM exit may occur on an instruction
boundary in VMX non-root operation as follows:
•   If the “monitor trap flag” VM-execution control is 1 and VM entry is injecting a vectored event (see Section
    26.5.1), an MTF VM exit is pending on the instruction boundary before the first instruction following the
    VM entry.
•   If VM entry is injecting a pending MTF VM exit (see Section 26.5.2), an MTF VM exit is pending on the
    instruction boundary before the first instruction following the VM entry. This is the case even if the “monitor
    trap flag” VM-execution control is 0.
•   If the “monitor trap flag” VM-execution control is 1, VM entry is not injecting an event, and a pending event
    (e.g., debug exception or interrupt) is delivered before an instruction can execute, an MTF VM exit is pending
    on the instruction boundary following delivery of the event (or any nested exception).
•   Suppose that the “monitor trap flag” VM-execution control is 1, VM entry is not injecting an event, and the first
    instruction following VM entry is a REP-prefixed string instruction:
    — If the first iteration of the instruction causes a fault, an MTF VM exit is pending on the instruction boundary
      following delivery of the fault (or any nested exception).
    — If the first iteration of the instruction does not cause a fault, an MTF VM exit is pending on the instruction
      boundary after that iteration.
•   Suppose that the “monitor trap flag” VM-execution control is 1, VM entry is not injecting an event, and the first
    instruction following VM entry is the XBEGIN instruction. In this case, an MTF VM exit is pending at the fallback
    instruction address of the XBEGIN instruction. This behavior applies regardless of whether advanced debugging
    of RTM transactional regions has been enabled (see Section 16.3.7, “RTM-Enabled Debugger Support,” of
    Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1).
•   Suppose that the “monitor trap flag” VM-execution control is 1, VM entry is not injecting an event, and the first
    instruction following VM entry is neither a REP-prefixed string instruction or the XBEGIN instruction:
    — If the instruction causes a fault, an MTF VM exit is pending on the instruction boundary following delivery of
      the fault (or any nested exception).1
    — If the instruction does not cause a fault, an MTF VM exit is pending on the instruction boundary following
      execution of that instruction. If the instruction is INT3 or INTO, this boundary follows delivery of any
      software exception. If the instruction is INT n, this boundary follows delivery of a software interrupt. If the
      instruction is HLT, the MTF VM exit will be from the HLT activity state.
No MTF VM exit occurs if another VM exit occurs before reaching the instruction boundary on which an MTF VM exit
would be pending (e.g., due to an exception or triple fault).
An MTF VM exit occurs on the instruction boundary on which it is pending unless a higher priority event takes
precedence or the MTF VM exit is blocked due to the activity state:
•   System-management interrupts (SMIs), INIT signals, and higher priority events take priority over MTF
    VM exits. MTF VM exits take priority over debug-trap exceptions and lower priority events.

1. This item includes the cases of an invalid opcode exception—#UD— generated by the UD2 instruction and a BOUND-range exceeded
   exception—#BR—generated by the BOUND instruction.

•   No MTF VM exit occurs if the processor is in either the shutdown activity state or wait-for-SIPI activity state. If
    a non-maskable interrupt subsequently takes the logical processor out of the shutdown activity state without
    causing a VM exit, an MTF VM exit is pending after delivery of that interrupt.
Special treatment may apply to Intel SGX instructions or if the logical processor is in enclave mode. See Section
43.2 for details.

25.5.3       Translation of Guest-Physical Addresses Using EPT
The extended page-table mechanism (EPT) is a feature that can be used to support the virtualization of physical
memory. When EPT is in use, certain physical addresses are treated as guest-physical addresses and are not used
to access memory directly. Instead, guest-physical addresses are translated by traversing a set of EPT paging
structures to produce physical addresses that are used to access memory.
Details of the EPT mechanism are given in Section 28.2.

25.5.4       APIC Virtualization
APIC virtualization is a collection of features that can be used to support the virtualization of interrupts and the
Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller (APIC). When APIC virtualization is enabled, the processor emulates
many accesses to the APIC, tracks the state of the virtual APIC, and delivers virtual interrupts — all in VMX non-
root operation without a VM exit.
Details of the APIC virtualization are given in Chapter 29.

25.5.5       VM Functions
A VM function is an operation provided by the processor that can be invoked from VMX non-root operation
without a VM exit. VM functions are enabled and configured by the settings of different fields in the VMCS. Soft-
ware in VMX non-root operation invokes a VM function with the VMFUNC instruction; the value of EAX selects the
specific VM function being invoked.
Section 25.5.5.1 explains how VM functions are enabled. Section 25.5.5.2 specifies the behavior of the VMFUNC
instruction. Section 25.5.5.3 describes a specific VM function called EPTP switching.

25.5.5.1      Enabling VM Functions
Software enables VM functions generally by setting the “enable VM functions” VM-execution control. A specific
VM function is enabled by setting the corresponding VM-function control.
Suppose, for example, that software wants to enable EPTP switching (VM function 0; see Section 24.6.14).To do
so, it must set the “activate secondary controls” VM-execution control (bit 31 of the primary processor-based VM-
execution controls), the “enable VM functions” VM-execution control (bit 13 of the secondary processor-based VM-
execution controls) and the “EPTP switching” VM-function control (bit 0 of the VM-function controls).

25.5.5.2      General Operation of the VMFUNC Instruction
The VMFUNC instruction causes an invalid-opcode exception (#UD) if the “enable VM functions” VM-execution
controls is 01 or the value of EAX is greater than 63 (only VM functions 0–63 can be enable). Otherwise, the
instruction causes a VM exit if the bit at position EAX is 0 in the VM-function controls (the selected VM function is
not enabled). If such a VM exit occurs, the basic exit reason used is 59 (3BH), indicating “VMFUNC”, and the length
of the VMFUNC instruction is saved into the VM-exit instruction-length field. If the instruction causes neither an
invalid-opcode exception nor a VM exit due to a disabled VM function, it performs the functionality of the
VM function specified by the value in EAX.

1. “Enable VM functions” is a secondary processor-based VM-execution control. If bit 31 of the primary processor-based VM-execution
   controls is 0, VMX non-root operation functions as if the “enable VM functions” VM-execution control were 0. See Section 24.6.2.

Individual VM functions may perform additional fault checking (e.g., one might cause a general-protection excep-
tion if CPL > 0). In addition, specific VM functions may include checks that might result in a VM exit. If such a
VM exit occurs, VM-exit information is saved as described in the previous paragraph. The specification of a
VM function may indicate that additional VM-exit information is provided.
The specific behavior of the EPTP-switching VM function (including checks that result in VM exits) is given in
Section 25.5.5.3.

25.5.5.3        EPTP Switching
EPTP switching is VM function 0. This VM function allows software in VMX non-root operation to load a new value
for the EPT pointer (EPTP), thereby establishing a different EPT paging-structure hierarchy (see Section 28.2 for
details of the operation of EPT). Software is limited to selecting from a list of potential EPTP values configured in
advance by software in VMX root operation.
Specifically, the value of ECX is used to select an entry from the EPTP list, the 4-KByte structure referenced by the
EPTP-list address (see Section 24.6.14; because this structure contains 512 8-Byte entries, VMFUNC causes a
VM exit if ECX ≥ 512). If the selected entry is a valid EPTP value (it would not cause VM entry to fail; see Section
26.2.1.1), it is stored in the EPTP field of the current VMCS and is used for subsequent accesses using guest-phys-
ical addresses. The following pseudocode provides details:

IF ECX ≥ 512
    THEN VM exit;
    ELSE
        tent_EPTP ← 8 bytes from EPTP-list address + 8 * ECX;
        IF tent_EPTP is not a valid EPTP value (would cause VM entry to fail if in EPTP)
             THEN VMexit;
             ELSE
                 write tent_EPTP to the EPTP field in the current VMCS;
                 use tent_EPTP as the new EPTP value for address translation;
                 IF processor supports the 1-setting of the “EPT-violation #VE” VM-execution control
                      THEN
                           write ECX[15:0] to EPTP-index field in current VMCS;
                           use ECX[15:0] as EPTP index for subsequent EPT-violation virtualization exceptions (see Section 25.5.6.2);
                 FI;
        FI;
FI;
Execution of the EPTP-switching VM function does not modify the state of any registers; no flags are modified.
As noted in Section 25.5.5.2, an execution of the EPTP-switching VM function that causes a VM exit (as specified
above), uses the basic exit reason 59, indicating “VMFUNC”. The length of the VMFUNC instruction is saved into the
VM-exit instruction-length field. No additional VM-exit information is provided.
An execution of VMFUNC loads EPTP from the EPTP list (and thus does not cause a fault or VM exit) is called an
EPTP-switching VMFUNC. After an EPTP-switching VMFUNC, control passes to the next instruction. The logical
processor starts creating and using guest-physical and combined mappings associated with the new value of bits
51:12 of EPTP; the combined mappings created and used are associated with the current VPID and PCID (these are
not changed by VMFUNC).1 If the “enable VPID” VM-execution control is 0, an EPTP-switching VMFUNC invalidates
combined mappings associated with VPID 0000H (for all PCIDs and for all EP4TA values, where EP4TA is the value
of bits 51:12 of EPTP).
Because an EPTP-switching VMFUNC may change the translation of guest-physical addresses, it may affect use of
the guest-physical address in CR3. The EPTP-switching VMFUNC cannot itself cause a VM exit due to an EPT viola-
tion or an EPT misconfiguration due to the translation of that guest-physical address through the new EPT paging
structures. The following items provide details that apply if CR0.PG = 1:
•   If 32-bit paging or IA-32e paging is in use (either CR4.PAE = 0 or IA32_EFER.LMA = 1), the next memory
    access with a linear address uses the translation of the guest-physical address in CR3 through the new EPT

1. If the “enable VPID” VM-execution control is 0, the current VPID is 0000H; if CR4.PCIDE = 0, the current PCID is 000H.

    paging structures. As a result, this access may cause a VM exit due to an EPT violation or an EPT misconfigu-
    ration encountered during that translation.
•   If PAE paging is in use (CR4.PAE = 1 and IA32_EFER.LMA = 0), an EPTP-switching VMFUNC does not load the
    four page-directory-pointer-table entries (PDPTEs) from the guest-physical address in CR3. The logical
    processor continues to use the four guest-physical addresses already present in the PDPTEs. The guest-
    physical address in CR3 is not translated through the new EPT paging structures (until some operation that
    would load the PDPTEs).
    The EPTP-switching VMFUNC cannot itself cause a VM exit due to an EPT violation or an EPT misconfiguration
    encountered during the translation of a guest-physical address in any of the PDPTEs. A subsequent memory
    access with a linear address uses the translation of the guest-physical address in the appropriate PDPTE
    through the new EPT paging structures. As a result, such an access may cause a VM exit due to an EPT
    violation or an EPT misconfiguration encountered during that translation.
If an EPTP-switching VMFUNC establishes an EPTP value that enables accessed and dirty flags for EPT (by setting
bit 6), subsequent memory accesses may fail to set those flags as specified if there has been no appropriate execu-
tion of INVEPT since the last use of an EPTP value that does not enable accessed and dirty flags for EPT (because
bit 6 is clear) and that is identical to the new value on bits 51:12.
IF the processor supports the 1-setting of the “EPT-violation #VE” VM-execution control, an EPTP-switching
VMFUNC loads the value in ECX[15:0] into to EPTP-index field in current VMCS. Subsequent EPT-violation virtual-
ization exceptions will save this value into the virtualization-exception information area (see Section 25.5.6.2);

25.5.6      Virtualization Exceptions
A virtualization exception is a new processor exception. It uses vector 20 and is abbreviated #VE.
A virtualization exception can occur only in VMX non-root operation. Virtualization exceptions occur only with
certain settings of certain VM-execution controls. Generally, these settings imply that certain conditions that would
normally cause VM exits instead cause virtualization exceptions
In particular, the 1-setting of the “EPT-violation #VE” VM-execution control causes some EPT violations to generate
virtualization exceptions instead of VM exits. Section 25.5.6.1 provides the details of how the processor deter-
mines whether an EPT violation causes a virtualization exception or a VM exit.
When the processor encounters a virtualization exception, it saves information about the exception to the virtual-
ization-exception information area; see Section 25.5.6.2.
After saving virtualization-exception information, the processor delivers a virtualization exception as it would any
other exception; see Section 25.5.6.3 for details.

25.5.6.1    Convertible EPT Violations
If the “EPT-violation #VE” VM-execution control is 0 (e.g., on processors that do not support this feature), EPT
violations always cause VM exits. If instead the control is 1, certain EPT violations may be converted to cause virtu-
alization exceptions instead; such EPT violations are convertible.
The values of certain EPT paging-structure entries determine which EPT violations are convertible. Specifically,
bit 63 of certain EPT paging-structure entries may be defined to mean suppress #VE:
•   If bits 2:0 of an EPT paging-structure entry are all 0, the entry is not present. If the processor encounters
    such an entry while translating a guest-physical address, it causes an EPT violation. The EPT violation is
    convertible if and only if bit 63 of the entry is 0.
•   If bits 2:0 of an EPT paging-structure entry are not all 0, the following cases apply:
    — If the value of the EPT paging-structure entry is not supported, the entry is misconfigured. If the
      processor encounters such an entry while translating a guest-physical address, it causes an EPT misconfig-
      uration (not an EPT violation). EPT misconfigurations always cause VM exits.
    — If the value of the EPT paging-structure entry is supported, the following cases apply:

            •   If bit 7 of the entry is 1, or if the entry is an EPT PTE, the entry maps a page. If the processor uses such
                an entry to translate a guest-physical address, and if an access to that address causes an EPT violation,
                the EPT violation is convertible if and only if bit 63 of the entry is 0.
            •   If bit 7 of the entry is 0 and the entry is not an EPT PTE, the entry references another EPT paging
                structure. The processor does not use the value of bit 63 of the entry to determine whether any
                subsequent EPT violation is convertible.
If an access to a guest-physical address causes an EPT violation, bit 63 of exactly one of the EPT paging-structure
entries used to translate that address is used to determine whether the EPT violation is convertible: either a entry
that is not present (if the guest-physical address does not translate to a physical address) or an entry that maps a
page (if it does).
A convertible EPT violation instead causes a virtualization exception if the following all hold:
•        CR0.PE = 1;
•        the logical processor is not in the process of delivering an event through the IDT; and
•        the 32 bits at offset 4 in the virtualization-exception information area are all 0.
Delivery of virtualization exceptions writes the value FFFFFFFFH to offset 4 in the virtualization-exception informa-
tion area (see Section 25.5.6.2). Thus, once a virtualization exception occurs, another can occur only if software
clears this field.

25.5.6.2          Virtualization-Exception Information
Virtualization exceptions save data into the virtualization-exception information area (see Section 24.6.18).
Table 25-1 enumerates the data saved and the format of the area.

                            Table 25-1. Format of the Virtualization-Exception Information Area

    Byte Offset                 Contents

    0                           The 32-bit value that would have been saved into the VMCS as an exit reason had a VM exit occurred
                                instead of the virtualization exception. For EPT violations, this value is 48 (00000030H)

    4                           FFFFFFFFH

    8                           The 64-bit value that would have been saved into the VMCS as an exit qualification had a VM exit
                                occurred instead of the virtualization exception

    16                          The 64-bit value that would have been saved into the VMCS as a guest-linear address had a VM exit
                                occurred instead of the virtualization exception

    24                          The 64-bit value that would have been saved into the VMCS as a guest-physical address had a VM
                                exit occurred instead of the virtualization exception

    32                          The current 16-bit value of the EPTP index VM-execution control (see Section 24.6.18 and Section
                                25.5.5.3)

25.5.6.3          Delivery of Virtualization Exceptions
After saving virtualization-exception information, the processor treats a virtualization exception as it does other
exceptions:
•        If bit 20 (#VE) is 1 in the exception bitmap in the VMCS, a virtualization exception causes a VM exit (see
         below). If the bit is 0, the virtualization exception is delivered using gate descriptor 20 in the IDT.
•        Virtualization exceptions produce no error code. Delivery of a virtualization exception pushes no error code on
         the stack.
•        With respect to double faults, virtualization exceptions have the same severity as page faults. If delivery of a
         virtualization exception encounters a nested fault that is either contributory or a page fault, a double fault

    (#DF) is generated. See Chapter 6, “Interrupt 8—Double Fault Exception (#DF)” in Intel® 64 and IA-32 Archi-
    tectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A.
    It is not possible for a virtualization exception to be encountered while delivering another exception (see
    Section 25.5.6.1).
If a virtualization exception causes a VM exit directly (because bit 20 is 1 in the exception bitmap), information
about the exception is saved normally in the VM-exit interruption information field in the VMCS (see Section
27.2.2). Specifically, the event is reported as a hardware exception with vector 20 and no error code. Bit 12 of the
field (NMI unblocking due to IRET) is set normally.
If a virtualization exception causes a VM exit indirectly (because bit 20 is 0 in the exception bitmap and delivery of
the exception generates an event that causes a VM exit), information about the exception is saved normally in the
IDT-vectoring information field in the VMCS (see Section 27.2.3). Specifically, the event is reported as a hardware
exception with vector 20 and no error code.

25.6         UNRESTRICTED GUESTS
The first processors to support VMX operation require CR0.PE and CR0.PG to be 1 in VMX operation (see Section
23.8). This restriction implies that guest software cannot be run in unpaged protected mode or in real-address
mode. Later processors support a VM-execution control called “unrestricted guest”.1 If this control is 1, CR0.PE and
CR0.PG may be 0 in VMX non-root operation. Such processors allow guest software to run in unpaged protected
mode or in real-address mode. The following items describe the behavior of such software:
•   The MOV CR0 instructions does not cause a general-protection exception simply because it would set either
    CR0.PE and CR0.PG to 0. See Section 25.3 for details.
•   A logical processor treats the values of CR0.PE and CR0.PG in VMX non-root operation just as it does outside
    VMX operation. Thus, if CR0.PE = 0, the processor operates as it does normally in real-address mode (for
    example, it uses the 16-bit interrupt table to deliver interrupts and exceptions). If CR0.PG = 0, the processor
    operates as it does normally when paging is disabled.
•   Processor operation is modified by the fact that the processor is in VMX non-root operation and by the settings
    of the VM-execution controls just as it is in protected mode or when paging is enabled. Instructions, interrupts,
    and exceptions that cause VM exits in protected mode or when paging is enabled also do so in real-address
    mode or when paging is disabled. The following examples should be noted:
    — If CR0.PG = 0, page faults do not occur and thus cannot cause VM exits.
    — If CR0.PE = 0, invalid-TSS exceptions do not occur and thus cannot cause VM exits.
    — If CR0.PE = 0, the following instructions cause invalid-opcode exceptions and do not cause VM exits:
      INVEPT, INVVPID, LLDT, LTR, SLDT, STR, VMCLEAR, VMLAUNCH, VMPTRLD, VMPTRST, VMREAD,
      VMRESUME, VMWRITE, VMXOFF, and VMXON.
•   If CR0.PG = 0, each linear address is passed directly to the EPT mechanism for translation to a physical
    address.2 The guest memory type passed on to the EPT mechanism is WB (writeback).

1. “Unrestricted guest” is a secondary processor-based VM-execution control. If bit 31 of the primary processor-based VM-execution
   controls is 0, VMX non-root operation functions as if the “unrestricted guest” VM-execution control were 0. See Section 24.6.2.
2. As noted in Section 26.2.1.1, the “enable EPT” VM-execution control must be 1 if the “unrestricted guest” VM-execution control is 1.

