                                                                                                    CHAPTER 27

VM exits occur in response to certain instructions and events in VMX non-root operation as detailed in Section 25.1
through Section 25.2. VM exits perform the following operations:
1. Information about the cause of the VM exit is recorded in the VM-exit information fields and VM-entry control
   fields are modified as described in Section 27.2.
2. Processor state is saved in the guest-state area (Section 27.3).
3. MSRs may be saved in the VM-exit MSR-store area (Section 27.4). This step is not performed for SMM VM exits
   that activate the dual-monitor treatment of SMIs and SMM.
4. The following may be performed in parallel and in any order (Section 27.5):
    — Processor state is loaded based in part on the host-state area and some VM-exit controls. This step is not
      performed for SMM VM exits that activate the dual-monitor treatment of SMIs and SMM. See Section
      34.15.6 for information on how processor state is loaded by such VM exits.
    — Address-range monitoring is cleared.
5. MSRs may be loaded from the VM-exit MSR-load area (Section 27.6). This step is not performed for SMM
   VM exits that activate the dual-monitor treatment of SMIs and SMM.
VM exits are not logged with last-branch records, do not produce branch-trace messages, and do not update the
branch-trace store.
Section 27.1 clarifies the nature of the architectural state before a VM exit begins. The steps described above are
detailed in Section 27.2 through Section 27.6.
Section 34.15 describes the dual-monitor treatment of system-management interrupts (SMIs) and system-
management mode (SMM). Under this treatment, ordinary transitions to SMM are replaced by VM exits to a sepa-
rate SMM monitor. Called SMM VM exits, these are caused by the arrival of an SMI or the execution of VMCALL in
VMX root operation. SMM VM exits differ from other VM exits in ways that are detailed in Section 34.15.2.

27.1        ARCHITECTURAL STATE BEFORE A VM EXIT
This section describes the architectural state that exists before a VM exit, especially for VM exits caused by events
that would normally be delivered through the IDT. Note the following:
•   An exception causes a VM exit directly if the bit corresponding to that exception is set in the exception bitmap.
    A non-maskable interrupt (NMI) causes a VM exit directly if the “NMI exiting” VM-execution control is 1. An
    external interrupt causes a VM exit directly if the “external-interrupt exiting” VM-execution control is 1. A start-
    up IPI (SIPI) that arrives while a logical processor is in the wait-for-SIPI activity state causes a VM exit directly.
    INIT signals that arrive while the processor is not in the wait-for-SIPI activity state cause VM exits directly.
•   An exception, NMI, external interrupt, or software interrupt causes a VM exit indirectly if it does not do so
    directly but delivery of the event causes a nested exception, double fault, task switch, APIC access (see Section
    27.4), EPT violation, EPT misconfiguration, or page-modification log-full event that causes a VM exit.
•   An event results in a VM exit if it causes a VM exit (directly or indirectly).
The following bullets detail when architectural state is and is not updated in response to VM exits:
•   If an event causes a VM exit directly, it does not update architectural state as it would have if it had it not
    caused the VM exit:
    — A debug exception does not update DR6, DR7.GD, or IA32_DEBUGCTL.LBR. (Information about the nature
      of the debug exception is saved in the exit qualification field.)
    — A page fault does not update CR2. (The linear address causing the page fault is saved in the exit-qualifi-
      cation field.)
    — An NMI causes subsequent NMIs to be blocked, but only after the VM exit completes.

    — An external interrupt does not acknowledge the interrupt controller and the interrupt remains pending,
      unless the “acknowledge interrupt on exit” VM-exit control is 1. In such a case, the interrupt controller is
      acknowledged and the interrupt is no longer pending.
    — The flags L0 – L3 in DR7 (bit 0, bit 2, bit 4, and bit 6) are not cleared when a task switch causes a VM exit.
    — If a task switch causes a VM exit, none of the following are modified by the task switch: old task-state
      segment (TSS); new TSS; old TSS descriptor; new TSS descriptor; RFLAGS.NT1; or the TR register.
    — No last-exception record is made if the event that would do so directly causes a VM exit.
    — If a machine-check exception causes a VM exit directly, this does not prevent machine-check MSRs from
      being updated. These are updated by the machine-check event itself and not the resulting machine-check
      exception.
    — If the logical processor is in an inactive state (see Section 24.4.2) and not executing instructions, some
      events may be blocked but others may return the logical processor to the active state. Unblocked events
      may cause VM exits.2 If an unblocked event causes a VM exit directly, a return to the active state occurs
      only after the VM exit completes.3 The VM exit generates any special bus cycle that is normally generated
      when the active state is entered from that activity state.
         MTF VM exits (see Section 25.5.2 and Section 26.6.8) are not blocked in the HLT activity state. If an MTF
         VM exit occurs in the HLT activity state, the logical processor returns to the active state only after the
         VM exit completes. MTF VM exits are blocked the shutdown state and the wait-for-SIPI state.
•   If an event causes a VM exit indirectly, the event does update architectural state:
    — A debug exception updates DR6, DR7, and the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR. No debug exceptions are considered
      pending.
    — A page fault updates CR2.
    — An NMI causes subsequent NMIs to be blocked before the VM exit commences.
    — An external interrupt acknowledges the interrupt controller and the interrupt is no longer pending.
    — If the logical processor had been in an inactive state, it enters the active state and, before the VM exit
      commences, generates any special bus cycle that is normally generated when the active state is entered
      from that activity state.
    — There is no blocking by STI or by MOV SS when the VM exit commences.
    — Processor state that is normally updated as part of delivery through the IDT (CS, RIP, SS, RSP, RFLAGS) is
      not modified. However, the incomplete delivery of the event may write to the stack.
    — The treatment of last-exception records is implementation dependent:
         •     Some processors make a last-exception record when beginning the delivery of an event through the IDT
               (before it can encounter a nested exception). Such processors perform this update even if the event
               encounters a nested exception that causes a VM exit (including the case where nested exceptions lead
               to a triple fault).
         •     Other processors delay making a last-exception record until event delivery has reached some event
               handler successfully (perhaps after one or more nested exceptions). Such processors do not update the
               last-exception record if a VM exit or triple fault occurs before an event handler is reached.
•   If the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 1, VM entry injects an NMI, and delivery of the NMI causes a
    nested exception, double fault, task switch, or APIC access that causes a VM exit, virtual-NMI blocking is in
    effect before the VM exit commences.

1. This chapter uses the notation RAX, RIP, RSP, RFLAGS, etc. for processor registers because most processors that support VMX oper-
   ation also support Intel 64 architecture. For processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture, this notation refers to the 32-bit
   forms of those registers (EAX, EIP, ESP, EFLAGS, etc.). In a few places, notation such as EAX is used to refer specifically to lower 32
   bits of the indicated register.
2. If a VM exit takes the processor from an inactive state resulting from execution of a specific instruction (HLT or MWAIT), the value
   saved for RIP by that VM exit will reference the following instruction.
3. An exception is made if the logical processor had been inactive due to execution of MWAIT; in this case, it is considered to have
   become active before the VM exit.

•   If a VM exit results from a fault, EPT violation, EPT misconfiguration, or page-modification log-full event is
    encountered during execution of IRET and the “NMI exiting” VM-execution control is 0, any blocking by NMI is
    cleared before the VM exit commences. However, the previous state of blocking by NMI may be recorded in the
    VM-exit interruption-information field; see Section 27.2.2.
•   If a VM exit results from a fault, EPT violation, EPT misconfiguration, or page-modification log-full event is
    encountered during execution of IRET and the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 1, virtual-NMI blocking is
    cleared before the VM exit commences. However, the previous state of virtual-NMI blocking may be recorded
    in the VM-exit interruption-information field; see Section 27.2.2.
•   Suppose that a VM exit is caused directly by an x87 FPU Floating-Point Error (#MF) or by any of the following
    events if the event was unblocked due to (and given priority over) an x87 FPU Floating-Point Error: an INIT
    signal, an external interrupt, an NMI, an SMI; or a machine-check exception. In these cases, there is no
    blocking by STI or by MOV SS when the VM exit commences.
•   Normally, a last-branch record may be made when an event is delivered through the IDT. However, if such an
    event results in a VM exit before delivery is complete, no last-branch record is made.
•   If machine-check exception results in a VM exit, processor state is suspect and may result in suspect state
    being saved to the guest-state area. A VM monitor should consult the RIPV and EIPV bits in the
    IA32_MCG_STATUS MSR before resuming a guest that caused a VM exit resulting from a machine-check
    exception.
•   If a VM exit results from a fault, APIC access (see Section 29.4), EPT violation, EPT misconfiguration, or page-
    modification log-full event is encountered while executing an instruction, data breakpoints due to that
    instruction may have been recognized and information about them may be saved in the pending debug
    exceptions field (see Section 27.3.4).
•   The following VM exits are considered to happen after an instruction is executed:
    — VM exits resulting from debug traps (single-step, I/O breakpoints, and data breakpoints).
    — VM exits resulting from debug exceptions whose recognition was delayed by blocking by MOV SS.
    — VM exits resulting from some machine-check exceptions.
    — Trap-like VM exits due to execution of MOV to CR8 when the “CR8-load exiting” VM-execution control is 0
      and the “use TPR shadow” VM-execution control is 1 (see Section 29.3). (Such VM exits can occur only from
      64-bit mode and thus only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture.)
    — Trap-like VM exits due to execution of WRMSR when the “use MSR bitmaps” VM-execution control is 1; the
      value of ECX is in the range 800H–8FFH; and the bit corresponding to the ECX value in write bitmap for low
      MSRs is 0; and the “virtualize x2APIC mode” VM-execution control is 1. See Section 29.5.
    — VM exits caused by APIC-write emulation (see Section 29.4.3.2) that result from APIC accesses as part of
      instruction execution.
    For these VM exits, the instruction’s modifications to architectural state complete before the VM exit occurs.
    Such modifications include those to the logical processor’s interruptibility state (see Table 24-3). If there had
    been blocking by MOV SS, POP SS, or STI before the instruction executed, such blocking is no longer in effect.
A VM exit that occurs in enclave mode sets bit 27 of the exit-reason field and bit 4 of the guest interruptibility-state
field. Before such a VM exit is delivered, an Asynchronous Enclave Exit (AEX) occurs (see Chapter 40, “Enclave
Exiting Events”). An AEX modifies architectural state (Section 40.3). In particular, the processor establishes the
following architectural state as indicated:
•   The following bits in RFLAGS are cleared: CF, PF, AF, ZF, SF, OF, and RF.
•   FS and GS are restored to the values they had prior to the most recent enclave entry.
•   RIP is loaded with the AEP of interrupted enclave thread.
•   RSP is loaded from the URSP field in the enclave’s state-save area (SSA).

27.2             RECORDING VM-EXIT INFORMATION AND UPDATING VM-ENTRY CONTROL
                 FIELDS
VM exits begin by recording information about the nature of and reason for the VM exit in the VM-exit information
fields. Section 27.2.1 to Section 27.2.4 detail the use of these fields.
In addition to updating the VM-exit information fields, the valid bit (bit 31) is cleared in the VM-entry interruption-
information field. If bit 5 of the IA32_VMX_MISC MSR (index 485H) is read as 1 (see Appendix A.6), the value of
IA32_EFER.LMA is stored into the “IA-32e mode guest” VM-entry control.1

27.2.1           Basic VM-Exit Information
Section 24.9.1 defines the basic VM-exit information fields. The following items detail their use.
•        Exit reason.
         — Bits 15:0 of this field contain the basic exit reason. It is loaded with a number indicating the general cause
           of the VM exit. Appendix C lists the numbers used and their meaning.
         — Bit 27 of this field is set to 1 if the VM exit occurred while the logical processor was in enclave mode.
            Such VM exits includes those caused by interrupts, non-maskable interrupts, system-management
            interrupts, INIT signals, and exceptions occurring in enclave mode as well as exceptions encountered
            during the delivery of such events incident to enclave mode.
            A VM exit also sets this bit if it is incident to delivery of an event injected by VM entry and the guest inter-
            ruptibility-state field indicates an enclave interrupt (bit 4 of the field is 1).
         — The remainder of the field (bits 31:28 and bits 26:16) is cleared to 0 (certain SMM VM exits may set some
           of these bits; see Section 34.15.2.3).2
•        Exit qualification. This field is saved for VM exits due to the following causes: debug exceptions; page-fault
         exceptions; start-up IPIs (SIPIs); system-management interrupts (SMIs) that arrive immediately after the
         retirement of I/O instructions; task switches; INVEPT; INVLPG; INVPCID; INVVPID; LGDT; LIDT; LLDT; LTR;
         SGDT; SIDT; SLDT; STR; VMCLEAR; VMPTRLD; VMPTRST; VMREAD; VMWRITE; VMXON; XRSTORS; XSAVES;
         control-register accesses; MOV DR; I/O instructions; MWAIT; accesses to the APIC-access page (see Section
         29.4); EPT violations; EOI virtualization (see Section 29.1.4); APIC-write emulation (see Section 29.4.3.3);
         and page-modification log full (see Section 28.2.5). For all other VM exits, this field is cleared. The following
         items provide details:
         — For a debug exception, the exit qualification contains information about the debug exception. The
           information has the format given in Table 27-1.

                                       Table 27-1. Exit Qualification for Debug Exceptions

    Bit Position(s)         Contents

    3:0                     B3 – B0. When set, each of these bits indicates that the corresponding breakpoint condition was met. Any of
                            these bits may be set even if its corresponding enabling bit in DR7 is not set.

    12:4                    Reserved (cleared to 0).

    13                      BD. When set, this bit indicates that the cause of the debug exception is “debug register access detected.”

    14                      BS. When set, this bit indicates that the cause of the debug exception is either the execution of a single
                            instruction (if RFLAGS.TF = 1 and IA32_DEBUGCTL.BTF = 0) or a taken branch (if
                            RFLAGS.TF = DEBUGCTL.BTF = 1).

    63:15                   Reserved (cleared to 0). Bits 63:32 exist only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture.

1. Bit 5 of the IA32_VMX_MISC MSR is read as 1 on any logical processor that supports the 1-setting of the “unrestricted guest” VM-
   execution control.
2. Bit 31 of this field is set on certain VM-entry failures; see Section 26.7.

  — For a page-fault exception, the exit qualification contains the linear address that caused the page fault. On
    processors that support Intel 64 architecture, bits 63:32 are cleared if the logical processor was not in 64-
    bit mode before the VM exit.
        If the page-fault exception occurred during execution of an instruction in enclave mode (and not during
        delivery of an event incident to enclave mode), bits 11:0 of the exit qualification are cleared.
  — For a start-up IPI (SIPI), the exit qualification contains the SIPI vector information in bits 7:0. Bits 63:8 of
    the exit qualification are cleared to 0.
  — For a task switch, the exit qualification contains details about the task switch, encoded as shown in
    Table 27-2.
  — For INVLPG, the exit qualification contains the linear-address operand of the instruction.
        •   On processors that support Intel 64 architecture, bits 63:32 are cleared if the logical processor was not
            in 64-bit mode before the VM exit.
        •   If the INVLPG source operand specifies an unusable segment, the linear address specified in the exit
            qualification will match the linear address that the INVLPG would have used if no VM exit occurred. This
            address is not architecturally defined and may be implementation-specific.

                                    Table 27-2. Exit Qualification for Task Switch

Bit Position(s)         Contents

15:0                    Selector of task-state segment (TSS) to which the guest attempted to switch

29:16                   Reserved (cleared to 0)

31:30                   Source of task switch initiation:
                          0: CALL instruction
                          1: IRET instruction
                          2: JMP instruction
                          3: Task gate in IDT

63:32                   Reserved (cleared to 0). These bits exist only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture.

  — For INVEPT, INVPCID, INVVPID, LGDT, LIDT, LLDT, LTR, SGDT, SIDT, SLDT, STR, VMCLEAR, VMPTRLD,
    VMPTRST, VMREAD, VMWRITE, VMXON, XRSTORS, and XSAVES, the exit qualification receives the value of
    the instruction’s displacement field, which is sign-extended to 64 bits if necessary (32 bits on processors
    that do not support Intel 64 architecture). If the instruction has no displacement (for example, has a
    register operand), zero is stored into the exit qualification.
        On processors that support Intel 64 architecture, an exception is made for RIP-relative addressing (used
        only in 64-bit mode). Such addressing causes an instruction to use an address that is the sum of the
        displacement field and the value of RIP that references the following instruction. In this case, the exit
        qualification is loaded with the sum of the displacement field and the appropriate RIP value.
        In all cases, bits of this field beyond the instruction’s address size are undefined. For example, suppose
        that the address-size field in the VM-exit instruction-information field (see Section 24.9.4 and Section
        27.2.4) reports an n-bit address size. Then bits 63:n (bits 31:n on processors that do not support Intel 64
        architecture) of the instruction displacement are undefined.
  — For a control-register access, the exit qualification contains information about the access and has the
    format given in Table 27-3.
  — For MOV DR, the exit qualification contains information about the instruction and has the format given in
    Table 27-4.
  — For an I/O instruction, the exit qualification contains information about the instruction and has the format
    given in Table 27-5.

     — For MWAIT, the exit qualification contains a value that indicates whether address-range monitoring
       hardware was armed. The exit qualification is set either to 0 (if address-range monitoring hardware is not
       armed) or to 1 (if address-range monitoring hardware is armed).
     — For an APIC-access VM exit resulting from a linear access or a guest-physical access to the APIC-access
       page (see Section 29.4), the exit qualification contains information about the access and has the format
       given in Table 27-6.1
         If the access to the APIC-access page occurred during execution of an instruction in enclave mode (and not
         during delivery of an event incident to enclave mode), bits 11:0 of the exit qualification are cleared.
         Such a VM exit that set bits 15:12 of the exit qualification to 0000b (data read during instruction execution)
         or 0001b (data write during instruction execution) set bit 12—which distinguishes data read from data
         write—to that which would have been stored in bit 1—W/R—of the page-fault error code had the access
         caused a page fault instead of an APIC-access VM exit. This implies the following:
         •     For an APIC-access VM exit caused by the CLFLUSH and CLFLUSHOPT instructions, the access type is
               “data read during instruction execution.”
         •     For an APIC-access VM exit caused by the ENTER instruction, the access type is “data write during
               instruction execution.”

                                Table 27-3. Exit Qualification for Control-Register Accesses

 Bit Positions      Contents

 3:0                Number of control register (0 for CLTS and LMSW). Bit 3 is always 0 on processors that do not support Intel 64
                    architecture as they do not support CR8.

 5:4                Access type:
                      0 = MOV to CR
                      1 = MOV from CR
                      2 = CLTS
                      3 = LMSW

 6                  LMSW operand type:
                      0 = register
                      1 = memory

                    For CLTS and MOV CR, cleared to 0

 7                  Reserved (cleared to 0)

 11:8               For MOV CR, the general-purpose register:
                      0 = RAX
                      1 = RCX
                      2 = RDX
                      3 = RBX
                      4 = RSP
                      5 = RBP
                      6 = RSI
                      7 = RDI
                      8–15 represent R8–R15, respectively (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)

                    For CLTS and LMSW, cleared to 0

 15:12              Reserved (cleared to 0)

1. The exit qualification is undefined if the access was part of the logging of a branch record or a precise-event-based-sampling (PEBS)
   record to the DS save area. It is recommended that software configure the paging structures so that no address in the DS save area
   translates to an address on the APIC-access page.

                          Table 27-3. Exit Qualification for Control-Register Accesses (Contd.)

 Bit Positions     Contents

 31:16             For LMSW, the LMSW source data
                   For CLTS and MOV CR, cleared to 0

 63:32             Reserved (cleared to 0). These bits exist only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture.

         •   For an APIC-access VM exit caused by the MASKMOVQ instruction or the MASKMOVDQU instruction, the
             access type is “data write during instruction execution.”
         •   For an APIC-access VM exit caused by the MONITOR instruction, the access type is “data read during
             instruction execution.”
         Such a VM exit stores 1 for bit 31 for IDT-vectoring information field (see Section 27.2.3) if and only if it
         sets bits 15:12 of the exit qualification to 0011b (linear access during event delivery) or 1010b (guest-
         physical access during event delivery).
         See Section 29.4.4 for further discussion of these instructions and APIC-access VM exits.
         For APIC-access VM exits resulting from physical accesses to the APIC-access page (see Section 29.4.6),
         the exit qualification is undefined.
     — For an EPT violation, the exit qualification contains information about the access causing the EPT violation
       and has the format given in Table 27-7.
         As noted in that table, the format and meaning of the exit qualification depends on the setting of the
         “mode-based execute control for EPT” VM-execution control and whether the processor supports advanced
         VM-exit information for EPT violations.1
         An EPT violation that occurs during as a result of execution of a read-modify-write operation sets bit 1 (data
         write). Whether it also sets bit 0 (data read) is implementation-specific and, for a given implementation,
         may differ for different kinds of read-modify-write operations.

                                          Table 27-4. Exit Qualification for MOV DR

 Bit Position(s)    Contents

 2:0                Number of debug register

 3                  Reserved (cleared to 0)

 4                  Direction of access (0 = MOV to DR; 1 = MOV from DR)

 7:5                Reserved (cleared to 0)

 11:8               General-purpose register:
                      0 = RAX
                      1 = RCX
                      2 = RDX
                      3 = RBX
                      4 = RSP
                      5 = RBP
                      6 = RSI
                      7 = RDI
                      8 –15 = R8 – R15, respectively

 63:12              Reserved (cleared to 0)

1. Software can determine whether advanced VM-exit information for EPT violations is supported by consulting the VMX capability
   MSR IA32_VMX_EPT_VPID_CAP (see Appendix A.10).

                                       Table 27-5. Exit Qualification for I/O Instructions

 Bit Position(s)     Contents

 2:0                 Size of access:
                       0 = 1-byte
                       1 = 2-byte
                       3 = 4-byte

                     Other values not used

 3                   Direction of the attempted access (0 = OUT, 1 = IN)

 4                   String instruction (0 = not string; 1 = string)

 5                   REP prefixed (0 = not REP; 1 = REP)

 6                   Operand encoding (0 = DX, 1 = immediate)

 15:7                Reserved (cleared to 0)

 31:16               Port number (as specified in DX or in an immediate operand)

 63:32               Reserved (cleared to 0). These bits exist only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture.

         Bit 12 is undefined in any of the following cases:
         •     If the “NMI exiting” VM-execution control is 1 and the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 0.
         •     If the VM exit sets the valid bit in the IDT-vectoring information field (see Section 27.2.3).
         Otherwise, bit 12 is defined as follows:
         •     If the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 0, the EPT violation was caused by a memory access as
               part of execution of the IRET instruction, and blocking by NMI (see Table 24-3) was in effect before
               execution of IRET, bit 12 is set to 1.

     Table 27-6. Exit Qualification for APIC-Access VM Exits from Linear Accesses and Guest-Physical Accesses

 Bit Position(s)     Contents

 11:0                • If the APIC-access VM exit is due to a linear access, the offset of access within the APIC page.
                     • Undefined if the APIC-access VM exit is due a guest-physical access

 15:12               Access type:
                       0 = linear access for a data read during instruction execution
                       1 = linear access for a data write during instruction execution
                       2 = linear access for an instruction fetch
                       3 = linear access (read or write) during event delivery
                       10 = guest-physical access during event delivery
                       15 = guest-physical access for an instruction fetch or during instruction execution

                       Other values not used

 63:16               Reserved (cleared to 0). Bits 63:32 exist only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture.

           •   If the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 1,the EPT violation was caused by a memory access as part
               of execution of the IRET instruction, and virtual-NMI blocking was in effect before execution of IRET,
               bit 12 is set to 1.
           •   For all other relevant VM exits, bit 12 is cleared to 0.
        — For VM exits caused as part of EOI virtualization (Section 29.1.4), bits 7:0 of the exit qualification are set
          to vector of the virtual interrupt that was dismissed by the EOI virtualization. Bits above bit 7 are cleared.
        — For APIC-write VM exits (Section 29.4.3.3), bits 11:0 of the exit qualification are set to the page offset of
          the write access that caused the VM exit.1 Bits above bit 11 are cleared.
        — For a VM exit due to a page-modification log-full event (Section 28.2.5), only bit 12 of the exit qualification
          is defined, and only in some cases. It is undefined in the following cases:
           •   If the “NMI exiting” VM-execution control is 1 and the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 0.
           •   If the VM exit sets the valid bit in the IDT-vectoring information field (see Section 27.2.3).
           Otherwise, it is defined as follows:
           •   If the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 0, the page-modification log-full event was caused by a
               memory access as part of execution of the IRET instruction, and blocking by NMI (see Table 24-3) was
               in effect before execution of IRET, bit 12 is set to 1.
           •   If the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 1,the page-modification log-full event was caused by a
               memory access as part of execution of the IRET instruction, and virtual-NMI blocking was in effect
               before execution of IRET, bit 12 is set to 1.
           •   For all other relevant VM exits, bit 12 is cleared to 0.
           For these VM exits, all bits other than bit 12 are undefined.
•       Guest-linear address. For some VM exits, this field receives a linear address that pertains to the VM exit. The
        field is set for different VM exits as follows:
        — VM exits due to attempts to execute LMSW with a memory operand. In these cases, this field receives the
          linear address of that operand. Bits 63:32 are cleared if the logical processor was not in 64-bit mode before
          the VM exit.
        — VM exits due to attempts to execute INS or OUTS for which the relevant segment is usable (if the relevant
          segment is not usable, the value is undefined). (ES is always the relevant segment for INS; for OUTS, the
          relevant segment is DS unless overridden by an instruction prefix.) The linear address is the base address
          of relevant segment plus (E)DI (for INS) or (E)SI (for OUTS). Bits 63:32 are cleared if the logical processor
          was not in 64-bit mode before the VM exit.

                                        Table 27-7. Exit Qualification for EPT Violations

    Bit Position(s)   Contents

    0                 Set if the access causing the EPT violation was a data read.1

    1                 Set if the access causing the EPT violation was a data write.1

    2                 Set if the access causing the EPT violation was an instruction fetch.

    3                 The logical-AND of bit 0 in the EPT paging-structure entries used to translate the guest-physical address of the
                      access causing the EPT violation (indicates whether the guest-physical address was readable).2

    4                 The logical-AND of bit 1 in the EPT paging-structure entries used to translate the guest-physical address of the
                      access causing the EPT violation (indicates whether the guest-physical address was writeable).

1. Execution of WRMSR with ECX = 83FH (self-IPI MSR) can lead to an APIC-write VM exit; the exit qualification for such an APIC-write
   VM exit is 3F0H.

                                      Table 27-7. Exit Qualification for EPT Violations (Contd.)

 Bit Position(s)     Contents

 5                   The logical-AND of bit 2 in the EPT paging-structure entries used to translate the guest-physical address of the
                     access causing the EPT violation.
                     If the “mode-based execute control for EPT” VM-execution control is 0, this indicates whether the guest-physical
                     address was executable. If that control is 1, this indicates whether the guest-physical address was executable
                     for supervisor-mode linear addresses.

 6                   If the “mode-based execute control” VM-execution control is 0, the value of this bit is undefined. If that control is
                     1, this bit is the logical-AND of bit 10 in the EPT paging-structures entries used to translate the guest-physical
                     address of the access causing the EPT violation. In this case, it indicates whether the guest-physical address was
                     executable for user-mode linear addresses.

 7                   Set if the guest linear-address field is valid.
                     The guest linear-address field is valid for all EPT violations except those resulting from an attempt to load the
                     guest PDPTEs as part of the execution of the MOV CR instruction.

 8                   If bit 7 is 1:
                     • Set if the access causing the EPT violation is to a guest-physical address that is the translation of a linear
                       address.
                     • Clear if the access causing the EPT violation is to a paging-structure entry as part of a page walk or the
                       update of an accessed or dirty bit.
                     Reserved if bit 7 is 0 (cleared to 0).

 9                   If bit 7 is 1, bit 8 is 1, and the processor supports advanced VM-exit information for EPT violations,3 this bit is 0
                     if the linear address is a supervisor-mode linear address and 1 if it is a user-mode linear address. (If CR0.PG = 0,
                     the translation of every linear address is a user-mode linear address and thus this bit will be 1.) Otherwise, this
                     bit is undefined.

 10                  If bit 7 is 1, bit 8 is 1, and the processor supports advanced VM-exit information for EPT violations,3 this bit is 0
                     if paging translates the linear address to a read-only page and 1 if it translates to a read/write page. (If CR0.PG =
                     0, every linear address is read/write and thus this bit will be 1.) Otherwise, this bit is undefined.

 11                  If bit 7 is 1, bit 8 is 1, and the processor supports advanced VM-exit information for EPT violations,3 this bit is 0
                     if paging translates the linear address to an executable page and 1 if it translates to an execute-disable page. (If
                     CR0.PG = 0, CR4.PAE = 0, or IA32_EFER.NXE = 0, every linear address is executable and thus this bit will be 0.)
                     Otherwise, this bit is undefined.

 12                  NMI unblocking due to IRET

 63:13               Reserved (cleared to 0).

NOTES:
1. If accessed and dirty flags for EPT are enabled, processor accesses to guest paging-structure entries are treated as writes with
   regard to EPT violations (see Section 28.2.3.2). If such an access causes an EPT violation, the processor sets both bit 0 and bit 1 of
   the exit qualification.
2. Bits 5:3 are cleared to 0 if any of EPT paging-structure entries used to translate the guest-physical address of the access causing the
   EPT violation is not present (see Section 28.2.2).
3. Software can determine whether advanced VM-exit information for EPT violations is supported by consulting the VMX capability
   MSR IA32_VMX_EPT_VPID_CAP (see Appendix A.10).

     — VM exits due to EPT violations that set bit 7 of the exit qualification (see Table 27-7; these are all EPT
       violations except those resulting from an attempt to load the PDPTEs as of execution of the MOV CR
       instruction). The linear address may translate to the guest-physical address whose access caused the EPT
       violation. Alternatively, translation of the linear address may reference a paging-structure entry whose
       access caused the EPT violation. Bits 63:32 are cleared if the logical processor was not in 64-bit mode
       before the VM exit.

         If the EPT violation occurred during execution of an instruction in enclave mode (and not during delivery of
         an event incident to enclave mode), bits 11:0 of this field are cleared.
    — For all other VM exits, the field is undefined.
•   Guest-physical address. For a VM exit due to an EPT violation or an EPT misconfiguration, this field receives
    the guest-physical address that caused the EPT violation or EPT misconfiguration. For all other VM exits, the
    field is undefined.
    If the EPT violation or EPT misconfiguration occurred during execution of an instruction in enclave mode (and
    not during delivery of an event incident to enclave mode), bits 11:0 of this field are cleared.

27.2.2        Information for VM Exits Due to Vectored Events
Section 24.9.2 defines fields containing information for VM exits due to the following events: exceptions (including
those generated by the instructions INT3, INTO, BOUND, and UD2); external interrupts that occur while the
“acknowledge interrupt on exit” VM-exit control is 1; and non-maskable interrupts (NMIs). Such VM exits include
those that occur on an attempt at a task switch that causes an exception before generating the VM exit due to the
task switch that causes the VM exit.
The following items detail the use of these fields:
•   VM-exit interruption information (format given in Table 24-15). The following items detail how this field is
    established for VM exits due to these events:
    — For an exception, bits 7:0 receive the exception vector (at most 31). For an NMI, bits 7:0 are set to 2. For
      an external interrupt, bits 7:0 receive the vector.
    — Bits 10:8 are set to 0 (external interrupt), 2 (non-maskable interrupt), 3 (hardware exception), or 6
      (software exception). Hardware exceptions comprise all exceptions except breakpoint exceptions (#BP;
      generated by INT3) and overflow exceptions (#OF; generated by INTO); these are software exceptions. (A
      #BP that occurs in enclave mode is considered a hardware exception.) BOUND-range exceeded exceptions
      (#BR; generated by BOUND) and invalid opcode exceptions (#UD) generated by UD2 are hardware
      exceptions.
    — Bit 11 is set to 1 if the VM exit is caused by a hardware exception that would have delivered an error code
      on the stack. This bit is always 0 if the VM exit occurred while the logical processor was in real-address
      mode (CR0.PE=0).1 If bit 11 is set to 1, the error code is placed in the VM-exit interruption error code (see
      below).
    — Bit 12 is undefined in any of the following cases:
         •   If the “NMI exiting” VM-execution control is 1 and the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 0.
         •   If the VM exit sets the valid bit in the IDT-vectoring information field (see Section 27.2.3).
         •   If the VM exit is due to a double fault (the interruption type is hardware exception and the vector is 8).
         Otherwise, bit 12 is defined as follows:
         •   If the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 0, the VM exit is due to a fault on the IRET instruction
             (other than a debug exception for an instruction breakpoint), and blocking by NMI (see Table 24-3) was
             in effect before execution of IRET, bit 12 is set to 1.
         •   If the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 1, the VM exit is due to a fault on the IRET instruction
             (other than a debug exception for an instruction breakpoint), and virtual-NMI blocking was in effect
             before execution of IRET, bit 12 is set to 1.
         •   For all other relevant VM exits, bit 12 is cleared to 0.2
    — Bits 30:13 are always set to 0.

1. If the capability MSR IA32_VMX_CR0_FIXED0 reports that CR0.PE must be 1 in VMX operation, a logical processor cannot be in real-
   address mode unless the “unrestricted guest” VM-execution control and bit 31 of the primary processor-based VM-execution con-
   trols are both 1.
2. The conditions imply that, if the “NMI exiting” VM-execution control is 0 or the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 1, bit 12 is
   always cleared to 0 by VM exits due to debug exceptions.

    — Bit 31 is always set to 1.
    For other VM exits (including those due to external interrupts when the “acknowledge interrupt on exit” VM-exit
    control is 0), the field is marked invalid (by clearing bit 31) and the remainder of the field is undefined.
•   VM-exit interruption error code.
    — For VM exits that set both bit 31 (valid) and bit 11 (error code valid) in the VM-exit interruption-information
      field, this field receives the error code that would have been pushed on the stack had the event causing the
      VM exit been delivered normally through the IDT. The EXT bit is set in this field exactly when it would be set
      normally. For exceptions that occur during the delivery of double fault (if the IDT-vectoring information field
      indicates a double fault), the EXT bit is set to 1, assuming that (1) that the exception would produce an
      error code normally (if not incident to double-fault delivery) and (2) that the error code uses the EXT bit
      (not for page faults, which use a different format).
    — For other VM exits, the value of this field is undefined.

27.2.3          Information for VM Exits During Event Delivery
Section 24.9.3 defined fields containing information for VM exits that occur while delivering an event through the
IDT and as a result of any of the following cases:1
•   A fault occurs during event delivery and causes a VM exit (because the bit associated with the fault is set to 1
    in the exception bitmap).
•   A task switch is invoked through a task gate in the IDT. The VM exit occurs due to the task switch only after the
    initial checks of the task switch pass (see Section 25.4.2).
•   Event delivery causes an APIC-access VM exit (see Section 29.4).
•   An EPT violation, EPT misconfiguration, or page-modification log-full event that occurs during event delivery.
These fields are used for VM exits that occur during delivery of events injected as part of VM entry (see Section
26.5.1.2).
A VM exit is not considered to occur during event delivery in any of the following circumstances:
•   The original event causes the VM exit directly (for example, because the original event is a non-maskable
    interrupt (NMI) and the “NMI exiting” VM-execution control is 1).
•   The original event results in a double-fault exception that causes the VM exit directly.
•   The VM exit occurred as a result of fetching the first instruction of the handler invoked by the event delivery.
•   The VM exit is caused by a triple fault.
The following items detail the use of these fields:
•   IDT-vectoring information (format given in Table 24-16). The following items detail how this field is established
    for VM exits that occur during event delivery:
    — If the VM exit occurred during delivery of an exception, bits 7:0 receive the exception vector (at most 31).
      If the VM exit occurred during delivery of an NMI, bits 7:0 are set to 2. If the VM exit occurred during
      delivery of an external interrupt, bits 7:0 receive the vector.
    — Bits 10:8 are set to indicate the type of event that was being delivered when the VM exit occurred: 0
      (external interrupt), 2 (non-maskable interrupt), 3 (hardware exception), 4 (software interrupt), 5
      (privileged software interrupt), or 6 (software exception).
         Hardware exceptions comprise all exceptions except breakpoint exceptions (#BP; generated by INT3) and
         overflow exceptions (#OF; generated by INTO); these are software exceptions. (A #BP that occurs in
         enclave mode is considered a hardware exception.) BOUND-range exceeded exceptions (#BR; generated
         by BOUND) and invalid opcode exceptions (#UD) generated by UD2 are hardware exceptions.
         Bits 10:8 may indicate privileged software interrupt if such an event was injected as part of VM entry.

1. This includes the case in which a VM exit occurs while delivering a software interrupt (INT n) through the 16-bit IVT (interrupt vec-
   tor table) that is used in virtual-8086 mode with virtual-machine extensions (if RFLAGS.VM = CR4.VME = 1).

    — Bit 11 is set to 1 if the VM exit occurred during delivery of a hardware exception that would have delivered
      an error code on the stack. This bit is always 0 if the VM exit occurred while the logical processor was in
      real-address mode (CR0.PE=0).1 If bit 11 is set to 1, the error code is placed in the IDT-vectoring error
      code (see below).
    — Bit 12 is undefined.
    — Bits 30:13 are always set to 0.
    — Bit 31 is always set to 1.
    For other VM exits, the field is marked invalid (by clearing bit 31) and the remainder of the field is undefined.
•   IDT-vectoring error code.
    — For VM exits that set both bit 31 (valid) and bit 11 (error code valid) in the IDT-vectoring information field,
      this field receives the error code that would have been pushed on the stack by the event that was being
      delivered through the IDT at the time of the VM exit. The EXT bit is set in this field when it would be set
      normally.
    — For other VM exits, the value of this field is undefined.

27.2.4        Information for VM Exits Due to Instruction Execution
Section 24.9.4 defined fields containing information for VM exits that occur due to instruction execution. (The VM-
exit instruction length is also used for VM exits that occur during the delivery of a software interrupt or software
exception.) The following items detail their use.
•   VM-exit instruction length. This field is used in the following cases:
    — For fault-like VM exits due to attempts to execute one of the following instructions that cause VM exits
      unconditionally (see Section 25.1.2) or based on the settings of VM-execution controls (see Section
      25.1.3): CLTS, CPUID, ENCLS, GETSEC, HLT, IN, INS, INVD, INVEPT, INVLPG, INVPCID, INVVPID, LGDT,
      LIDT, LLDT, LMSW, LTR, MONITOR, MOV CR, MOV DR, MWAIT, OUT, OUTS, PAUSE, RDMSR, RDPMC,
      RDRAND, RDSEED, RDTSC, RDTSCP, RSM, SGDT, SIDT, SLDT, STR, VMCALL, VMCLEAR, VMLAUNCH,
      VMPTRLD, VMPTRST, VMREAD, VMRESUME, VMWRITE, VMXOFF, VMXON, WBINVD, WRMSR, XRSTORS,
      XSETBV, and XSAVES.2
    — For VM exits due to software exceptions (those generated by executions of INT3 or INTO).
    — For VM exits due to faults encountered during delivery of a software interrupt, privileged software
      exception, or software exception.
    — For VM exits due to attempts to effect a task switch via instruction execution. These are VM exits that
      produce an exit reason indicating task switch and either of the following:
         •   An exit qualification indicating execution of CALL, IRET, or JMP instruction.
         •   An exit qualification indicating a task gate in the IDT and an IDT-vectoring information field indicating
             that the task gate was encountered during delivery of a software interrupt, privileged software
             exception, or software exception.
    — For APIC-access VM exits resulting from accesses (see Section 29.4) during delivery of a software
      interrupt, privileged software exception, or software exception.3
    — For VM exits due executions of VMFUNC that fail because one of the following is true:

1. If the capability MSR IA32_VMX_CR0_FIXED0 reports that CR0.PE must be 1 in VMX operation, a logical processor cannot be in real-
   address mode unless the “unrestricted guest” VM-execution control and bit 31 of the primary processor-based VM-execution con-
   trols are both 1.
2. This item applies only to fault-like VM exits. It does not apply to trap-like VM exits following executions of the MOV to CR8 instruc-
   tion when the “use TPR shadow” VM-execution control is 1 or to those following executions of the WRMSR instruction when the
   “virtualize x2APIC mode” VM-execution control is 1.
3. The VM-exit instruction-length field is not defined following APIC-access VM exits resulting from physical accesses (see Section
   29.4.6) even if encountered during delivery of a software interrupt, privileged software exception, or software exception.

           •    EAX indicates a VM function that is not enabled (the bit at position EAX is 0 in the VM-function controls;
                see Section 25.5.5.2).
           •    EAX = 0 and either ECX ≥ 512 or the value of ECX selects an invalid tentative EPTP value (see Section
                25.5.5.3).
       In all the above cases, this field receives the length in bytes (1–15) of the instruction (including any instruction
       prefixes) whose execution led to the VM exit (see the next paragraph for one exception).
       The cases of VM exits encountered during delivery of a software interrupt, privileged software exception, or
       software exception include those encountered during delivery of events injected as part of VM entry (see
       Section 26.5.1.2). If the original event was injected as part of VM entry, this field receives the value of the VM-
       entry instruction length.
       All VM exits other than those listed in the above items leave this field undefined.
       If the VM exit occurred in enclave mode, this field is cleared (none of the previous items apply).

                Table 27-8. Format of the VM-Exit Instruction-Information Field as Used for INS and OUTS
 Bit Position(s) Content
 6:0               Undefined.
 9:7               Address size:
                     0: 16-bit
                     1: 32-bit
                     2: 64-bit (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                   Other values not used.
 14:10             Undefined.
 17:15             Segment register:
                     0: ES
                     1: CS
                     2: SS
                     3: DS
                     4: FS
                     5: GS
                   Other values not used. Undefined for VM exits due to execution of INS.
 31:18             Undefined.

•      VM-exit instruction information. For VM exits due to attempts to execute INS, INVEPT, INVPCID, INVVPID,
       LIDT, LGDT, LLDT, LTR, OUTS, RDRAND, RDSEED, SIDT, SGDT, SLDT, STR, VMCLEAR, VMPTRLD, VMPTRST,
       VMREAD, VMWRITE, VMXON, XRSTORS, or XSAVES, this field receives information about the instruction that
       caused the VM exit. The format of the field depends on the identity of the instruction causing the VM exit:
       — For VM exits due to attempts to execute INS or OUTS, the field has the format is given in Table 27-8.1
       — For VM exits due to attempts to execute INVEPT, INVPCID, or INVVPID, the field has the format is given in
         Table 27-9.
       — For VM exits due to attempts to execute LIDT, LGDT, SIDT, or SGDT, the field has the format is given in
         Table 27-10.
       — For VM exits due to attempts to execute LLDT, LTR, SLDT, or STR, the field has the format is given in
         Table 27-11.
       — For VM exits due to attempts to execute RDRAND or RDSEED, the field has the format is given in
         Table 27-12.

1. The format of the field was undefined for these VM exits on the first processors to support the virtual-machine extensions. Soft-
   ware can determine whether the format specified in Table 27-8 is used by consulting the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC
   (see Appendix A.1).

      — For VM exits due to attempts to execute VMCLEAR, VMPTRLD, VMPTRST, VMXON, XRSTORS, or XSAVES,
        the field has the format is given in Table 27-13.
      — For VM exits due to attempts to execute VMREAD or VMWRITE, the field has the format is given in
        Table 27-14.
      For all other VM exits, the field is undefined, unless the VM exit occurred in enclave mode, in which case the
      field is cleared.
•     I/O RCX, I/O RSI, I/O RDI, I/O RIP. These fields are undefined except for SMM VM exits due to system-
      management interrupts (SMIs) that arrive immediately after retirement of I/O instructions. See Section
      34.15.2.3. Note that, if the VM exit occurred in enclave mode, these fields are all cleared.

     Table 27-9. Format of the VM-Exit Instruction-Information Field as Used for INVEPT, INVPCID, and INVVPID
Bit Position(s) Content
1:0              Scaling:
                   0: no scaling
                   1: scale by 2
                   2: scale by 4
                   3: scale by 8 (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                 Undefined for instructions with no index register (bit 22 is set).
6:2              Undefined.
9:7              Address size:
                   0: 16-bit
                   1: 32-bit
                   2: 64-bit (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                 Other values not used.
10               Cleared to 0.
14:11            Undefined.
17:15            Segment register:
                   0: ES
                   1: CS
                   2: SS
                   3: DS
                   4: FS
                   5: GS
                 Other values not used.
21:18            IndexReg:
                   0 = RAX
                   1 = RCX
                   2 = RDX
                   3 = RBX
                   4 = RSP
                   5 = RBP
                   6 = RSI
                   7 = RDI
                   8–15 represent R8–R15, respectively (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                 Undefined for instructions with no index register (bit 22 is set).
22               IndexReg invalid (0 = valid; 1 = invalid)
26:23            BaseReg (encoded as IndexReg above)
                 Undefined for memory instructions with no base register (bit 27 is set).
27               BaseReg invalid (0 = valid; 1 = invalid)
31:28            Reg2 (same encoding as IndexReg above)

       Table 27-10. Format of the VM-Exit Instruction-Information Field as Used for LIDT, LGDT, SIDT, or SGDT
 Bit Position(s) Content
 1:0            Scaling:
                  0: no scaling
                  1: scale by 2
                  2: scale by 4
                  3: scale by 8 (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                Undefined for instructions with no index register (bit 22 is set).
 6:2            Undefined.
 9:7            Address size:
                  0: 16-bit
                  1: 32-bit
                  2: 64-bit (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                Other values not used.
 10             Cleared to 0.
 11             Operand size:
                  0: 16-bit
                  1: 32-bit
                Undefined for VM exits from 64-bit mode.
 14:12          Undefined.
 17:15          Segment register:
                  0: ES
                  1: CS
                  2: SS
                  3: DS
                  4: FS
                  5: GS
                Other values not used.
 21:18          IndexReg:
                  0 = RAX
                  1 = RCX
                  2 = RDX
                  3 = RBX
                  4 = RSP
                  5 = RBP
                  6 = RSI
                  7 = RDI
                  8–15 represent R8–R15, respectively (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                Undefined for instructions with no index register (bit 22 is set).
 22             IndexReg invalid (0 = valid; 1 = invalid)
 26:23          BaseReg (encoded as IndexReg above)
                Undefined for instructions with no base register (bit 27 is set).
 27             BaseReg invalid (0 = valid; 1 = invalid)
 29:28          Instruction identity:
                  0: SGDT
                  1: SIDT
                  2: LGDT
                  3: LIDT

Table 27-10. Format of the VM-Exit Instruction-Information Field as Used for LIDT, LGDT, SIDT, or SGDT (Contd.)
Bit Position(s) Content
31:30          Undefined.

      Table 27-11. Format of the VM-Exit Instruction-Information Field as Used for LLDT, LTR, SLDT, and STR
Bit Position(s) Content
1:0            Scaling:
                 0: no scaling
                 1: scale by 2
                 2: scale by 4
                 3: scale by 8 (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
               Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set) and for memory instructions with no index register (bit 10 is clear
               and bit 22 is set).
2              Undefined.
6:3            Reg1:
                 0 = RAX
                 1 = RCX
                 2 = RDX
                 3 = RBX
                 4 = RSP
                 5 = RBP
                 6 = RSI
                 7 = RDI
                 8–15 represent R8–R15, respectively (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
               Undefined for memory instructions (bit 10 is clear).
9:7            Address size:
                 0: 16-bit
                 1: 32-bit
                 2: 64-bit (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
               Other values not used. Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set).
10             Mem/Reg (0 = memory; 1 = register).
14:11          Undefined.
17:15          Segment register:
                 0: ES
                 1: CS
                 2: SS
                 3: DS
                 4: FS
                 5: GS
               Other values not used. Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set).
21:18          IndexReg (encoded as Reg1 above)
               Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set) and for memory instructions with no index register (bit 10 is clear
               and bit 22 is set).
22             IndexReg invalid (0 = valid; 1 = invalid)
               Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set).
26:23          BaseReg (encoded as Reg1 above)
               Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set) and for memory instructions with no base register (bit 10 is clear
               and bit 27 is set).

 Table 27-11. Format of the VM-Exit Instruction-Information Field as Used for LLDT, LTR, SLDT, and STR (Contd.)
 Bit Position(s) Content
 27             BaseReg invalid (0 = valid; 1 = invalid)
                Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set).
 29:28          Instruction identity:
                  0: SLDT
                  1: STR
                  2: LLDT
                  3: LTR
 31:30          Undefined.

         Table 27-12. Format of the VM-Exit Instruction-Information Field as Used for RDRAND and RDSEED
 Bit Position(s) Content
 2:0            Undefined.
 6:3            Destination register:
                  0 = RAX
                  1 = RCX
                  2 = RDX
                  3 = RBX
                  4 = RSP
                  5 = RBP
                  6 = RSI
                  7 = RDI
                  8–15 represent R8–R15, respectively (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
 10:7           Undefined.
 12:11          Operand size:
                  0: 16-bit
                  1: 32-bit
                  2: 64-bit
                The value 3 is not used.
 31:13          Undefined.

   Table 27-13. Format of the VM-Exit Instruction-Information Field as Used for VMCLEAR, VMPTRLD, VMPTRST,
                                        VMXON, XRSTORS, and XSAVES
 Bit Position(s) Content
 1:0            Scaling:
                  0: no scaling
                  1: scale by 2
                  2: scale by 4
                  3: scale by 8 (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                Undefined for instructions with no index register (bit 22 is set).
 6:2            Undefined.
 9:7            Address size:
                  0: 16-bit
                  1: 32-bit
                  2: 64-bit (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                Other values not used.

    Table 27-13. Format of the VM-Exit Instruction-Information Field as Used for VMCLEAR, VMPTRLD, VMPTRST,
                                     VMXON, XRSTORS, and XSAVES (Contd.)
Bit Position(s) Content
10              Cleared to 0.
14:11           Undefined.
17:15           Segment register:
                  0: ES
                  1: CS
                  2: SS
                  3: DS
                  4: FS
                  5: GS
                Other values not used.
21:18           IndexReg:
                  0 = RAX
                  1 = RCX
                  2 = RDX
                  3 = RBX
                  4 = RSP
                  5 = RBP
                  6 = RSI
                  7 = RDI
                  8–15 represent R8–R15, respectively (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                Undefined for instructions with no index register (bit 22 is set).
22              IndexReg invalid (0 = valid; 1 = invalid)
26:23           BaseReg (encoded as IndexReg above)
                Undefined for instructions with no base register (bit 27 is set).
27              BaseReg invalid (0 = valid; 1 = invalid)
31:28           Undefined.

        Table 27-14. Format of the VM-Exit Instruction-Information Field as Used for VMREAD and VMWRITE
Bit Position(s) Content
1:0             Scaling:
                  0: no scaling
                  1: scale by 2
                  2: scale by 4
                  3: scale by 8 (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set) and for memory instructions with no index register (bit 10 is clear
                and bit 22 is set).
2               Undefined.

   Table 27-14. Format of the VM-Exit Instruction-Information Field as Used for VMREAD and VMWRITE (Contd.)
 Bit Position(s) Content
 6:3             Reg1:
                   0 = RAX
                   1 = RCX
                   2 = RDX
                   3 = RBX
                   4 = RSP
                   5 = RBP
                   6 = RSI
                   7 = RDI
                   8–15 represent R8–R15, respectively (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                 Undefined for memory instructions (bit 10 is clear).
 9:7             Address size:
                   0: 16-bit
                   1: 32-bit
                   2: 64-bit (used only on processors that support Intel 64 architecture)
                 Other values not used. Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set).
 10              Mem/Reg (0 = memory; 1 = register).
 14:11           Undefined.
 17:15           Segment register:
                   0: ES
                   1: CS
                   2: SS
                   3: DS
                   4: FS
                   5: GS
                 Other values not used. Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set).
 21:18           IndexReg (encoded as Reg1 above)
                 Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set) and for memory instructions with no index register (bit 10 is clear
                 and bit 22 is set).
 22              IndexReg invalid (0 = valid; 1 = invalid)
                 Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set).
 26:23           BaseReg (encoded as Reg1 above)
                 Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set) and for memory instructions with no base register (bit 10 is clear
                 and bit 27 is set).
 27              BaseReg invalid (0 = valid; 1 = invalid)
                 Undefined for register instructions (bit 10 is set).
 31:28           Reg2 (same encoding as Reg1 above)

27.3            SAVING GUEST STATE
Each field in the guest-state area of the VMCS (see Section 24.4) is written with the corresponding component of
processor state. On processors that support Intel 64 architecture, the full values of each natural-width field (see
Section 24.11.2) is saved regardless of the mode of the logical processor before and after the VM exit.
In general, the state saved is that which was in the logical processor at the time the VM exit commences. See
Section 27.1 for a discussion of which architectural updates occur at that time.
Section 27.3.1 through Section 27.3.4 provide details for how certain components of processor state are saved.
These sections reference VMCS fields that correspond to processor state. Unless otherwise stated, these references
are to fields in the guest-state area.

27.3.1       Saving Control Registers, Debug Registers, and MSRs
Contents of certain control registers, debug registers, and MSRs is saved as follows:
•   The contents of CR0, CR3, CR4, and the IA32_SYSENTER_CS, IA32_SYSENTER_ESP, and IA32_SYSENTER_EIP
    MSRs are saved into the corresponding fields. Bits 63:32 of the IA32_SYSENTER_CS MSR are not saved. On
    processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture, bits 63:32 of the IA32_SYSENTER_ESP and
    IA32_SYSENTER_EIP MSRs are not saved.
•   If the “save debug controls” VM-exit control is 1, the contents of DR7 and the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR are saved
    into the corresponding fields. The first processors to support the virtual-machine extensions supported only the
    1-setting of this control and thus always saved data into these fields.
•   If the “save IA32_PAT” VM-exit control is 1, the contents of the IA32_PAT MSR are saved into the corresponding
    field.
•   If the “save IA32_EFER” VM-exit control is 1, the contents of the IA32_EFER MSR are saved into the corre-
    sponding field.
•   If the processor supports either the 1-setting of the “load IA32_BNDCFGS” VM-entry control or that of the
    “clear IA32_BNDCFGS” VM-exit control, the contents of the IA32_BNDCFGS MSR are saved into the corre-
    sponding field.
•   The value of the SMBASE field is undefined after all VM exits except SMM VM exits. See Section 34.15.2.

27.3.2       Saving Segment Registers and Descriptor-Table Registers
For each segment register (CS, SS, DS, ES, FS, GS, LDTR, or TR), the values saved for the base-address, segment-
limit, and access rights are based on whether the register was unusable (see Section 24.4.1) before the VM exit:
•   If the register was unusable, the values saved into the following fields are undefined: (1) base address;
    (2) segment limit; and (3) bits 7:0 and bits 15:12 in the access-rights field. The following exceptions apply:
    — CS.
         •   The base-address and segment-limit fields are saved.
         •   The L, D, and G bits are saved in the access-rights field.
    — SS.
         •   DPL is saved in the access-rights field.
         •   On processors that support Intel 64 architecture, bits 63:32 of the value saved for the base address are
             always zero.
    — DS and ES. On processors that support Intel 64 architecture, bits 63:32 of the values saved for the base
      addresses are always zero.
    — FS and GS. The base-address field is saved.
    — LDTR. The value saved for the base address is always canonical.
•   If the register was not unusable, the values saved into the following fields are those which were in the register
    before the VM exit: (1) base address; (2) segment limit; and (3) bits 7:0 and bits 15:12 in access rights.
•   Bits 31:17 and 11:8 in the access-rights field are always cleared. Bit 16 is set to 1 if and only if the segment is
    unusable.
The contents of the GDTR and IDTR registers are saved into the corresponding base-address and limit fields.

27.3.3       Saving RIP, RSP, and RFLAGS
The contents of the RIP, RSP, and RFLAGS registers are saved as follows:
•   The value saved in the RIP field is determined by the nature and cause of the VM exit:
    — If the VM exit occurred in enclave mode, the value saved is the AEP of interrupted enclave thread (the
      remaining items do not apply).

    — If the VM exit occurs due to by an attempt to execute an instruction that causes VM exits unconditionally or
      that has been configured to cause a VM exit via the VM-execution controls, the value saved references that
      instruction.
    — If the VM exit is caused by an occurrence of an INIT signal, a start-up IPI (SIPI), or system-management
      interrupt (SMI), the value saved is that which was in RIP before the event occurred.
    — If the VM exit occurs due to the 1-setting of either the “interrupt-window exiting” VM-execution control or
      the “NMI-window exiting” VM-execution control, the value saved is that which would be in the register had
      the VM exit not occurred.
    — If the VM exit is due to an external interrupt, non-maskable interrupt (NMI), or hardware exception (as
      defined in Section 27.2.2), the value saved is the return pointer that would have been saved (either on the
      stack had the event been delivered through a trap or interrupt gate,1 or into the old task-state segment had
      the event been delivered through a task gate).
    — If the VM exit is due to a triple fault, the value saved is the return pointer that would have been saved
      (either on the stack had the event been delivered through a trap or interrupt gate, or into the old task-state
      segment had the event been delivered through a task gate) had delivery of the double fault not
      encountered the nested exception that caused the triple fault.
    — If the VM exit is due to a software exception (due to an execution of INT3 or INTO), the value saved
      references the INT3 or INTO instruction that caused that exception.
    — Suppose that the VM exit is due to a task switch that was caused by execution of CALL, IRET, or JMP or by
      execution of a software interrupt (INT n) or software exception (due to execution of INT3 or INTO) that
      encountered a task gate in the IDT. The value saved references the instruction that caused the task switch
      (CALL, IRET, JMP, INT n, INT3, or INTO).
    — Suppose that the VM exit is due to a task switch that was caused by a task gate in the IDT that was
      encountered for any reason except the direct access by a software interrupt or software exception. The
      value saved is that which would have been saved in the old task-state segment had the task switch
      completed normally.
    — If the VM exit is due to an execution of MOV to CR8 or WRMSR that reduced the value of bits 7:4 of VTPR
      (see Section 29.1.1) below that of TPR threshold VM-execution control field (see Section 29.1.2), the value
      saved references the instruction following the MOV to CR8 or WRMSR.
    — If the VM exit was caused by APIC-write emulation (see Section 29.4.3.2) that results from an APIC access
      as part of instruction execution, the value saved references the instruction following the one whose
      execution caused the APIC-write emulation.
•   The contents of the RSP register are saved into the RSP field.
•   With the exception of the resume flag (RF; bit 16), the contents of the RFLAGS register is saved into the
    RFLAGS field. RFLAGS.RF is saved as follows:
    — If the VM exit occurred in enclave mode, the value saved is 0 (the remaining items do not apply).
    — If the VM exit is caused directly by an event that would normally be delivered through the IDT, the value
      saved is that which would appear in the saved RFLAGS image (either that which would be saved on the
      stack had the event been delivered through a trap or interrupt gate2 or into the old task-state segment had
      the event been delivered through a task gate) had the event been delivered through the IDT. See below for
      VM exits due to task switches caused by task gates in the IDT.
    — If the VM exit is caused by a triple fault, the value saved is that which the logical processor would have in
      RF in the RFLAGS register had the triple fault taken the logical processor to the shutdown state.
    — If the VM exit is caused by a task switch (including one caused by a task gate in the IDT), the value saved
      is that which would have been saved in the RFLAGS image in the old task-state segment (TSS) had the task
      switch completed normally without exception.

1. The reference here is to the full value of RIP before any truncation that would occur had the stack width been only 32 bits or 16
   bits.
2. The reference here is to the full value of RFLAGS before any truncation that would occur had the stack width been only 32 bits or
   16 bits.

    — If the VM exit is caused by an attempt to execute an instruction that unconditionally causes VM exits or one
      that was configured to do with a VM-execution control, the value saved is 0.1
    — For APIC-access VM exits and for VM exits caused by EPT violations EPT misconfigurations, and page-
      modification log-full events, the value saved depends on whether the VM exit occurred during delivery of an
      event through the IDT:
         •   If the VM exit stored 0 for bit 31 for IDT-vectoring information field (because the VM exit did not occur
             during delivery of an event through the IDT; see Section 27.2.3), the value saved is 1.
         •   If the VM exit stored 1 for bit 31 for IDT-vectoring information field (because the VM exit did occur
             during delivery of an event through the IDT), the value saved is the value that would have appeared in
             the saved RFLAGS image had the event been delivered through the IDT (see above).
    — For all other VM exits, the value saved is the value RFLAGS.RF had before the VM exit occurred.

27.3.4        Saving Non-Register State
Information corresponding to guest non-register state is saved as follows:
•   The activity-state field is saved with the logical processor’s activity state before the VM exit.2 See Section 27.1
    for details of how events leading to a VM exit may affect the activity state.
•   The interruptibility-state field is saved to reflect the logical processor’s interruptibility before the VM exit.
    — See Section 27.1 for details of how events leading to a VM exit may affect this state.
    — VM exits that end outside system-management mode (SMM) save bit 2 (blocking by SMI) as 0 regardless
      of the state of such blocking before the VM exit.
    — Bit 3 (blocking by NMI) is treated specially if the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 1. In this case, the
      value saved for this field does not indicate the blocking of NMIs but rather the state of virtual-NMI blocking.
    — Bit 4 (enclave interruption) is set to 1 if the VM exit occurred while the logical processor was in enclave
      mode.
         Such VM exits includes those caused by interrupts, non-maskable interrupts, system-management
         interrupts, INIT signals, and exceptions occurring in enclave mode as well as exceptions encountered
         during the delivery of such events incident to enclave mode.
         A VM exit that is incident to delivery of an event injected by VM entry leaves this bit unmodified.
•   The pending debug exceptions field is saved as clear for all VM exits except the following:
    — A VM exit caused by an INIT signal, a machine-check exception, or a system-management interrupt (SMI).
    — A VM exit with basic exit reason “TPR below threshold”,3 “virtualized EOI”, “APIC write”, or “monitor trap
      flag.”
    — VM exits that are not caused by debug exceptions and that occur while there is MOV-SS blocking of debug
      exceptions.
    For VM exits that do not clear the field, the value saved is determined as follows:
    — Each of bits 3:0 may be set if it corresponds to a matched breakpoint. This may be true even if the corre-
      sponding breakpoint is not enabled in DR7.
    — Suppose that a VM exit is due to an INIT signal, a machine-check exception, or an SMI; or that a VM exit
      has basic exit reason “TPR below threshold” or “monitor trap flag.” In this case, the value saved sets bits
      corresponding to the causes of any debug exceptions that were pending at the time of the VM exit.

1. This is true even if RFLAGS.RF was 1 before the instruction was executed. If, in response to such a VM exit, a VM monitor re-enters
   the guest to re-execute the instruction that caused the VM exit (for example, after clearing the VM-execution control that caused
   the VM exit), the instruction may encounter a code breakpoint that has already been processed. A VM monitor can avoid this by set-
   ting the guest value of RFLAGS.RF to 1 before resuming guest software.
2. If this activity state was an inactive state resulting from execution of a specific instruction (HLT or MWAIT), the value saved for RIP
   by that VM exit will reference the following instruction.
3. This item includes VM exits that occur as a result of certain VM entries (Section 26.6.7).

        If the VM exit occurs immediately after VM entry, the value saved may match that which was loaded on
        VM entry (see Section 26.6.3). Otherwise, the following items apply:
        •       Bit 12 (enabled breakpoint) is set to 1 in any of the following cases:
                — If there was at least one matched data or I/O breakpoint that was enabled in DR7.
                — If it had been set on VM entry, causing there to be valid pending debug exceptions (see Section
                  26.6.3) and the VM exit occurred before those exceptions were either delivered or lost.
                — If the XBEGIN instruction was executed immediately before the VM exit and advanced debugging of
                  RTM transactional regions had been enabled (see Section 16.3.7, “RTM-Enabled Debugger
                  Support,” of Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1). (This does
                  not apply to VM exits with basic exit reason “monitor trap flag.”)
                In other cases, bit 12 is cleared to 0.
        •       Bit 14 (BS) is set if RFLAGS.TF = 1 in either of the following cases:
                — IA32_DEBUGCTL.BTF = 0 and the cause of a pending debug exception was the execution of a single
                  instruction.
                — IA32_DEBUGCTL.BTF = 1 and the cause of a pending debug exception was a taken branch.
        •       Bit 16 (RTM) is set if a debug exception (#DB) or a breakpoint exception (#BP) occurred inside an RTM
                region while advanced debugging of RTM transactional regions had been enabled. (This does not apply
                to VM exits with basic exit reason “monitor trap flag.”)
    — Suppose that a VM exit is due to another reason (but not a debug exception) and occurs while there is MOV-
      SS blocking of debug exceptions. In this case, the value saved sets bits corresponding to the causes of any
      debug exceptions that were pending at the time of the VM exit. If the VM exit occurs immediately after
      VM entry (no instructions were executed in VMX non-root operation), the value saved may match that
      which was loaded on VM entry (see Section 26.6.3). Otherwise, the following items apply:
        •       Bit 12 (enabled breakpoint) is set to 1 if there was at least one matched data or I/O breakpoint that was
                enabled in DR7. Bit 12 is also set if it had been set on VM entry, causing there to be valid pending debug
                exceptions (see Section 26.6.3) and the VM exit occurred before those exceptions were either delivered
                or lost. In other cases, bit 12 is cleared to 0.
        •       The setting of bit 14 (BS) is implementation-specific. However, it is not set if RFLAGS.TF = 0 or
                IA32_DEBUGCTL.BTF = 1.
    — The reserved bits in the field are cleared.
•   If the “save VMX-preemption timer value” VM-exit control is 1, the value of timer is saved into the VMX-
    preemption timer-value field. This is the value loaded from this field on VM entry as subsequently decremented
    (see Section 25.5.1). VM exits due to timer expiration save the value 0. Other VM exits may also save the value
    0 if the timer expired during VM exit. (If the “save VMX-preemption timer value” VM-exit control is 0, VM exit
    does not modify the value of the VMX-preemption timer-value field.)
•   If the logical processor supports the 1-setting of the “enable EPT” VM-execution control, values are saved into
    the four (4) PDPTE fields as follows:
    — If the “enable EPT” VM-execution control is 1 and the logical processor was using PAE paging at the time of
      the VM exit, the PDPTE values currently in use are saved:1
        •       The values saved into bits 11:9 of each of the fields is undefined.
        •       If the value saved into one of the fields has bit 0 (present) clear, the value saved into bits 63:1 of that
                field is undefined. That value need not correspond to the value that was loaded by VM entry or to any
                value that might have been loaded in VMX non-root operation.
        •       If the value saved into one of the fields has bit 0 (present) set, the value saved into bits 63:12 of the
                field is a guest-physical address.

1. A logical processor uses PAE paging if CR0.PG = 1, CR4.PAE = 1 and IA32_EFER.LMA = 0. See Section 4.4 in the Intel® 64 and IA-32
   Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A. “Enable EPT” is a secondary processor-based VM-execution control. If bit 31
   of the primary processor-based VM-execution controls is 0, VM exit functions as if the “enable EPT” VM-execution control were 0.
   See Section 24.6.2.

    — If the “enable EPT” VM-execution control is 0 or the logical processor was not using PAE paging at the time
      of the VM exit, the values saved are undefined.

27.4        SAVING MSRS
After processor state is saved to the guest-state area, values of MSRs may be stored into the VM-exit MSR-store
area (see Section 24.7.2). Specifically each entry in that area (up to the number specified in the VM-exit MSR-store
count) is processed in order by storing the value of the MSR indexed by bits 31:0 (as they would be read by
RDMSR) into bits 127:64. Processing of an entry fails in either of the following cases:
•   The value of bits 31:8 is 000008H, meaning that the indexed MSR is one that allows access to an APIC register
    when the local APIC is in x2APIC mode.
•   The value of bits 31:0 indicates an MSR that can be read only in system-management mode (SMM) and the
    VM exit will not end in SMM. (IA32_SMBASE is an MSR that can be read only in SMM.)
•   The value of bits 31:0 indicates an MSR that cannot be saved on VM exits for model-specific reasons. A
    processor may prevent certain MSRs (based on the value of bits 31:0) from being stored on VM exits, even if
    they can normally be read by RDMSR. Such model-specific behavior is documented in Chapter 35.
•   Bits 63:32 of the entry are not all 0.
•   An attempt to read the MSR indexed by bits 31:0 would cause a general-protection exception if executed via
    RDMSR with CPL = 0.
A VMX abort occurs if processing fails for any entry. See Section 27.7.

27.5        LOADING HOST STATE
Processor state is updated on VM exits in the following ways:
•   Some state is loaded from or otherwise determined by the contents of the host-state area.
•   Some state is determined by VM-exit controls.
•   Some state is established in the same way on every VM exit.
•   The page-directory pointers are loaded based on the values of certain control registers.
This loading may be performed in any order.
On processors that support Intel 64 architecture, the full values of each 64-bit field loaded (for example, the base
address for GDTR) is loaded regardless of the mode of the logical processor before and after the VM exit.
The loading of host state is detailed in Section 27.5.1 to Section 27.5.5. These sections reference VMCS fields that
correspond to processor state. Unless otherwise stated, these references are to fields in the host-state area.
A logical processor is in IA-32e mode after a VM exit only if the “host address-space size” VM-exit control is 1. If
the logical processor was in IA-32e mode before the VM exit and this control is 0, a VMX abort occurs. See Section
27.7.
In addition to loading host state, VM exits clear address-range monitoring (Section 27.5.6).
After the state loading described in this section, VM exits may load MSRs from the VM-exit MSR-load area (see
Section 27.6). This loading occurs only after the state loading described in this section.

27.5.1      Loading Host Control Registers, Debug Registers, MSRs
VM exits load new values for controls registers, debug registers, and some MSRs:
•   CR0, CR3, and CR4 are loaded from the CR0 field, the CR3 field, and the CR4 field, respectively, with the
    following exceptions:
    — The following bits are not modified:

         •      For CR0, ET, CD, NW; bits 63:32 (on processors that support Intel 64 architecture), 28:19, 17, and
                15:6; and any bits that are fixed in VMX operation (see Section 23.8).1
         •      For CR3, bits 63:52 and bits in the range 51:32 beyond the processor’s physical-address width (they
                are cleared to 0).2 (This item applies only to processors that support Intel 64 architecture.)
         •      For CR4, any bits that are fixed in VMX operation (see Section 23.8).
    — CR4.PAE is set to 1 if the “host address-space size” VM-exit control is 1.
    — CR4.PCIDE is set to 0 if the “host address-space size” VM-exit control is 0.
•   DR7 is set to 400H.
•   The following MSRs are established as follows:
    — The IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR is cleared to 00000000_00000000H.
    — The IA32_SYSENTER_CS MSR is loaded from the IA32_SYSENTER_CS field. Since that field has only 32
      bits, bits 63:32 of the MSR are cleared to 0.
    — IA32_SYSENTER_ESP MSR and IA32_SYSENTER_EIP MSR are loaded from the IA32_SYSENTER_ESP field
      and the IA32_SYSENTER_EIP field, respectively.
         If the processor does not support the Intel 64 architecture, these fields have only 32 bits; bits 63:32 of the
         MSRs are cleared to 0.
         If the processor does support the Intel 64 architecture and the processor supports N < 64 linear-address
         bits, each of bits 63:N is set to the value of bit N–1.3
    — The following steps are performed on processors that support Intel 64 architecture:
         •      The MSRs FS.base and GS.base are loaded from the base-address fields for FS and GS, respectively
                (see Section 27.5.2).
         •      The LMA and LME bits in the IA32_EFER MSR are each loaded with the setting of the “host address-
                space size” VM-exit control.
    — If the “load IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL” VM-exit control is 1, the IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL MSR is loaded
      from the IA32_PERF_GLOBAL_CTRL field. Bits that are reserved in that MSR are maintained with their
      reserved values.
    — If the “load IA32_PAT” VM-exit control is 1, the IA32_PAT MSR is loaded from the IA32_PAT field. Bits that
      are reserved in that MSR are maintained with their reserved values.
    — If the “load IA32_EFER” VM-exit control is 1, the IA32_EFER MSR is loaded from the IA32_EFER field. Bits
      that are reserved in that MSR are maintained with their reserved values.
    — If the “clear IA32_BNDCFGS” VM-exit control is 1, the IA32_BNDCFGS MSR is cleared to
      00000000_00000000H; otherwise, it is not modified.
    With the exception of FS.base and GS.base, any of these MSRs is subsequently overwritten if it appears in the
    VM-exit MSR-load area. See Section 27.6.

27.5.2          Loading Host Segment and Descriptor-Table Registers
Each of the registers CS, SS, DS, ES, FS, GS, and TR is loaded as follows (see below for the treatment of LDTR):
•   The selector is loaded from the selector field. The segment is unusable if its selector is loaded with zero. The
    checks specified Section 26.3.1.2 limit the selector values that may be loaded. In particular, CS and TR are
    never loaded with zero and are thus never unusable. SS can be loaded with zero only on processors that

1. Bits 28:19, 17, and 15:6 of CR0 and CR0.ET are unchanged by executions of MOV to CR0. CR0.ET is always 1 and the other bits are
   always 0.
2. Software can determine a processor’s physical-address width by executing CPUID with 80000008H in EAX. The physical-address
   width is returned in bits 7:0 of EAX.
3. Software can determine the number N by executing CPUID with 80000008H in EAX. The number of linear-address bits supported is
   returned in bits 15:8 of EAX.

    support Intel 64 architecture and only if the VM exit is to 64-bit mode (64-bit mode allows use of segments
    marked unusable).
•   The base address is set as follows:
    — CS. Cleared to zero.
    — SS, DS, and ES. Undefined if the segment is unusable; otherwise, cleared to zero.
    — FS and GS. Undefined (but, on processors that support Intel 64 architecture, canonical) if the segment is
      unusable and the VM exit is not to 64-bit mode; otherwise, loaded from the base-address field.
         If the processor supports the Intel 64 architecture and the processor supports N < 64 linear-address bits,
         each of bits 63:N is set to the value of bit N–1.1 The values loaded for base addresses for FS and GS are
         also manifest in the FS.base and GS.base MSRs.
    — TR. Loaded from the host-state area. If the processor supports the Intel 64 architecture and the processor
      supports N < 64 linear-address bits, each of bits 63:N is set to the value of bit N–1.
•   The segment limit is set as follows:
    — CS. Set to FFFFFFFFH (corresponding to a descriptor limit of FFFFFH and a G-bit setting of 1).
    — SS, DS, ES, FS, and GS. Undefined if the segment is unusable; otherwise, set to FFFFFFFFH.
    — TR. Set to 00000067H.
•   The type field and S bit are set as follows:
    — CS. Type set to 11 and S set to 1 (execute/read, accessed, non-conforming code segment).
    — SS, DS, ES, FS, and GS. Undefined if the segment is unusable; otherwise, type set to 3 and S set to 1
      (read/write, accessed, expand-up data segment).
    — TR. Type set to 11 and S set to 0 (busy 32-bit task-state segment).
•   The DPL is set as follows:
    — CS, SS, and TR. Set to 0. The current privilege level (CPL) will be 0 after the VM exit completes.
    — DS, ES, FS, and GS. Undefined if the segment is unusable; otherwise, set to 0.
•   The P bit is set as follows:
    — CS, TR. Set to 1.
    — SS, DS, ES, FS, and GS. Undefined if the segment is unusable; otherwise, set to 1.
•   On processors that support Intel 64 architecture, CS.L is loaded with the setting of the “host address-space
    size” VM-exit control. Because the value of this control is also loaded into IA32_EFER.LMA (see Section 27.5.1),
    no VM exit is ever to compatibility mode (which requires IA32_EFER.LMA = 1 and CS.L = 0).
•   D/B.
    — CS. Loaded with the inverse of the setting of the “host address-space size” VM-exit control. For example, if
      that control is 0, indicating a 32-bit guest, CS.D/B is set to 1.
    — SS. Set to 1.
    — DS, ES, FS, and GS. Undefined if the segment is unusable; otherwise, set to 1.
    — TR. Set to 0.
•   G.
    — CS. Set to 1.
    — SS, DS, ES, FS, and GS. Undefined if the segment is unusable; otherwise, set to 1.
    — TR. Set to 0.

1. Software can determine the number N by executing CPUID with 80000008H in EAX. The number of linear-address bits supported is
   returned in bits 15:8 of EAX.

The host-state area does not contain a selector field for LDTR. LDTR is established as follows on all VM exits: the
selector is cleared to 0000H, the segment is marked unusable and is otherwise undefined (although the base
address is always canonical).
The base addresses for GDTR and IDTR are loaded from the GDTR base-address field and the IDTR base-address
field, respectively. If the processor supports the Intel 64 architecture and the processor supports N < 64 linear-
address bits, each of bits 63:N of each base address is set to the value of bit N–1 of that base address. The GDTR
and IDTR limits are each set to FFFFH.

27.5.3          Loading Host RIP, RSP, and RFLAGS
RIP and RSP are loaded from the RIP field and the RSP field, respectively. RFLAGS is cleared, except bit 1, which is
always set.

27.5.4          Checking and Loading Host Page-Directory-Pointer-Table Entries
If CR0.PG = 1, CR4.PAE = 1, and IA32_EFER.LMA = 0, the logical processor uses PAE paging. See Section 4.4 of
the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A.1 When in PAE paging is in use, the
physical address in CR3 references a table of page-directory-pointer-table entries (PDPTEs). A MOV to CR3
when PAE paging is in use checks the validity of the PDPTEs and, if they are valid, loads them into the processor
(into internal, non-architectural registers).
A VM exit is to a VMM that uses PAE paging if (1) bit 5 (corresponding to CR4.PAE) is set in the CR4 field in the host-
state area of the VMCS; and (2) the “host address-space size” VM-exit control is 0. Such a VM exit may check the
validity of the PDPTEs referenced by the CR3 field in the host-state area of the VMCS. Such a VM exit must check
their validity if either (1) PAE paging was not in use before the VM exit; or (2) the value of CR3 is changing as a
result of the VM exit. A VM exit to a VMM that does not use PAE paging must not check the validity of the PDPTEs.
A VM exit that checks the validity of the PDPTEs uses the same checks that are used when CR3 is loaded with
MOV to CR3 when PAE paging is in use. If MOV to CR3 would cause a general-protection exception due to the
PDPTEs that would be loaded (e.g., because a reserved bit is set), a VMX abort occurs (see Section 27.7). If a
VM exit to a VMM that uses PAE does not cause a VMX abort, the PDPTEs are loaded into the processor as would
MOV to CR3, using the value of CR3 being load by the VM exit.

27.5.5          Updating Non-Register State
VM exits affect the non-register state of a logical processor as follows:
•   A logical processor is always in the active state after a VM exit.
•   Event blocking is affected as follows:
    — There is no blocking by STI or by MOV SS after a VM exit.
    — VM exits caused directly by non-maskable interrupts (NMIs) cause blocking by NMI (see Table 24-3). Other
      VM exits do not affect blocking by NMI. (See Section 27.1 for the case in which an NMI causes a VM exit
      indirectly.)
•   There are no pending debug exceptions after a VM exit.
Section 28.3 describes how the VMX architecture controls how a logical processor manages information in the TLBs
and paging-structure caches. The following items detail how VM exits invalidate cached mappings:
•   If the “enable VPID” VM-execution control is 0, the logical processor invalidates linear mappings and combined
    mappings associated with VPID 0000H (for all PCIDs); combined mappings for VPID 0000H are invalidated for
    all EP4TA values (EP4TA is the value of bits 51:12 of EPTP).

1. On processors that support Intel 64 architecture, the physical-address extension may support more than 36 physical-address bits.
   Software can determine a processor’s physical-address width by executing CPUID with 80000008H in EAX. The physical-address
   width is returned in bits 7:0 of EAX.

•   VM exits are not required to invalidate any guest-physical mappings, nor are they required to invalidate any
    linear mappings or combined mappings if the “enable VPID” VM-execution control is 1.

27.5.6       Clearing Address-Range Monitoring
The Intel 64 and IA-32 architectures allow software to monitor a specified address range using the MONITOR and
MWAIT instructions. See Section 8.10.4 in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual,
Volume 3A. VM exits clear any address-range monitoring that may be in effect.

27.6         LOADING MSRS
VM exits may load MSRs from the VM-exit MSR-load area (see Section 24.7.2). Specifically each entry in that area
(up to the number specified in the VM-exit MSR-load count) is processed in order by loading the MSR indexed by
bits 31:0 with the contents of bits 127:64 as they would be written by WRMSR.
Processing of an entry fails in any of the following cases:
•   The value of bits 31:0 is either C0000100H (the IA32_FS_BASE MSR) or C0000101H (the IA32_GS_BASE
    MSR).
•   The value of bits 31:8 is 000008H, meaning that the indexed MSR is one that allows access to an APIC register
    when the local APIC is in x2APIC mode.
•   The value of bits 31:0 indicates an MSR that can be written only in system-management mode (SMM) and the
    VM exit will not end in SMM. (IA32_SMM_MONITOR_CTL is an MSR that can be written only in SMM.)
•   The value of bits 31:0 indicates an MSR that cannot be loaded on VM exits for model-specific reasons. A
    processor may prevent loading of certain MSRs even if they can normally be written by WRMSR. Such model-
    specific behavior is documented in Chapter 35.
•   Bits 63:32 are not all 0.
•   An attempt to write bits 127:64 to the MSR indexed by bits 31:0 of the entry would cause a general-protection
    exception if executed via WRMSR with CPL = 0.1
If processing fails for any entry, a VMX abort occurs. See Section 27.7.
If any MSR is being loaded in such a way that would architecturally require a TLB flush, the TLBs are updated so
that, after VM exit, the logical processor does not use any translations that were cached before the transition.

27.7         VMX ABORTS
A problem encountered during a VM exit leads to a VMX abort. A VMX abort takes a logical processor into a shut-
down state as described below.
A VMX abort does not modify the VMCS data in the VMCS region of any active VMCS. The contents of these data
are thus suspect after the VMX abort.
On a VMX abort, a logical processor saves a nonzero 32-bit VMX-abort indicator field at byte offset 4 in the VMCS
region of the VMCS whose misconfiguration caused the failure (see Section 24.2). The following values are used:
1. There was a failure in saving guest MSRs (see Section 27.4).
2. Host checking of the page-directory-pointer-table entries (PDPTEs) failed (see Section 27.5.4).
3. The current VMCS has been corrupted (through writes to the corresponding VMCS region) in such a way that
   the logical processor cannot complete the VM exit properly.
4. There was a failure on loading host MSRs (see Section 27.6).

1. Note the following about processors that support Intel 64 architecture. If CR0.PG = 1, WRMSR to the IA32_EFER MSR causes a gen-
   eral-protection exception if it would modify the LME bit. Since CR0.PG is always 1 in VMX operation, the IA32_EFER MSR should not
   be included in the VM-exit MSR-load area for the purpose of modifying the LME bit.

5. There was a machine-check event during VM exit (see Section 27.8).
6. The logical processor was in IA-32e mode before the VM exit and the “host address-space size” VM-entry
   control was 0 (see Section 27.5).
Some of these causes correspond to failures during the loading of state from the host-state area. Because the
loading of such state may be done in any order (see Section 27.5) a VM exit that might lead to a VMX abort for
multiple reasons (for example, the current VMCS may be corrupt and the host PDPTEs might not be properly
configured). In such cases, the VMX-abort indicator could correspond to any one of those reasons.
A logical processor never reads the VMX-abort indicator in a VMCS region and writes it only with one of the non-
zero values mentioned above. The VMX-abort indicator allows software on one logical processor to diagnose the
VMX-abort on another. For this reason, it is recommended that software running in VMX root operation zero the
VMX-abort indicator in the VMCS region of any VMCS that it uses.
After saving the VMX-abort indicator, operation of a logical processor experiencing a VMX abort depends on
whether the logical processor is in SMX operation:1
•   If the logical processor is in SMX operation, an Intel® TXT shutdown condition occurs. The error code used is
    000DH, indicating “VMX abort.” See Intel® Trusted Execution Technology Measured Launched Environment
    Programming Guide.
•   If the logical processor is outside SMX operation, it issues a special bus cycle (to notify the chipset) and enters
    the VMX-abort shutdown state. RESET is the only event that wakes a logical processor from the VMX-abort
    shutdown state. The following events do not affect a logical processor in this state: machine-check events; INIT
    signals; external interrupts; non-maskable interrupts (NMIs); start-up IPIs (SIPIs); and system-management
    interrupts (SMIs).

27.8            MACHINE-CHECK EVENTS DURING VM EXIT
If a machine-check event occurs during VM exit, one of the following occurs:
•   The machine-check event is handled as if it occurred before the VM exit:
    — If CR4.MCE = 0, operation of the logical processor depends on whether the logical processor is in SMX
      operation:2
        •       If the logical processor is in SMX operation, an Intel® TXT shutdown condition occurs. The error code
                used is 000CH, indicating “unrecoverable machine-check condition.”
        •       If the logical processor is outside SMX operation, it goes to the shutdown state.
    — If CR4.MCE = 1, a machine-check exception (#MC) is generated:
        •       If bit 18 (#MC) of the exception bitmap is 0, the exception is delivered through the guest IDT.
        •       If bit 18 of the exception bitmap is 1, the exception causes a VM exit.
•   The machine-check event is handled after VM exit completes:
    — If the VM exit ends with CR4.MCE = 0, operation of the logical processor depends on whether the logical
      processor is in SMX operation:
        •       If the logical processor is in SMX operation, an Intel® TXT shutdown condition occurs with error code
                000CH (unrecoverable machine-check condition).
        •       If the logical processor is outside SMX operation, it goes to the shutdown state.

1. A logical processor is in SMX operation if GETSEC[SEXIT] has not been executed since the last execution of GETSEC[SENTER]. A logi-
   cal processor is outside SMX operation if GETSEC[SENTER] has not been executed or if GETSEC[SEXIT] was executed after the last
   execution of GETSEC[SENTER]. See Chapter 6, “Safer Mode Extensions Reference,” in Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software
   Developer’s Manual, Volume 2B.
2. A logical processor is in SMX operation if GETSEC[SEXIT] has not been executed since the last execution of GETSEC[SENTER]. A logi-
   cal processor is outside SMX operation if GETSEC[SENTER] has not been executed or if GETSEC[SEXIT] was executed after the last
   execution of GETSEC[SENTER]. See Chapter 6, “Safer Mode Extensions Reference,” in Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software
   Developer’s Manual, Volume 2B.

    — If the VM exit ends with CR4.MCE = 1, a machine-check exception (#MC) is delivered through the host IDT.
•   A VMX abort is generated (see Section 27.7). The logical processor blocks events as done normally in
    VMX abort. The VMX abort indicator is 5, for “machine-check event during VM exit.”
The first option is not used if the machine-check event occurs after any host state has been loaded. The second
option is used only if VM entry is able to load all host state.

