                                                                         CHAPTER 29

The VMCS includes controls that enable the virtualization of interrupts and the Advanced Programmable Interrupt
Controller (APIC).
When these controls are used, the processor will emulate many accesses to the APIC, track the state of the virtual
APIC, and deliver virtual interrupts — all in VMX non-root operation with out a VM exit.1
The processor tracks the state of the virtual APIC using a virtual-APIC page identified by the virtual-machine
monitor (VMM). Section 29.1 discusses the virtual-APIC page and how the processor uses it to track the state of the
virtual APIC.
The following are the VM-execution controls relevant to APIC virtualization and virtual interrupts (see Section 24.6
for information about the locations of these controls):
•   Virtual-interrupt delivery. This controls enables the evaluation and delivery of pending virtual interrupts
    (Section 29.2). It also enables the emulation of writes (memory-mapped or MSR-based, as enabled) to the
    APIC registers that control interrupt prioritization.
•   Use TPR shadow. This control enables emulation of accesses to the APIC’s task-priority register (TPR) via CR8
    (Section 29.3) and, if enabled, via the memory-mapped or MSR-based interfaces.
•   Virtualize APIC accesses. This control enables virtualization of memory-mapped accesses to the APIC
    (Section 29.4) by causing VM exits on accesses to a VMM-specified APIC-access page. Some of the other
    controls, if set, may cause some of these accesses to be emulated rather than causing VM exits.
•   Virtualize x2APIC mode. This control enables virtualization of MSR-based accesses to the APIC (Section
    29.5).
•   APIC-register virtualization. This control allows memory-mapped and MSR-based reads of most APIC
    registers (as enabled) by satisfying them from the virtual-APIC page. It directs memory-mapped writes to the
    APIC-access page to the virtual-APIC page, following them by VM exits for VMM emulation.
•   Process posted interrupts. This control allows software to post virtual interrupts in a data structure and send
    a notification to another logical processor; upon receipt of the notification, the target processor will process the
    posted interrupts by copying them into the virtual-APIC page (Section 29.6).
“Virtualize APIC accesses”, “virtualize x2APIC mode”, “virtual-interrupt delivery”, and “APIC-register virtualization”
are all secondary processor-based VM-execution controls. If bit 31 of the primary processor-based VM-execution
controls is 0, the processor operates as if these controls were all 0. See Section 24.6.2.

29.1          VIRTUAL APIC STATE
The virtual-APIC page is a 4-KByte region of memory that the processor uses to virtualize certain accesses to
APIC registers and to manage virtual interrupts. The physical address of the virtual-APIC page is the virtual-APIC
address, a 64-bit VM-execution control field in the VMCS (see Section 24.6.8).
Depending on the settings of certain VM-execution controls, the processor may virtualize certain fields on the
virtual-APIC page with functionality analogous to that performed by the local APIC. Section 29.1.1 identifies and
defines these fields. Section 29.1.2, Section 29.1.3, Section 29.1.4, and Section 29.1.5 detail the actions taken to
virtualize updates to some of these fields.

29.1.1        Virtualized APIC Registers
Depending on the setting of certain VM-execution controls, a logical processor may virtualize certain accesses to
APIC registers using the following fields on the virtual-APIC page:
•   Virtual task-priority register (VTPR): the 32-bit field located at offset 080H on the virtual-APIC page.

1. In most cases, it is not necessary for a virtual-machine monitor (VMM) to inject virtual interrupts as part of VM entry.

•   Virtual processor-priority register (VPPR): the 32-bit field located at offset 0A0H on the virtual-APIC
    page.
•   Virtual end-of-interrupt register (VEOI): the 32-bit field located at offset 0B0H on the virtual-APIC page.
•   Virtual interrupt-service register (VISR): the 256-bit value comprising eight non-contiguous 32-bit fields
    at offsets 100H, 110H, 120H, 130H, 140H, 150H, 160H, and 170H on the virtual-APIC page. Bit x of the VISR
    is at bit position (x & 1FH) at offset (100H | ((x & E0H) » 1)). The processor uses only the low 4 bytes of each
    of the 16-byte fields at offsets 100H, 110H, 120H, 130H, 140H, 150H, 160H, and 170H.
•   Virtual interrupt-request register (VIRR): the 256-bit value comprising eight non-contiguous 32-bit fields
    at offsets 200H, 210H, 220H, 230H, 240H, 250H, 260H, and 270H on the virtual-APIC page. Bit x of the VIRR
    is at bit position (x & 1FH) at offset (200H | ((x & E0H) » 1)). The processor uses only the low 4 bytes of each
    of the 16-Byte fields at offsets 200H, 210H, 220H, 230H, 240H, 250H, 260H, and 270H.
•   Virtual interrupt-command register (VICR_LO): the 32-bit field located at offset 300H on the virtual-APIC
    page
•   Virtual interrupt-command register (VICR_HI): the 32-bit field located at offset 310H on the virtual-APIC
    page.

29.1.2         TPR Virtualization
The processor performs TPR virtualization in response to the following operations: (1) virtualization of the MOV
to CR8 instruction; (2) virtualization of a write to offset 080H on the APIC-access page; and (3) virtualization of the
WRMSR instruction with ECX = 808H. See Section 29.3, Section 29.4.3, and Section 29.5 for details of when TPR
virtualization is performed.
The following pseudocode details the behavior of TPR virtualization:
    IF “virtual-interrupt delivery” is 0
        THEN
             IF VTPR[7:4] < TPR threshold (see Section 24.6.8)
                   THEN cause VM exit due to TPR below threshold;
             FI;
        ELSE
             perform PPR virtualization (see Section 29.1.3);
             evaluate pending virtual interrupts (see Section 29.2.1);
    FI;
Any VM exit caused by TPR virtualization is trap-like: the instruction causing TPR virtualization completes before
the VM exit occurs (for example, the value of CS:RIP saved in the guest-state area of the VMCS references the next
instruction).

29.1.3         PPR Virtualization
The processor performs PPR virtualization in response to the following operations: (1) VM entry; (2) TPR virtu-
alization; and (3) EOI virtualization. See Section 26.3.2.5, Section 29.1.2, and Section 29.1.4 for details of when
PPR virtualization is performed.
PPR virtualization uses the guest interrupt status (specifically, SVI; see Section 24.4.2) and VTPR. The following
pseudocode details the behavior of PPR virtualization:
    IF VTPR[7:4] ≥ SVI[7:4]
        THEN VPPR ← VTPR & FFH;
        ELSE VPPR ← SVI & F0H;
    FI;
PPR virtualization always clears bytes 3:1 of VPPR.
PPR virtualization is caused only by TPR virtualization, EOI virtualization, and VM entry. Delivery of a virtual inter-
rupt also modifies VPPR, but in a different way (see Section 29.2.2). No other operations modify VPPR, even if they
modify SVI, VISR, or VTPR.

29.1.4       EOI Virtualization
The processor performs EOI virtualization in response to the following operations: (1) virtualization of a write to
offset 0B0H on the APIC-access page; and (2) virtualization of the WRMSR instruction with ECX = 80BH. See
Section 29.4.3 and Section 29.5 for details of when EOI virtualization is performed. EOI virtualization occurs only
if the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control is 1.
EOI virtualization uses and updates the guest interrupt status (specifically, SVI; see Section 24.4.2). The following
pseudocode details the behavior of EOI virtualization:
    Vector ← SVI;
    VISR[Vector] ← 0; (see Section 29.1.1 for definition of VISR)
    IF any bits set in VISR
        THEN SVI ← highest index of bit set in VISR
        ELSE SVI ← 0;
    FI;
    perform PPR virtualiation (see Section 29.1.3);
    IF EOI_exit_bitmap[Vector] = 1 (see Section 24.6.8 for definition of EOI_exit_bitmap)
        THEN cause EOI-induced VM exit with Vector as exit qualification;
        ELSE evaluate pending virtual interrupts; (see Section 29.2.1)
    FI;
Any VM exit caused by EOI virtualization is trap-like: the instruction causing EOI virtualization completes before
the VM exit occurs (for example, the value of CS:RIP saved in the guest-state area of the VMCS references the next
instruction).

29.1.5       Self-IPI Virtualization
The processor performs self-IPI virtualization in response to the following operations: (1) virtualization of a
write to offset 300H on the APIC-access page; and (2) virtualization of the WRMSR instruction with ECX = 83FH.
See Section 29.4.3 and Section 29.5 for details of when self-IPI virtualization is performed. Self-IPI virtualization
occurs only if the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control is 1.
Each operation that leads to self-IPI virtualization provides an 8-bit vector (see Section 29.4.3 and Section 29.5).
Self-IPI virtualization updates the guest interrupt status (specifically, RVI; see Section 24.4.2). The following
pseudocode details the behavior of self-IPI virtualization:
    VIRR[Vector] ← 1; (see Section 29.1.1 for definition of VIRR)
    RVI ← max{RVI,Vector};
    evaluate pending virtual interrupts; (see Section 29.2.1)

29.2         EVALUATION AND DELIVERY OF VIRTUAL INTERRUPTS
If the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control is 1, certain actions in VMX non-root operation or during
VM entry cause the processor to evaluate and deliver virtual interrupts.
Evaluation of virtual interrupts is triggered by certain actions change the state of the virtual-APIC page and is
described in Section 29.2.1. This evaluation may result in recognition of a virtual interrupt. Once a virtual interrupt
is recognized, the processor may deliver it within VMX non-root operation without a VM exit. Virtual-interrupt
delivery is described in Section 29.2.2.

29.2.1       Evaluation of Pending Virtual Interrupts
If the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control is 1, certain actions cause a logical processor to evaluate
pending virtual interrupts.
The following actions cause the evaluation of pending virtual interrupts: VM entry; TPR virtualization; EOI virtual-
ization; self-IPI virtualization; and posted-interrupt processing. See Section 26.3.2.5, Section 29.1.2, Section

29.1.4, Section 29.1.5, and Section 29.6 for details of when evaluation of pending virtual interrupts is performed.
No other operations cause the evaluation of pending virtual interrupts, even if they modify RVI or VPPR.
Evaluation of pending virtual interrupts uses the guest interrupt status (specifically, RVI; see Section 24.4.2). The
following pseudocode details the evaluation of pending virtual interrupts:
    IF “interrupt-window exiting” is 0 AND
    RVI[7:4] > VPPR[7:4] (see Section 29.1.1 for definition of VPPR)
             THEN recognize a pending virtual interrupt;
         ELSE
             do not recognize a pending virtual interrupt;
    FI;
Once recognized, a virtual interrupt may be delivered in VMX non-root operation; see Section 29.2.2.
Evaluation of pending virtual interrupts is caused only by VM entry, TPR virtualization, EOI virtualization, self-IPI
virtualization, and posted-interrupt processing. No other operations do so, even if they modify RVI or VPPR. The
logical processor ceases recognition of a pending virtual interrupt following the delivery of a virtual interrupt.

29.2.2         Virtual-Interrupt Delivery
If a virtual interrupt has been recognized (see Section 29.2.1), it is delivered at an instruction boundary when the
following conditions all hold: (1) RFLAGS.IF = 1; (2) there is no blocking by STI; (3) there is no blocking by MOV
SS or by POP SS; and (4) the “interrupt-window exiting” VM-execution control is 0.
Virtual-interrupt delivery has the same priority as that of VM exits due to the 1-setting of the “interrupt-window
exiting” VM-execution control.2 Thus, non-maskable interrupts (NMIs) and higher priority events take priority over
delivery of a virtual interrupt; delivery of a virtual interrupt takes priority over external interrupts and lower priority
events.
Virtual-interrupt delivery wakes a logical processor from the same inactive activity states as would an external
interrupt. Specifically, it wakes a logical processor from the states entered using the HLT and MWAIT instructions.
It does not wake a logical processor in the shutdown state or in the wait-for-SIPI state.
Virtual-interrupt delivery updates the guest interrupt status (both RVI and SVI; see Section 24.4.2) and delivers an
event within VMX non-root operation without a VM exit. The following pseudocode details the behavior of virtual-
interrupt delivery (see Section 29.1.1 for definition of VISR, VIRR, and VPPR):
    Vector ← RVI;
    VISR[Vector] ← 1;
    SVI ← Vector;
    VPPR ← Vector & F0H;
    VIRR[Vector] ← 0;
    IF any bits set in VIRR
        THEN RVI ← highest index of bit set in VIRR
        ELSE RVI ← 0;
    FI;
    deliver interrupt with Vector through IDT;
    cease recognition of any pending virtual interrupt;
If a logical processor is in enclave mode, an Asynchronous Enclave Exit (AEX) occurs before delivery of a virtual
interrupt (see Chapter 40, “Enclave Exiting Events”).

2. A logical processor never recognizes or delivers a virtual interrupt if the “interrupt-window exiting” VM-execution control is 1.
   Because of this, the relative priority of virtual-interrupt delivery and VM exits due to the 1-setting of that control is not defined.

29.3         VIRTUALIZING CR8-BASED TPR ACCESSES
In 64-bit mode, software can access the local APIC’s task-priority register (TPR) through CR8. Specifically, software
uses the MOV from CR8 and MOV to CR8 instructions (see Section 10.8.6, “Task Priority in IA-32e Mode”). This
section describes how these accesses can be virtualized.
A virtual-machine monitor can virtualize these CR8-based APIC accesses by setting the “CR8-load exiting” and
“CR8-store exiting” VM-execution controls, ensuring that the accesses cause VM exits (see Section 25.1.3). Alter-
natively, there are methods for virtualizing some CR8-based APIC accesses without VM exits.
Normally, an execution of MOV from CR8 or MOV to CR8 that does not fault or cause a VM exit accesses the APIC’s
TPR. However, such an execution are treated specially if the “use TPR shadow” VM-execution control is 1. The
following items provide details:
•   MOV from CR8. The instruction loads bits 3:0 of its destination operand with bits 7:4 of VTPR (see Section
    29.1.1). Bits 63:4 of the destination operand are cleared.
•   MOV to CR8. The instruction stores bits 3:0 of its source operand into bits 7:4 of VTPR; the remainder of VTPR
    (bits 3:0 and bits 31:8) are cleared. Following this, the processor performs TPR virtualization (see Section
    29.1.2).

29.4         VIRTUALIZING MEMORY-MAPPED APIC ACCESSES
When the local APIC is in xAPIC mode, software accesses the local APIC’s control registers using a memory-
mapped interface. Specifically, software uses linear addresses that translate to physical addresses on page frame
indicated by the base address in the IA32_APIC_BASE MSR (see Section 10.4.4, “Local APIC Status and Location”).
This section describes how these accesses can be virtualized.
A virtual-machine monitor (VMM) can virtualize these memory-mapped APIC accesses by ensuring that any access
to a linear address that would access the local APIC instead causes a VM exit. This could be done using paging or
the extended page-table mechanism (EPT). Another way is by using the 1-setting of the “virtualize APIC accesses”
VM-execution control.
If the “virtualize APIC accesses” VM-execution control is 1, the logical processor treats specially memory accesses
using linear addresses that translate to physical addresses in the 4-KByte APIC-access page.3 (The APIC-access
page is identified by the APIC-access address, a field in the VMCS; see Section 24.6.8.)
In general, an access to the APIC-access page causes an APIC-access VM exit. APIC-access VM exits provide a
VMM with information about the access causing the VM exit. Section 29.4.1 discusses the priority of APIC-access
VM exits.
Certain VM-execution controls enable the processor to virtualize certain accesses to the APIC-access page without
a VM exit. In general, this virtualization causes these accesses to be made to the virtual-APIC page instead of the
APIC-access page.

                                                              NOTES
         Unless stated otherwise, this section characterizes only linear accesses to the APIC-access page;
         an access to the APIC-access page is a linear access if (1) it results from a memory access using a
         linear address; and (2) the access’s physical address is the translation of that linear address.
         Section 29.4.6 discusses accesses to the APIC-access page that are not linear accesses.
         The distinction between the APIC-access page and the virtual-APIC page allows a VMM to share
         paging structures or EPT paging structures among the virtual processors of a virtual machine (the
         shared paging structures referencing the same APIC-access address, which appears in the VMCS of

3. Even when addresses are translated using EPT (see Section 28.2), the determination of whether an APIC-access VM exit occurs
   depends on an access’s physical address, not its guest-physical address. Even when CR0.PG = 0, ordinary memory accesses by soft-
   ware use linear addresses; the fact that CR0.PG = 0 means only that the identity translation is used to convert linear addresses to
   physical (or guest-physical) addresses.

         all the virtual processors) while giving each virtual processor its own virtual APIC (the VMCS of each
         virtual processor will have a unique virtual-APIC address).

Section 29.4.2 discusses when and how the processor may virtualize read accesses from the APIC-access page.
Section 29.4.3 does the same for write accesses. When virtualizing a write to the APIC-access page, the processor
typically takes actions in addition to passing the write through to the virtual-APIC page.
The discussion in those sections uses the concept of an operation within which these memory accesses may occur.
For those discussions, an “operation” can be an iteration of a REP-prefixed string instruction, an execution of any
other instruction, or delivery of an event through the IDT.
The 1-setting of the “virtualize APIC accesses” VM-execution control may also affect accesses to the APIC-access
page that do not result directly from linear addresses. This is discussed in Section 29.4.6.
Special treatment may apply to Intel SGX instructions or if the logical processor is in enclave mode. See Section
42.5.3 for details.

29.4.1         Priority of APIC-Access VM Exits
The following items specify the priority of APIC-access VM exits relative to other events.
•   The priority of an APIC-access VM exit due to a memory access is below that of any page fault or EPT violation
    that that access may incur. That is, an access does not cause an APIC-access VM exit if it would cause a page
    fault or an EPT violation.
•   A memory access does not cause an APIC-access VM exit until after the accessed flags are set in the paging
    structures (including EPT paging structures, if enabled).
•   A write access does not cause an APIC-access VM exit until after the dirty flags are set in the appropriate paging
    structure and EPT paging structure (if enabled).
•   With respect to all other events, any APIC-access VM exit due to a memory access has the same priority as any
    page fault or EPT violation that the access could cause. (This item applies to other events that the access may
    generate as well as events that may be generated by other accesses by the same operation.)
These principles imply, among other things, that an APIC-access VM exit may occur during the execution of a
repeated string instruction (including INS and OUTS). Suppose, for example, that the first n iterations (n may be
0) of such an instruction do not access the APIC-access page and that the next iteration does access that page. As
a result, the first n iterations may complete and be followed by an APIC-access VM exit. The instruction pointer
saved in the VMCS references the repeated string instruction and the values of the general-purpose registers
reflect the completion of n iterations.

29.4.2         Virtualizing Reads from the APIC-Access Page
A read access from the APIC-access page causes an APIC-access VM exit if any of the following are true:
•   The “use TPR shadow” VM-execution control is 0.
•   The access is for an instruction fetch.
•   The access is more than 32 bits in size.
•   The access is part of an operation for which the processor has already virtualized a write to the APIC-access
    page.
•   The access is not entirely contained within the low 4 bytes of a naturally aligned 16-byte region. That is, bits
    3:2 of the access’s address are 0, and the same is true of the address of the highest byte accessed.
If none of the above are true, whether a read access is virtualized depends on the setting of the “APIC-register
virtualization” VM-execution control:
•   If “APIC-register virtualization” is 0, a read access is virtualized if its page offset is 080H (task priority);
    otherwise, the access causes an APIC-access VM exit.
•   If “APIC-register virtualization is 1, a read access is virtualized if it is entirely within one the following ranges of
    offsets:

    — 020H–023H (local APIC ID);
    — 030H–033H (local APIC version);
    — 080H–083H (task priority);
    — 0B0H–0B3H (end of interrupt);
    — 0D0H–0D3H (logical destination);
    — 0E0H–0E3H (destination format);
    — 0F0H–0F3H (spurious-interrupt vector);
    — 100H–103H, 110H–113H, 120H–123H, 130H–133H, 140H–143H, 150H–153H, 160H–163H, or 170H–
      173H (in-service);
    — 180H–183H, 190H–193H, 1A0H–1A3H, 1B0H–1B3H, 1C0H–1C3H, 1D0H–1D3H, 1E0H–1E3H, or 1F0H–
      1F3H (trigger mode);
    — 200H–203H, 210H–213H, 220H–223H, 230H–233H, 240H–243H, 250H–253H, 260H–263H, or 270H–
      273H (interrupt request);
    — 280H–283H (error status);
    — 300H–303H or 310H–313H (interrupt command);
    — 320H–323H, 330H–333H, 340H–343H, 350H–353H, 360H–363H, or 370H–373H (LVT entries);
    — 380H–383H (initial count); or
    — 3E0H–3E3H (divide configuration).
    In all other cases, the access causes an APIC-access VM exit.
A read access from the APIC-access page that is virtualized returns data from the corresponding page offset on the
virtual-APIC page.4

29.4.3       Virtualizing Writes to the APIC-Access Page
Whether a write access to the APIC-access page is virtualized depends on the settings of the VM-execution controls
and the page offset of the access. Section 29.4.3.1 details when APIC-write virtualization occurs.
Unlike reads, writes to the local APIC have side effects; because of this, virtualization of writes to the APIC-access
page may require emulation specific to the access’s page offset (which identifies the APIC register being accessed).
Section 29.4.3.2 describes this APIC-write emulation.
For some page offsets, it is necessary for software to complete the virtualization after a write completes. In these
cases, the processor causes an APIC-write VM exit to invoke VMM software. Section 29.4.3.3 discusses APIC-
write VM exits.

29.4.3.1      Determining Whether a Write Access is Virtualized
A write access to the APIC-access page causes an APIC-access VM exit if any of the following are true:
•   The “use TPR shadow” VM-execution control is 0.
•   The access is more than 32 bits in size.
•   The access is part of an operation for which the processor has already virtualized a write (with a different page
    offset or a different size) to the APIC-access page.
•   The access is not entirely contained within the low 4 bytes of a naturally aligned 16-byte region. That is, bits
    3:2 of the access’s address are 0, and the same is true of the address of the highest byte accessed.
If none of the above are true, whether a write access is virtualized depends on the settings of the “APIC-register
virtualization” and “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution controls:

4. The memory type used for accesses that read from the virtual-APIC page is reported in bits 53:50 of the IA32_VMX_BASIC MSR
   (see Appendix A.1).

•   If the “APIC-register virtualization” and “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution controls are both 0, a write
    access is virtualized if its page offset is 080H; otherwise, the access causes an APIC-access VM exit.
•   If the “APIC-register virtualization” VM-execution control is 0 and the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution
    control is 1, a write access is virtualized if its page offset is 080H (task priority), 0B0H (end of interrupt), and
    300H (interrupt command — low); otherwise, the access causes an APIC-access VM exit.
•   If “APIC-register virtualization is 1, a write access is virtualized if it is entirely within one the following ranges of
    offsets:
    — 020H–023H (local APIC ID);
    — 080H–083H (task priority);
    — 0B0H–0B3H (end of interrupt);
    — 0D0H–0D3H (logical destination);
    — 0E0H–0E3H (destination format);
    — 0F0H–0F3H (spurious-interrupt vector);
    — 280H–283H (error status);
    — 300H–303H or 310H–313H (interrupt command);
    — 320H–323H, 330H–333H, 340H–343H, 350H–353H, 360H–363H, or 370H–373H (LVT entries);
    — 380H–383H (initial count); or
    — 3E0H–3E3H (divide configuration).
    In all other cases, the access causes an APIC-access VM exit.
The processor virtualizes a write access to the APIC-access page by writing data to the corresponding page offset
on the virtual-APIC page.5 Following this, the processor performs certain actions after completion of the operation
of which the access was a part.6 APIC-write emulation is described in Section 29.4.3.2.

29.4.3.2       APIC-Write Emulation
If the processor virtualizes a write access to the APIC-access page, it performs additional actions after completion
of an operation of which the access was a part. These actions are called APIC-write emulation.
The details of APIC-write emulation depend upon the page offset of the virtualized write access:7
•   080H (task priority). The processor clears bytes 3:1 of VTPR and then causes TPR virtualization (Section
    29.1.2).
•   0B0H (end of interrupt). If the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control is 1, the processor clears VEOI
    and then causes EOI virtualization (Section 29.1.4); otherwise, the processor causes an APIC-write VM exit
    (Section 29.4.3.3).
•   300H (interrupt command — low). If the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control is 1, the processor
    checks the value of VICR_LO to determine whether the following are all true:
    — Reserved bits (31:20, 17:16, 13) and bit 12 (delivery status) are all 0.
    — Bits 19:18 (destination shorthand) are 01B (self).
    — Bit 15 (trigger mode) is 0 (edge).
    — Bits 10:8 (delivery mode) are 000B (fixed).
    — Bits 7:4 (the upper half of the vector) are not 0000B.

5. The memory type used for accesses that write to the virtual-APIC page is reported in bits 53:50 of the IA32_VMX_BASIC MSR (see
   Appendix A.1).
6. Recall that, for the purposes of this discussion, an operation is an iteration of a REP-prefixed string instruction, an execution of any
   other instruction, or delivery of an event through the IDT.
7. For any operation, there can be only one page offset for which a write access was virtualized. This is because a write access is not
   virtualized if the processor has already virtualized a write access for the same operation with a different page offset.

    If all of the items above are true, the processor performs self-IPI virtualization using the 8-bit vector in byte 0
    of VICR_LO (Section 29.1.5).
    If the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control is 0, or if any of the items above are false, the
    processor causes an APIC-write VM exit (Section 29.4.3.3).
•   310H–313H (interrupt command — high). The processor clears bytes 2:0 of VICR_HI. No other virtualization or
    VM exit occurs.
•   Any other page offset. The processor causes an APIC-write VM exit (Section 29.4.3.3).
APIC-write emulation takes priority over system-management interrupts (SMIs), INIT signals, and lower priority
events. APIC-write emulation is not blocked if RFLAGS.IF = 0 or by the MOV SS, POP SS, or STI instructions.
If an operation causes a fault after a write access to the APIC-access page and before APIC-write emulation, and
that fault is delivered without a VM exit, APIC-write emulation occurs after the fault is delivered and before the fault
handler can execute. If an operation causes a VM exit (perhaps due to a fault) after a write access to the APIC-
access page and before APIC-write emulation, the APIC-write emulation does not occur.

29.4.3.3      APIC-Write VM Exits
In certain cases, VMM software must be invoked to complete the virtualization of a write access to the APIC-access
page. In this case, APIC-write emulation causes an APIC-write VM exit. (Section 29.4.3.2 details the cases that
causes APIC-write VM exits.)
APIC-write VM exits are invoked by APIC-write emulation, and APIC-write emulation occurs after an operation that
performs a write access to the APIC-access page. Because of this, every APIC-write VM exit is trap-like: it occurs
after completion of the operation containing the write access that caused the VM exit (for example, the value of
CS:RIP saved in the guest-state area of the VMCS references the next instruction).
The basic exit reason for an APIC-write VM exit is “APIC write.” The exit qualification is the page offset of the write
access that led to the VM exit.
As noted in Section 29.5, execution of WRMSR with ECX = 83FH (self-IPI MSR) can lead to an APIC-write VM exit
if the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control is 1. The exit qualification for such an APIC-write VM exit is
3F0H.

29.4.4        Instruction-Specific Considerations
Certain instructions that use linear address may cause page faults even though they do not use those addresses to
access memory. The APIC-virtualization features may affect these instructions as well:
•   CLFLUSH, CLFLUSHOPT. With regard to faulting, the processor operates as if each of these instructions reads
    from the linear address in its source operand. If that address translates to one on the APIC-access page, the
    instruction may cause an APIC-access VM exit. If it does not, it will flush the corresponding cache line on the
    virtual-APIC page instead of the APIC-access page.
•   ENTER. With regard to faulting, the processor operates if ENTER writes to the byte referenced by the final
    value of the stack pointer (even though it does not if its size operand is non-zero). If that value translates to an
    address on the APIC-access page, the instruction may cause an APIC-access VM exit. If it does not, it will cause
    the APIC-write emulation appropriate to the address’s page offset.
•   MASKMOVQ and MAKSMOVDQU. Even if the instruction’s mask is zero, the processor may operate with
    regard to faulting as if MASKMOVQ or MASKMOVDQU writes to memory (the behavior is implementation-
    specific). In such a situation, an APIC-access VM exit may occur.
•   MONITOR. With regard to faulting, the processor operates as if MONITOR reads from the effective address in
    RAX. If the resulting linear address translates to one on the APIC-access page, the instruction may cause an
    APIC-access VM exit.8 If it does not, it will monitor the corresponding address on the virtual-APIC page instead
    of the APIC-access page.

8. This chapter uses the notation RAX, RIP, RSP, RFLAGS, etc. for processor registers because most processors that support VMX oper-
   ation also support Intel 64 architecture. For IA-32 processors, this notation refers to the 32-bit forms of those registers (EAX, EIP,
   ESP, EFLAGS, etc.). In a few places, notation such as EAX is used to refer specifically to lower 32 bits of the indicated register.

•   PREFETCH. An execution of the PREFETCH instruction that would result in an access to the APIC-access page
    does not cause an APIC-access VM exit. Such an access may prefetch data; if so, it is from the corresponding
    address on the virtual-APIC page.
Virtualization of accesses to the APIC-access page is principally intended for basic instructions such as AND, MOV,
OR, TEST, XCHG, and XOR. Use of an instruction that normally operates on floating-point, SSE, AVX, or AVX-512
registers may cause an APIC-access VM exit unconditionally regardless of the page offset it accesses on the APIC-
access page.

29.4.5          Issues Pertaining to Page Size and TLB Management
The 1-setting of the “virtualize APIC accesses” VM-execution is guaranteed to apply only if translations to the APIC-
access address use a 4-KByte page. The following items provide details:
•   If EPT is not in use, any linear address that translates to an address on the APIC-access page should use a 4-
    KByte page. Any access to a linear address that translates to the APIC-access page using a larger page may
    operate as if the “virtualize APIC accesses” VM-execution control were 0.
•   If EPT is in use, any guest-physical address that translates to an address on the APIC-access page should use a
    4-KByte page. Any access to a linear address that translates to a guest-physical address that in turn translates
    to the APIC-access page using a larger page may operate as if the “virtualize APIC accesses” VM-execution
    control were 0. (This is true also for guest-physical accesses to the APIC-access page; see Section 29.4.6.1.)
In addition, software should perform appropriate TLB invalidation when making changes that may affect APIC-
virtualization. The specifics depend on whether VPIDs or EPT is being used:
•   VPIDs being used but EPT not being used. Suppose that there is a VPID that has been used before and that
    software has since made either of the following changes: (1) set the “virtualize APIC accesses” VM-execution
    control when it had previously been 0; or (2) changed the paging structures so that some linear address
    translates to the APIC-access address when it previously did not. In that case, software should execute
    INVVPID (see “INVVPID— Invalidate Translations Based on VPID” in Section 30.3) before performing on the
    same logical processor and with the same VPID.9
•   EPT being used. Suppose that there is an EPTP value that has been used before and that software has since
    made either of the following changes: (1) set the “virtualize APIC accesses” VM-execution control when it had
    previously been 0; or (2) changed the EPT paging structures so that some guest-physical address translates to
    the APIC-access address when it previously did not. In that case, software should execute INVEPT (see
    “INVEPT— Invalidate Translations Derived from EPT” in Section 30.3) before performing on the same logical
    processor and with the same EPTP value.10
•   Neither VPIDs nor EPT being used. No invalidation is required.
Failure to perform the appropriate TLB invalidation may result in the logical processor operating as if the “virtualize
APIC accesses” VM-execution control were 0 in responses to accesses to the affected address. (No invalidation is
necessary if neither VPIDs nor EPT is being used.)

29.4.6          APIC Accesses Not Directly Resulting From Linear Addresses
Section 29.4 has described the treatment of accesses that use linear addresses that translate to addresses on the
APIC-access page. This section considers memory accesses that do not result directly from linear addresses.
•   An access is called a guest-physical access if (1) CR0.PG = 1;11 (2) the “enable EPT” VM-execution control
    is 1;12 (3) the access’s physical address is the result of an EPT translation; and (4) either (a) the access was
    not generated by a linear address; or (b) the access’s guest-physical address is not the translation of the

9. INVVPID should use either (1) the all-contexts INVVPID type; (2) the single-context INVVPID type with the VPID in the INVVPID
   descriptor; or (3) the individual-address INVVPID type with the linear address and the VPID in the INVVPID descriptor.
10. INVEPT should use either (1) the global INVEPT type; or (2) the single-context INVEPT type with the EPTP value in the INVEPT
    descriptor.
11. If the capability MSR IA32_VMX_CR0_FIXED0 reports that CR0.PG must be 1 in VMX operation, CR0.PG must be 1 unless the “unre-
    stricted guest” VM-execution control and bit 31 of the primary processor-based VM-execution controls are both 1.

    access’s linear address. Section 29.4.6.1 discusses the treatment of guest-physical accesses to the APIC-
    access page.
•   An access is called a physical access if (1) either (a) the “enable EPT” VM-execution control is 0; or (b) the
    access’s physical address is not the result of a translation through the EPT paging structures; and (2) either
    (a) the access is not generated by a linear address; or (b) the access’s physical address is not the translation
    of its linear address. Section 29.4.6.2 discusses the treatment of physical accesses to the APIC-access page.

29.4.6.1      Guest-Physical Accesses to the APIC-Access Page
Guest-physical accesses include the following when guest-physical addresses are being translated using EPT:
•   Reads from the guest paging structures when translating a linear address (such an access uses a guest-
    physical address that is not the translation of that linear address).
•   Loads of the page-directory-pointer-table entries by MOV to CR when the logical processor is using (or that
    causes the logical processor to use) PAE paging (see Section 4.4).
•   Updates to the accessed and dirty flags in the guest paging structures when using a linear address (such an
    access uses a guest-physical address that is not the translation of that linear address).
Every guest-physical access to an address on the APIC-access page causes an APIC-access VM exit. Such accesses
are never virtualized regardless of the page offset.
The following items specify the priority relative to other events of APIC-access VM exits caused by guest-physical
accesses to the APIC-access page.
•   The priority of an APIC-access VM exit caused by a guest-physical access to memory is below that of any EPT
    violation that that access may incur. That is, a guest-physical access does not cause an APIC-access VM exit if
    it would cause an EPT violation.
•   With respect to all other events, any APIC-access VM exit caused by a guest-physical access has the same
    priority as any EPT violation that the guest-physical access could cause.

29.4.6.2      Physical Accesses to the APIC-Access Page
Physical accesses include the following:
•   If the “enable EPT” VM-execution control is 0:
    — Reads from the paging structures when translating a linear address.
    — Loads of the page-directory-pointer-table entries by MOV to CR when the logical processor is using (or that
      causes the logical processor to use) PAE paging (see Section 4.4).
    — Updates to the accessed and dirty flags in the paging structures.
•   If the “enable EPT” VM-execution control is 1, accesses to the EPT paging structures (including updates to the
    accessed and dirty flags for EPT).
•   Any of the following accesses made by the processor to support VMX non-root operation:
    — Accesses to the VMCS region.
    — Accesses to data structures referenced (directly or indirectly) by physical addresses in VM-execution
      control fields in the VMCS. These include the I/O bitmaps, the MSR bitmaps, and the virtual-APIC page.
•   Accesses that effect transitions into and out of SMM.13 These include the following:
    — Accesses to SMRAM during SMI delivery and during execution of RSM.
    — Accesses during SMM VM exits (including accesses to MSEG) and during VM entries that return from SMM.

12. “Enable EPT” is a secondary processor-based VM-execution control. If bit 31 of the primary processor-based VM-execution controls
    is 0, VMX non-root operation functions as if the “enable EPT” VM-execution control were 0. See Section 24.6.2.
13. Technically, these accesses do not occur in VMX non-root operation. They are included here for clarity.

A physical access to the APIC-access page may or may not cause an APIC-access VM exit. If it does not cause an
APIC-access VM exit, it may access the APIC-access page or the virtual-APIC page. Physical write accesses to the
APIC-access page may or may not cause APIC-write emulation or APIC-write VM exits.
The priority of an APIC-access VM exit caused by physical access is not defined relative to other events that the
access may cause.
It is recommended that software not set the APIC-access address to any of the addresses used by physical memory
accesses (identified above). For example, it should not set the APIC-access address to the physical address of any
of the active paging structures if the “enable EPT” VM-execution control is 0.

29.5            VIRTUALIZING MSR-BASED APIC ACCESSES
When the local APIC is in x2APIC mode, software accesses the local APIC’s control registers using the MSR inter-
face. Specifically, software uses the RDMSR and WRMSR instructions, setting ECX (identifying the MSR being
accessed) to values in the range 800H–8FFH (see Section 10.12, “Extended XAPIC (x2APIC)”). This section
describes how these accesses can be virtualized.
A virtual-machine monitor can virtualize these MSR-based APIC accesses by configuring the MSR bitmaps (see
Section 24.6.9) to ensure that the accesses cause VM exits (see Section 25.1.3). Alternatively, there are methods
for virtualizing some MSR-based APIC accesses without VM exits.
Normally, an execution of RDMSR or WRMSR that does not fault or cause a VM exit accesses the MSR indicated in
ECX. However, such an execution treats some values of ECX in the range 800H–8FFH specially if the “virtualize
x2APIC mode” VM-execution control is 1. The following items provide details:
•   RDMSR. The instruction’s behavior depends on the setting of the “APIC-register virtualization” VM-execution
    control.
    — If the “APIC-register virtualization” VM-execution control is 0, behavior depends upon the value of ECX.
        •       If ECX contains 808H (indicating the TPR MSR), the instruction reads the 8 bytes from offset 080H on
                the virtual-APIC page (VTPR and the 4 bytes above it) into EDX:EAX. This occurs even if the local APIC
                is not in x2APIC mode (no general-protection fault occurs because the local APIC is not x2APIC mode).
        •       If ECX contains any other value in the range 800H–8FFH, the instruction operates normally. If the local
                APIC is in x2APIC mode and ECX indicates a readable APIC register, EDX and EAX are loaded with the
                value of that register. If the local APIC is not in x2APIC mode or ECX does not indicate a readable APIC
                register, a general-protection fault occurs.
    — If “APIC-register virtualization” is 1 and ECX contains a value in the range 800H–8FFH, the instruction reads
      the 8 bytes from offset X on the virtual-APIC page into EDX:EAX, where X = (ECX & FFH) « 4. This occurs
      even if the local APIC is not in x2APIC mode (no general-protection fault occurs because the local APIC is
      not in x2APIC mode).
•   WRMSR. The instruction’s behavior depends on the value of ECX and the setting of the “virtual-interrupt
    delivery” VM-execution control.
    Special processing applies in the following cases: (1) ECX contains 808H (indicating the TPR MSR); (2) ECX
    contains 80BH (indicating the EOI MSR) and the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control is 1; and
    (3) ECX contains 83FH (indicating the self-IPI MSR) and the “virtual-interrupt delivery” VM-execution control
    is 1.
    If special processing applies, no general-protection exception is produced due to the fact that the local APIC is
    in xAPIC mode. However, WRMSR does perform the normal reserved-bit checking:
    — If ECX contains 808H or 83FH, a general-protection fault occurs if either EDX or EAX[31:8] is non-zero.
    — If ECX contains 80BH, a general-protection fault occurs if either EDX or EAX is non-zero.
    If there is no fault, WRMSR stores EDX:EAX at offset X on the virtual-APIC page, where X = (ECX & FFH) « 4.
    Following this, the processor performs an operation depending on the value of ECX:
    — If ECX contains 808H, the processor performs TPR virtualization (see Section 29.1.2).
    — If ECX contains 80BH, the processor performs EOI virtualization (see Section 29.1.4).
    — If ECX contains 83FH, the processor then checks the value of EAX[7:4] and proceeds as follows:

         •     If the value is non-zero, the logical processor performs self-IPI virtualization with the 8-bit vector in
               EAX[7:0] (see Section 29.1.5).
         •     If the value is zero, the logical processor causes an APIC-write VM exit as if there had been a write
               access to page offset 3F0H on the APIC-access page (see Section 29.4.3.3).
    If special processing does not apply, the instruction operates normally. If the local APIC is in x2APIC mode
    and ECX indicates a writable APIC register, the value in EDX:EAX is written to that register. If the local APIC is
    not in x2APIC mode or ECX does not indicate a writable APIC register, a general-protection fault occurs.

29.6           POSTED-INTERRUPT PROCESSING
Posted-interrupt processing is a feature by which a processor processes the virtual interrupts by recording them as
pending on the virtual-APIC page.
Posted-interrupt processing is enabled by setting the “process posted interrupts” VM-execution control. The
processing is performed in response to the arrival of an interrupt with the posted-interrupt notification vector.
In response to such an interrupt, the processor processes virtual interrupts recorded in a data structure called a
posted-interrupt descriptor. The posted-interrupt notification vector and the address of the posted-interrupt
descriptor are fields in the VMCS; see Section 24.6.8.
If the “process posted interrupts” VM-execution control is 1, a logical processor uses a 64-byte posted-interrupt
descriptor located at the posted-interrupt descriptor address. The posted-interrupt descriptor has the following
format:
                                      Table 29-1. Format of Posted-Interrupt Descriptor
 Bit             Name                            Description
 Position(s)
 255:0           Posted-interrupt requests       One bit for each interrupt vector. There is a posted-interrupt request for a vector if
                                                 the corresponding bit is 1
 256             Outstanding notification        If this bit is set, there is a notification outstanding for one or more posted interrupts
                                                 in bits 255:0
 511:257         Reserved for software and       These bits may be used by software and by other agents in the system (e.g.,
                 other agents                    chipset). The processor does not modify these bits.

The notation PIR (posted-interrupt requests) refers to the 256 posted-interrupt bits in the posted-interrupt
descriptor.
Use of the posted-interrupt descriptor differs from that of other data structures that are referenced by pointers in
a VMCS. There is a general requirement that software ensure that each such data structure is modified only when
no logical processor with a current VMCS that references it is in VMX non-root operation. That requirement does
not apply to the posted-interrupt descriptor. There is a requirement, however, that such modifications be done
using locked read-modify-write instructions.
If the “external-interrupt exiting” VM-execution control is 1, any unmasked external interrupt causes a VM exit
(see Section 25.2). If the “process posted interrupts” VM-execution control is also 1, this behavior is changed and
the processor handles an external interrupt as follows:14
1. The local APIC is acknowledged; this provides the processor core with an interrupt vector, called here the
   physical vector.
2. If the physical vector equals the posted-interrupt notification vector, the logical processor continues to the next
   step. Otherwise, a VM exit occurs as it would normally due to an external interrupt; the vector is saved in the
   VM-exit interruption-information field.
3. The processor clears the outstanding-notification bit in the posted-interrupt descriptor. This is done atomically
   so as to leave the remainder of the descriptor unmodified (e.g., with a locked AND operation).

14. VM entry ensures that the “process posted interrupts” VM-execution control is 1 only if the “external-interrupt exiting” VM-execu-
    tion control is also 1. SeeSection 26.2.1.1.

4. The processor writes zero to the EOI register in the local APIC; this dismisses the interrupt with the posted-
   interrupt notification vector from the local APIC.
5. The logical processor performs a logical-OR of PIR into VIRR and clears PIR. No other agent can read or write a
   PIR bit (or group of bits) between the time it is read (to determine what to OR into VIRR) and when it is cleared.
6. The logical processor sets RVI to be the maximum of the old value of RVI and the highest index of all bits that
   were set in PIR; if no bit was set in PIR, RVI is left unmodified.
7. The logical processor evaluates pending virtual interrupts as described in Section 29.2.1.
The logical processor performs the steps above in an uninterruptible manner. If step #7 leads to recognition of a
virtual interrupt, the processor may deliver that interrupt immediately.
Steps #1 to #7 above occur when the interrupt controller delivers an unmasked external interrupt to the CPU core.
The following items consider certain cases of interrupt delivery:
•   Interrupt delivery can occur between iterations of a REP-prefixed instruction (after at least one iteration has
    completed but before all iterations have completed). If this occurs, the following items characterize processor
    state after posted-interrupt processing completes and before guest execution resumes:
    — RIP references the REP-prefixed instruction;
    — RCX, RSI, and RDI are updated to reflect the iterations completed; and
    — RFLAGS.RF = 1.
•   Interrupt delivery can occur when the logical processor is in the active, HLT, or MWAIT states. If the logical
    processor had been in the active or MWAIT state before the arrival of the interrupt, it is in the active state
    following completion of step #7; if it had been in the HLT state, it returns to the HLT state after step #7 (if a
    pending virtual interrupt was recognized, the logical processor may immediately wake from the HLT state).
•   Interrupt delivery can occur while the logical processor is in enclave mode. If the logical processor had been in
    enclave mode before the arrival of the interrupt, an Asynchronous Enclave Exit (AEX) may occur before the
    steps #1 to #7 (see Chapter 40, “Enclave Exiting Events”). If no AEX occurs before step #1 and a VM exit
    occurs at step #2, an AEX occurs before the VM exit is delivered.

