                                                        CHAPTER 31

31.1          VMX SYSTEM PROGRAMMING OVERVIEW
The Virtual Machine Monitor (VMM) is a software class used to manage virtual machines (VM). This chapter
describes programming considerations for VMMs.
Each VM behaves like a complete physical machine and can run operating system (OS) and applications. The VMM
software layer runs at the most privileged level and has complete ownership of the underlying system hardware.
The VMM controls creation of a VM, transfers control to a VM, and manages situations that can cause transitions
between the guest VMs and host VMM. The VMM allows the VMs to share the underlying hardware and yet provides
isolation between the VMs. The guest software executing in a VM is unaware of any transitions that might have
occurred between the VM and its host.

31.2          SUPPORTING PROCESSOR OPERATING MODES IN GUEST ENVIRONMENTS
Typically, VMMs transfer control to a VM using VMX transitions referred to as VM entries. The boundary conditions
that define what a VM is allowed to execute in isolation are specified in a virtual-machine control structure (VMCS).
As noted in Section 23.8, processors may fix certain bits in CR0 and CR4 to specific values and not support other
values. The first processors to support VMX operation require that CR0.PE and CR0.PG be 1 in VMX operation. Thus,
a VM entry is allowed only to guests with paging enabled that are in protected mode or in virtual-8086 mode. Guest
execution in other processor operating modes need to be specially handled by the VMM.
One example of such a condition is guest execution in real-mode. A VMM could support guest real-mode execution
using at least two approaches:
•   By using a fast instruction set emulator in the VMM.
•   By using the similarity between real-mode and virtual-8086 mode to support real-mode guest execution in a
    virtual-8086 container. The virtual-8086 container may be implemented as a virtual-8086 container task within
    a monitor that emulates real-mode guest state and instructions, or by running the guest VM as the virtual-8086
    container (by entering the guest with RFLAGS.VM1 set). Attempts by real-mode code to access privileged state
    outside the virtual-8086 container would trap to the VMM and would also need to be emulated.
Another example of such a condition is guest execution in protected mode with paging disabled. A VMM could
support such guest execution by using “identity” page tables to emulate unpaged protected mode.

31.2.1        Using Unrestricted Guest Mode
Processors which support the “unrestricted guest” VM-execution control allow VM software to run in real-address
mode and unpaged protected mode. Since these modes do not use paging, VMM software must virtualize guest
memory using EPT.
Special notes for 64-bit VMM software using the 1-setting of the “unrestricted guest” VM-execution control:
•   It is recommended that 64-bit VMM software use the 1-settings of the "load IA32_EFER" VM entry control and
    the "save IA32_EFER" VM-exit control. If VM entry is establishing CR0.PG=0 and if the "IA-32e mode guest"
    and "load IA32_EFER" VM entry controls are both 0, VM entry leaves IA32_EFER.LME unmodified (i.e., the host
    value will persist in the guest).
•   It is not necessary for VMM software to track guest transitions into and out of IA-32e mode for the purpose of
    maintaining the correct setting of the "IA-32e mode guest" VM entry control. This is because VM exits on

1. This chapter uses the notation RAX, RIP, RSP, RFLAGS, etc. for processor registers because most processors that support VMX oper-
   ation also support Intel 64 architecture. For processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture, this notation refers to the 32-bit
   forms of those registers (EAX, EIP, ESP, EFLAGS, etc.).

    processors supporting the 1-setting of the "unrestricted guest" VM-execution control save the (guest) value of
    IA32_EFER.LMA into the "IA-32e mode guest" VM entry control.

31.3           MANAGING VMCS REGIONS AND POINTERS
A VMM must observe necessary procedures when working with a VMCS, the associated VMCS pointer, and the
VMCS region. It must also not assume the state of persistency for VMCS regions in memory or cache.
Before entering VMX operation, the host VMM allocates a VMXON region. A VMM can host several virtual machines
and have many VMCSs active under its management. A unique VMCS region is required for each virtual machine;
a VMXON region is required for the VMM itself.
A VMM determines the VMCS region size by reading IA32_VMX_BASIC MSR; it creates VMCS regions of this size
using a 4-KByte-aligned area of physical memory. Each VMCS region needs to be initialized with a VMCS revision
identifier (at byte offset 0) identical to the revision reported by the processor in the VMX capability MSR.

                                                        NOTE
         Software must not read or write directly to the VMCS data region as the format is not architecturally
         defined. Consequently, Intel recommends that the VMM remove any linear-address mappings to
         VMCS regions before loading.
System software does not need to do special preparation to the VMXON region before entering into VMX operation.
The address of the VMXON region for the VMM is provided as an operand to VMXON instruction. Once in VMX root
operation, the VMM needs to prepare data fields in the VMCS that control the execution of a VM upon a VM entry.
The VMM can make a VMCS the current VMCS by using the VMPTRLD instruction. VMCS data fields must be read or
written only through VMREAD and VMWRITE commands respectively.
Every component of the VMCS is identified by a 32-bit encoding that is provided as an operand to VMREAD and
VMWRITE. Appendix B provides the encodings. A VMM must properly initialize all fields in a VMCS before using the
current VMCS for VM entry.
A VMCS is referred to as a controlling VMCS if it is the current VMCS on a logical processor in VMX non-root opera-
tion. A current VMCS for controlling a logical processor in VMX non-root operation may be referred to as a working
VMCS if the logical processor is not in VMX non-root operation. The relationship of active, current (i.e. working) and
controlling VMCS during VMX operation is shown in Figure 31-1.

                                                        NOTE
         As noted in Section 24.1, the processor may optimize VMX operation by maintaining the state of an
         active VMCS (one for which VMPTRLD has been executed) on the processor. Before relinquishing
         control to other system software that may, without informing the VMM, remove power from the
         processor (e.g., for transitions to S3 or S4) or leave VMX operation, a VMM must VMCLEAR all active
         VMCSs. This ensures that all VMCS data cached by the processor are flushed to memory and that
         no other software can corrupt the current VMM’s VMCS data. It is also recommended that the VMM
         execute VMXOFF after such executions of VMCLEAR.

The VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC reports the memory type used by the processor for accessing a VMCS
or any data structures referenced through pointers in the VMCS. Software must maintain the VMCS structures in
cache-coherent memory. Software must always map the regions hosting the I/O bitmaps, MSR bitmaps, VM-exit
MSR-store area, VM-exit MSR-load area, and VM-entry MSR-load area to the write-back (WB) memory type.
Mapping these regions to uncacheable (UC) memory type is supported, but strongly discouraged due to negative
impact on performance.

31.4           USING VMX INSTRUCTIONS
VMX instructions are allowed only in VMX root operation. An attempt to execute a VMX instruction in VMX non-root
operation causes a VM exit.

                 (a) VMX Operation and VMX Transitions

                              VM Entry       VM Entry         VM Entry         VM Entry         VMXOFF
                 Processor
                 Operation

                                            VM Exit         VM Exit                        VM Exit
                           VMXON                                           VM Exit

                 Legend:

                                 Outside                VMX Root                      VMX
                                  VMX                   Operation                   Non-Root
                                Operation                                           Operation

                 (b) State of VMCS and VMX Operation

                                            VMRESUME                                        VMCLEAR B
                             VMLAUNCH
                           VMPTRLD B
                                                  VM Exit        VM Exit

                  VMCS B

                  VMCS A

                                                                               VM Exit          VM Exit
                       VMPTRLD A                        VMPTRLD A

                                                                      VMLAUNCH      VMRESUME         VMCLEAR A

                 Legend:
                               Inactive      Current VMCS      Active VMCS        Current VMCS
                                VMCS           (working)       (not current)       (controlling)

                     Figure 31-1. VMX Transitions and States of VMCS in a Logical Processor

Processors perform various checks while executing any VMX instruction. They follow well-defined error handling on
failures. VMX instruction execution failures detected before loading of a guest state are handled by the processor
as follows:
•   If the working-VMCS pointer is not valid, the instruction fails by setting RFLAGS.CF to 1.
•   If the working-VMCS pointer is valid, RFLAGS.ZF is set to 1 and the proper error-code is saved in the VM-
    instruction error field of the working-VMCS.
Software is required to check RFLAGS.CF and RFLAGS.ZF to determine the success or failure of VMX instruction
executions.
The following items provide details regarding use of the VM-entry instructions (VMLAUNCH and VMRESUME):
•   If the working-VMCS pointer is valid, the state of the working VMCS may cause the VM-entry instruction to fail.
    RFLAGS.ZF is set to 1 and one of the following values is saved in the VM-instruction error field:
    — 4: VMLAUNCH with non-clear VMCS.
      If this error occurs, software can avoid the error by executing VMRESUME.
    — 5: VMRESUME with non-launched VMCS.
      If this error occurs, software can avoid the error by executing VMLAUNCH.

    — 6: VMRESUME after VMXOFF.1
      If this error occurs, software can avoid the error by executing the following sequence of instructions:
               VMPTRST working-VMCS pointer
               VMCLEAR working-VMCS pointer
               VMPTRLD working-VMCS pointer
               VMLAUNCH
        (VMPTRST may not be necessary is software already knows the working-VMCS pointer.)
•   If none of the above errors occur, the processor checks on the VMX controls and host-state area. If any of these
    checks fail, the VM-entry instruction fails. RFLAGS.ZF is set to 1 and either 7 (VM entry with invalid control
    field(s)) or 8 (VM entry with invalid host-state field(s)) is saved in the VM-instruction error field.
•   After a VM-entry instruction (VMRESUME or VMLAUNCH) successfully completes the general checks and checks
    on VMX controls and the host-state area (see Section 26.2), any errors encountered while loading of guest-
    state (due to bad guest-state or bad MSR loading) causes the processor to load state from the host-state area
    of the working VMCS as if a VM exit had occurred (see Section 31.7).
    This failure behavior differs from that of VM exits in that no guest-state is saved to the guest-state area. A VMM
    can detect its VM-exit handler was invoked by such a failure by checking bit 31 (for 1) in the exit reason field of
    the working VMCS and further identify the failure by using the exit qualification field.
See Chapter 26 for more details about the VM-entry instructions.

31.5           VMM SETUP & TEAR DOWN
VMMs need to ensure that the processor is running in protected mode with paging before entering VMX operation.
The following list describes the minimal steps required to enter VMX root operation with a VMM running at CPL = 0.
•   Check VMX support in processor using CPUID.
•   Determine the VMX capabilities supported by the processor through the VMX capability MSRs. See Section
    31.5.1 and Appendix A.
•   Create a VMXON region in non-pageable memory of a size specified by IA32_VMX_BASIC MSR and aligned to a
    4-KByte boundary. Software should read the capability MSRs to determine width of the physical addresses that
    may be used for the VMXON region and ensure the entire VMXON region can be addressed by addresses with
    that width. Also, software must ensure that the VMXON region is hosted in cache-coherent memory.
•   Initialize the version identifier in the VMXON region (the first 31 bits) with the VMCS revision identifier reported
    by capability MSRs. Clear bit 31 of the first 4 bytes of the VMXON region.
•   Ensure the current processor operating mode meets the required CR0 fixed bits (CR0.PE = 1, CR0.PG = 1).
    Other required CR0 fixed bits can be detected through the IA32_VMX_CR0_FIXED0 and
    IA32_VMX_CR0_FIXED1 MSRs.
•   Enable VMX operation by setting CR4.VMXE = 1. Ensure the resultant CR4 value supports all the CR4 fixed bits
    reported in the IA32_VMX_CR4_FIXED0 and IA32_VMX_CR4_FIXED1 MSRs.
•   Ensure that the IA32_FEATURE_CONTROL MSR (MSR index 3AH) has been properly programmed and that its
    lock bit is set (Bit 0 = 1). This MSR is generally configured by the BIOS using WRMSR.
•   Execute VMXON with the physical address of the VMXON region as the operand. Check successful execution of
    VMXON by checking if RFLAGS.CF = 0.
Upon successful execution of the steps above, the processor is in VMX root operation.
A VMM executing in VMX root operation and CPL = 0 leaves VMX operation by executing VMXOFF and verifies
successful execution by checking if RFLAGS.CF = 0 and RFLAGS.ZF = 0.
If an SMM monitor has been configured to service SMIs while in VMX operation (see Section 34.15), the SMM
monitor needs to be torn down before the executive monitor can leave VMX operation (see Section 34.15.7).
VMXOFF fails for the executive monitor (a VMM that entered VMX operation by way of issuing VMXON) if SMM
monitor is configured.

1. Earlier versions of this manual described this error as “VMRESUME with a corrupted VMCS”.

31.5.1        Algorithms for Determining VMX Capabilities
As noted earlier, a VMM should determine the VMX capabilities supported by the processor by reading the VMX
capability MSRs. The architecture for these MSRs is detailed in Appendix A.
As noted in Chapter 26, “VM Entries”, certain VMX controls are reserved and must be set to a specific value (0 or
1) determined by the processor. The specific value to which a reserved control must be set is its default setting.
Most controls have a default setting of 0; Appendix A.2 identifies those controls that have a default setting of 1. The
term default1 describes the class of controls whose default setting is 1. The are controls in this class from the pin-
based VM-execution controls, the primary processor-based VM-execution controls, the VM-exit controls, and the
VM-entry controls. There are no secondary processor-based VM-execution controls in the default1 class.
Future processors may define new functionality for one or more reserved controls. Such processors would allow
each newly defined control to be set either to 0 or to 1. Software that does not desire a control’s new functionality
should set the control to its default setting.
The capability MSRs IA32_VMX_PINBASED_CTLS, IA32_VMX_PROCBASED_CTLS, IA32_VMX_EXIT_CTLS, and
IA32_VMX_ENTRY_CTLS report, respectively, on the allowed settings of most of the pin-based VM-execution
controls, the primary processor-based VM-execution controls, the VM-exit controls, and the VM-entry controls.
However, they will always report that any control in the default1 class must be 1. If a logical processor allows any
control in the default1 class to be 0, it indicates this fact by returning 1 for the value of bit 55 of the
IA32_VMX_BASIC MSR. If this bit is 1, the logical processor supports the capability MSRs
IA32_VMX_TRUE_PINBASED_CTLS, IA32_VMX_TRUE_PROCBASED_CTLS, IA32_VMX_TRUE_EXIT_CTLS, and
IA32_VMX_TRUE_ENTRY_CTLS. These capability MSRs report, respectively, on the allowed settings of all of the
pin-based VM-execution controls, the primary processor-based VM-execution controls, the VM-exit controls, and
the VM-entry controls.
Software may use one of the following high-level algorithms to determine the correct default control settings:1
1. The following algorithm does not use the details given in Appendix A.2:
    a. Ignore bit 55 of the IA32_VMX_BASIC MSR.
    b. Using RDMSR, read the VMX capability MSRs IA32_VMX_PINBASED_CTLS, IA32_VMX_PROCBASED_CTLS,
       IA32_VMX_EXIT_CTLS, and IA32_VMX_ENTRY_CTLS.
    c.   Set the VMX controls as follows:
         i)   If the relevant VMX capability MSR reports that a control has a single setting, use that setting.
         ii) If (1) the relevant VMX capability MSR reports that a control can be set to 0 or 1; and (2) the control’s
             meaning is known to the VMM; then set the control based on functionality desired.
         iii) If (1) the relevant VMX capability MSR reports that a control can be set to 0 or 1; and (2) the control’s
              meaning is not known to the VMM; then set the control to 0.
    A VMM using this algorithm will set to 1 all controls in the default1 class (in step (c)(i)). It will operate
    correctly even on processors that allow some controls in the default1 class to be 0. However, such a VMM will
    not be able to use the new features enabled by the 0-setting of such controls. For that reason, this algorithm
    is not recommended.
2. The following algorithm uses the details given in Appendix A.2. This algorithm requires software to know the
   identity of the controls in the default1 class:
    a. Using RDMSR, read the IA32_VMX_BASIC MSR.
    b. Use bit 55 of that MSR as follows:
         i)   If bit 55 is 0, use RDMSR to read the VMX capability MSRs IA32_VMX_PINBASED_CTLS,
              IA32_VMX_PROCBASED_CTLS, IA32_VMX_EXIT_CTLS, and IA32_VMX_ENTRY_CTLS.
         ii) If bit 55 is 1, use RDMSR to read the VMX capability MSRs IA32_VMX_TRUE_PINBASED_CTLS,
             IA32_VMX_TRUE_PROCBASED_CTLS, IA32_VMX_TRUE_EXIT_CTLS, and
             IA32_VMX_TRUE_ENTRY_CTLS.

1. These algorithms apply only to the pin-based VM-execution controls, the primary processor-based VM-execution controls, the VM-
   exit controls, and the VM-entry controls. Because there are no secondary processor-based VM-execution controls in the default1
   class, a VMM can always set to 0 any such control whose meaning is unknown to it.

    c.   Set the VMX controls as follows:
         i)    If the relevant VMX capability MSR reports that a control has a single setting, use that setting.
         ii) If (1) the relevant VMX capability MSR reports that a control can be set to 0 or 1; and (2) the control’s
             meaning is known to the VMM; then set the control based on functionality desired.
         iii) If (1) the relevant VMX capability MSR reports that a control can be set to 0 or 1; (2) the control’s
              meaning is not known to the VMM; and (3) the control is not in the default1 class; then set the control
              to 0.
         iv) If (1) the relevant VMX capability MSR reports that a control can be set to 0 or 1; (2) the control’s
             meaning is not known to the VMM; and (3) the control is in the default1 class; then set the control to 1.
    A VMM using this algorithm will set to 1 all controls in default1 class whose meaning it does not know (either
    in step (c)(i) or step (c)(iv)). It will operate correctly even on processors that allow some controls in the
    default1 class to be 0. Unlike a VMM using Algorithm 1, a VMM using Algorithm 2 will be able to use the new
    features enabled by the 0-setting of such controls.
3. The following algorithm uses the details given in Appendix A.2. This algorithm does not require software to
   know the identity of the controls in the default1 class:
    a. Using RDMSR, read the VMX capability MSRs IA32_VMX_BASIC, IA32_VMX_PINBASED_CTLS,
       IA32_VMX_PROCBASED_CTLS, IA32_VMX_EXIT_CTLS, and IA32_VMX_ENTRY_CTLS.
    b. If bit 55 of the IA32_VMX_BASIC MSR is 0, set the VMX controls as follows:
         i)    If the relevant VMX capability MSR reports that a control has a single setting, use that setting.
         ii) If (1) the relevant VMX capability MSR reports that a control can be set to 0 or 1; and (2) the control’s
             meaning is known to the VMM; then set the control based on functionality desired.
         iii) If (1) the relevant VMX capability MSR reports that a control can be set to 0 or 1; and (2) the control’s
              meaning is not known to the VMM; then set the control to 0.
    c.   If bit 55 of the IA32_VMX_BASIC MSR is 1, use RDMSR to read the VMX capability MSRs
         IA32_VMX_TRUE_PINBASED_CTLS, IA32_VMX_TRUE_PROCBASED_CTLS, IA32_VMX_TRUE_EXIT_CTLS,
         and IA32_VMX_TRUE_ENTRY_CTLS. Set the VMX controls as follows:
         i)    If the relevant VMX capability MSR just read reports that a control has a single setting, use that
               setting.
         ii) If (1) the relevant VMX capability MSR just read reports that a control can be set to 0 or 1; and (2) the
             control’s meaning is known to the VMM; then set the control based on functionality desired.
         iii) If (1) the relevant VMX capability MSR just read reports that a control can be set to 0 or 1; (2) the
              control’s meaning is not known to the VMM; and (3) the relevant VMX capability MSR as read in step (a)
              reports that a control can be set to 0; then set the control to 0.
         iv) If (1) the relevant VMX capability MSR just read reports that a control can be set to 0 or 1; (2) the
             control’s meaning is not known to the VMM; and (3) the relevant VMX capability MSR as read in step (a)
             reports that a control must be 1; then set the control to 1.
    A VMM using this algorithm will set to 1 all controls in the default1 class whose meaning it does not know (in
    step (b)(i), step (c)(i), or step (c)(iv)). It will operate correctly even on processors that allow some controls
    in the default1 class to be 0. Unlike a VMM using Algorithm 1, a VMM using Algorithm 3 will be able to use the
    new features enabled by the 0-setting of such controls. Unlike a VMM using Algorithm 2, a VMM using
    Algorithm 3 need not know the identities of the controls in the default1 class.

31.6           PREPARATION AND LAUNCHING A VIRTUAL MACHINE
The following list describes the minimal steps required by the VMM to set up and launch a guest VM.
•   Create a VMCS region in non-pageable memory of size specified by the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC
    and aligned to 4-KBytes. Software should read the capability MSRs to determine width of the physical
    addresses that may be used for a VMCS region and ensure the entire VMCS region can be addressed by

    addresses with that width. The term “guest-VMCS address” refers to the physical address of the new VMCS
    region for the following steps.
•   Initialize the version identifier in the VMCS (first 31 bits) with the VMCS revision identifier reported by the VMX
    capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC. Clear bit 31 of the first 4 bytes of the VMCS region.
•   Execute the VMCLEAR instruction by supplying the guest-VMCS address. This will initialize the new VMCS
    region in memory and set the launch state of the VMCS to “clear”. This action also invalidates the working-
    VMCS pointer register to FFFFFFFF_FFFFFFFFH. Software should verify successful execution of VMCLEAR by
    checking if RFLAGS.CF = 0 and RFLAGS.ZF = 0.
•   Execute the VMPTRLD instruction by supplying the guest-VMCS address. This initializes the working-VMCS
    pointer with the new VMCS region’s physical address.
•   Issue a sequence of VMWRITEs to initialize various host-state area fields in the working VMCS. The initialization
    sets up the context and entry-points to the VMM upon subsequent VM exits from the guest. Host-state fields
    include control registers (CR0, CR3 and CR4), selector fields for the segment registers (CS, SS, DS, ES, FS, GS
    and TR), and base-address fields (for FS, GS, TR, GDTR and IDTR; RSP, RIP and the MSRs that control fast
    system calls).
    Chapter 27 describes the host-state consistency checking done by the processor for VM entries. The VMM is
    required to set up host-state that comply with these consistency checks. For example, VMX requires the host-
    area to have a task register (TR) selector with TI and RPL fields set to 0 and pointing to a valid TSS.
•   Use VMWRITEs to set up the various VM-exit control fields, VM-entry control fields, and VM-execution control
    fields in the VMCS. Care should be taken to make sure the settings of individual fields match the allowed 0 and
    1 settings for the respective controls as reported by the VMX capability MSRs (see Appendix A). Any settings
    inconsistent with the settings reported by the capability MSRs will cause VM entries to fail.
•   Use VMWRITE to initialize various guest-state area fields in the working VMCS. This sets up the context and
    entry-point for guest execution upon VM entry. Chapter 27 describes the guest-state loading and checking
    done by the processor for VM entries to protected and virtual-8086 guest execution.
•   The VMM is required to set up guest-state that complies with these consistency checks:
    — If the VMM design requires the initial VM launch to cause guest software (typically the guest virtual BIOS)
      execution from the guest’s reset vector, it may need to initialize the guest execution state to reflect the
      state of a physical processor at power-on reset (described in Chapter 9, Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures
      Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A).
    — The VMM may need to initialize additional guest execution state that is not captured in the VMCS guest-
      state area by loading them directly on the respective processor registers. Examples include general
      purpose registers, the CR2 control register, debug registers, floating point registers and so forth. VMM may
      support lazy loading of FPU, MMX, SSE, and SSE2 states with CR0.TS = 1 (described in Intel® 64 and IA-32
      Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A).
•   Execute VMLAUNCH to launch the guest VM. If VMLAUNCH fails due to any consistency checks before guest-
    state loading, RFLAGS.CF or RFLAGS.ZF will be set and the VM-instruction error field (see Section 24.9.5) will
    contain the error-code. If guest-state consistency checks fail upon guest-state loading, the processor loads
    state from the host-state area as if a VM exit had occurred (see Section 31.6).
VMLAUNCH updates the controlling-VMCS pointer with the working-VMCS pointer and saves the old value of
controlling-VMCS as the parent pointer. In addition, the launch state of the guest VMCS is changed to “launched”
from “clear”. Any programmed exit conditions will cause the guest to VM exit to the VMM. The VMM should execute
VMRESUME instruction for subsequent VM entries to guests in a “launched” state.

31.7        HANDLING OF VM EXITS
This section provides examples of software steps involved in a VMM’s handling of VM-exit conditions:
•   Determine the exit reason through a VMREAD of the exit-reason field in the working-VMCS. Appendix C
    describes exit reasons and their encodings.
•   VMREAD the exit-qualification from the VMCS if the exit-reason field provides a valid qualification. The exit-
    qualification field provides additional details on the VM-exit condition. For example, in case of page faults, the
    exit-qualification field provides the guest linear address that caused the page fault.

•   Depending on the exit reason, fetch other relevant fields from the VMCS. Appendix C lists the various exit
    reasons.
•   Handle the VM-exit condition appropriately in the VMM. This may involve the VMM emulating one or more guest
    instructions, programming the underlying host hardware resources, and then re-entering the VM to continue
    execution.

31.7.1         Handling VM Exits Due to Exceptions
As noted in Section 25.2, an exception causes a VM exit if the bit corresponding to the exception’s vector is set in
the exception bitmap. (For page faults, the error code also determines whether a VM exit occurs.) This section
provide some guidelines of how a VMM might handle such exceptions.
Exceptions result when a logical processor encounters an unusual condition that software may not have expected.
When guest software encounters an exception, it may be the case that the condition was caused by the guest soft-
ware. For example, a guest application may attempt to access a page that is restricted to supervisor access. Alter-
natively, the condition causing the exception may have been established by the VMM. For example, a guest OS may
attempt to access a page that the VMM has chosen to make not present.
When the condition causing an exception was established by guest software, the VMM may choose to reflect the
exception to guest software. When the condition was established by the VMM itself, the VMM may choose to
resume guest software after removing the condition.

31.7.1.1        Reflecting Exceptions to Guest Software
If the VMM determines that a VM exit was caused by an exception due to a condition established by guest software,
it may reflect that exception to guest software. The VMM would cause the exception to be delivered to guest soft-
ware, where it can be handled as it would be if the guest were running on a physical machine. This section
describes how that may be done.
In general, the VMM can deliver the exception to guest software using VM-entry event injection as described in
Section 26.5. The VMM can copy (using VMREAD and VMWRITE) the contents of the VM-exit interruption-informa-
tion field (which is valid, since the VM exit was caused by an exception) to the VM-entry interruption-information
field (which, if valid, will cause the exception to be delivered as part of the next VM entry). The VMM would also
copy the contents of the VM-exit interruption error-code field to the VM-entry exception error-code field; this need
not be done if bit 11 (error code valid) is clear in the VM-exit interruption-information field. After this, the VMM can
execute VMRESUME.
The following items provide details that may qualify the general approach:
•   Care should be taken to ensure that reserved bits 30:12 in the VM-entry interruption-information field are 0. In
    particular, some VM exits may set bit 12 in the VM-exit interruption-information field to indicate NMI
    unblocking due to IRET. If this bit is copied as 1 into the VM-entry interruption-information field, the next
    VM entry will fail because that bit should be 0.
•   Bit 31 (valid) of the IDT-vectoring information field indicates, if set, that the exception causing the VM exit
    occurred while another event was being delivered to guest software. If this is the case, it may not be
    appropriate simply to reflect that exception to guest software. To provide proper virtualization of the exception
    architecture, a VMM should handle nested events as a physical processor would. Processor handling is
    described in Chapter 6, “Interrupt 8—Double Fault Exception (#DF)” in Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures
    Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A.
    — The VMM should reflect the exception causing the VM exit to guest software in any of the following cases:
         •     The value of bits 10:8 (interruption type) of the IDT-vectoring information field is anything other than 3
               (hardware exception).
         •     The value of bits 7:0 (vector) of the IDT-vectoring information field indicates a benign exception (1, 2,
               3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 16, 17, 18, or 19).
         •     The value of bits 7:0 (vector) of the VM-exit interruption-information field indicates a benign exception.

       •   The value of bits 7:0 of the IDT-vectoring information field indicates a contributory exception (0, 10,
           11, 12, or 13) and the value of bits 7:0 of the VM-exit interruption-information field indicates a page
           fault (14).
    — If the value of bits 10:8 of the IDT-vectoring information field is 3 (hardware exception), the VMM should
      reflect a double-fault exception to guest software in any of the following cases:
       •   The value of bits 7:0 of the IDT-vectoring information field and the value of bits 7:0 of the VM-exit
           interruption-information field each indicates a contributory exception.
       •   The value of bits 7:0 of the IDT-vectoring information field indicates a page fault and the value of
           bits 7:0 of the VM-exit interruption-information field indicates either a contributory exception or a page
           fault.
       A VMM can reflect a double-fault exception to guest software by setting the VM-entry interruption-
       information and VM-entry exception error-code fields as follows:
       •   Set bits 7:0 (vector) of the VM-entry interruption-information field to 8 (#DF).
       •   Set bits 10:8 (interruption type) of the VM-entry interruption-information field to 3 (hardware
           exception).
       •   Set bit 11 (deliver error code) of the VM-entry interruption-information field to 1.
       •   Clear bits 30:12 (reserved) of VM-entry interruption-information field.
       •   Set bit 31 (valid) of VM-entry interruption-information field.
       •   Set the VM-entry exception error-code field to zero.
    — If the value of bits 10:8 of the IDT-vectoring information field is 3 (hardware exception) and the value of
      bits 7:0 is 8 (#DF), guest software would have encountered a triple fault. Event injection should not be
      used in this case. The VMM may choose to terminate the guest, or it might choose to enter the guest in the
      shutdown activity state.

31.7.1.2     Resuming Guest Software after Handling an Exception
If the VMM determines that a VM exit was caused by an exception due to a condition established by the VMM itself,
it may choose to resume guest software after removing the condition. The approach for removing the condition
may be specific to the VMM’s software architecture. and algorithms This section describes how guest software may
be resumed after removing the condition.
In general, the VMM can resume guest software simply by executing VMRESUME. The following items provide
details of cases that may require special handling:
•   If the “NMI exiting” VM-execution control is 0, bit 12 of the VM-exit interruption-information field indicates that
    the VM exit was due to a fault encountered during an execution of the IRET instruction that unblocked non-
    maskable interrupts (NMIs). In particular, it provides this indication if the following are both true:
    — Bit 31 (valid) in the IDT-vectoring information field is 0.
    — The value of bits 7:0 (vector) of the VM-exit interruption-information field is not 8 (the VM exit is not due
      to a double-fault exception).
    If both are true and bit 12 of the VM-exit interruption-information field is 1, NMIs were blocked before guest
    software executed the IRET instruction that caused the fault that caused the VM exit. The VMM should set bit 3
    (blocking by NMI) in the interruptibility-state field (using VMREAD and VMWRITE) before resuming guest
    software.
•   If the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 1, bit 12 of the VM-exit interruption-information field indicates
    that the VM exit was due to a fault encountered during an execution of the IRET instruction that removed
    virtual-NMI blocking. In particular, it provides this indication if the following are both true:
    — Bit 31 (valid) in the IDT-vectoring information field is 0.
    — The value of bits 7:0 (vector) of the VM-exit interruption-information field is not 8 (the VM exit is not due
      to a double-fault exception).
    If both are true and bit 12 of the VM-exit interruption-information field is 1, there was virtual-NMI blocking
    before guest software executed the IRET instruction that caused the fault that caused the VM exit. The VMM

    should set bit 3 (blocking by NMI) in the interruptibility-state field (using VMREAD and VMWRITE) before
    resuming guest software.
•   Bit 31 (valid) of the IDT-vectoring information field indicates, if set, that the exception causing the VM exit
    occurred while another event was being delivered to guest software. The VMM should ensure that the other
    event is delivered when guest software is resumed. It can do so using the VM-entry event injection described
    in Section 26.5 and detailed in the following paragraphs:
    — The VMM can copy (using VMREAD and VMWRITE) the contents of the IDT-vectoring information field
      (which is presumed valid) to the VM-entry interruption-information field (which, if valid, will cause the
      exception to be delivered as part of the next VM entry).
        •       The VMM should ensure that reserved bits 30:12 in the VM-entry interruption-information field are 0. In
                particular, the value of bit 12 in the IDT-vectoring information field is undefined after all VM exits. If this
                bit is copied as 1 into the VM-entry interruption-information field, the next VM entry will fail because the
                bit should be 0.
        •       If the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 1 and the value of bits 10:8 (interruption type) in the IDT-
                vectoring information field is 2 (indicating NMI), the VM exit occurred during delivery of an NMI that had
                been injected as part of the previous VM entry. In this case, bit 3 (blocking by NMI) will be 1 in the inter-
                ruptibility-state field in the VMCS. The VMM should clear this bit; otherwise, the next VM entry will fail
                (see Section 26.3.1.5).
    — The VMM can also copy the contents of the IDT-vectoring error-code field to the VM-entry exception error-
      code field. This need not be done if bit 11 (error code valid) is clear in the IDT-vectoring information field.
    — The VMM can also copy the contents of the VM-exit instruction-length field to the VM-entry instruction-
      length field. This need be done only if bits 10:8 (interruption type) in the IDT-vectoring information field
      indicate either software interrupt, privileged software exception, or software exception.

31.8            MULTI-PROCESSOR CONSIDERATIONS
The most common VMM design will be the symmetric VMM. This type of VMM runs the same VMM binary on all
logical processors. Like a symmetric operating system, the symmetric VMM is written to ensure all critical data is
updated by only one processor at a time, IO devices are accessed sequentially, and so forth. Asymmetric VMM
designs are possible. For example, an asymmetric VMM may run its scheduler on one processor and run just
enough of the VMM on other processors to allow the correct execution of guest VMs. The remainder of this section
focuses on the multi-processor considerations for a symmetric VMM.
A symmetric VMM design does not preclude asymmetry in its operations. For example, a symmetric VMM can
support asymmetric allocation of logical processor resources to guests. Multiple logical processors can be brought
into a single guest environment to support an MP-aware guest OS. Because an active VMCS can not control more
than one logical processor simultaneously, a symmetric VMM must make copies of its VMCS to control the VM allo-
cated to support an MP-aware guest OS. Care must be taken when accessing data structures shared between these
VMCSs. See Section 31.8.4.
Although it may be easier to develop a VMM that assumes a fully-symmetric view of hardware capabilities (with all
processors supporting the same processor feature sets, including the same revision of VMX), there are advantages
in developing a VMM that comprehends different levels of VMX capability (reported by VMX capability MSRs). One
possible advantage of such an approach could be that an existing software installation (VMM and guest software
stack) could continue to run without requiring software upgrades to the VMM, when the software installation is
upgraded to run on hardware with enhancements in the processor’s VMX capabilities. Another advantage could be
that a single software installation image, consisting of a VMM and guests, could be deployed to multiple hardware
platforms with varying VMX capabilities. In such cases, the VMM could fall back to a common subset of VMX
features supported by all VMX revisions, or choose to understand the asymmetry of the VMX capabilities and assign
VMs accordingly.
This section outlines some of the considerations to keep in mind when developing an MP-aware VMM.

31.8.1      Initialization
Before enabling VMX, an MP-aware VMM must check to make sure that all processors in the system are compatible
and support features required. This can be done by:
•   Checking the CPUID on each logical processor to ensure VMX is supported and that the overall feature set of
    each logical processor is compatible.
•   Checking VMCS revision identifiers on each logical processor.
•   Checking each of the “allowed-1” or “allowed-0” fields of the VMX capability MSR’s on each processor.

31.8.2      Moving a VMCS Between Processors
An MP-aware VMM is free to assign any logical processor to a VM. But for performance considerations, moving a
guest VMCS to another logical processor is slower than resuming that guest VMCS on the same logical processor.
Certain VMX performance features (such as caching of portions of the VMCS in the processor) are optimized for a
guest VMCS that runs on the same logical processor.
The reasons are:
•   To restart a guest on the same logical processor, a VMM can use VMRESUME. VMRESUME is expected to be
    faster than VMLAUNCH in general.
•   To migrate a VMCS to another logical processor, a VMM must use the sequence of VMCLEAR, VMPTRLD and
    VMLAUNCH.
•   Operations involving VMCLEAR can impact performance negatively. See
    Section 24.11.3.
A VMM scheduler should make an effort to schedule a guest VMCS to run on the logical processor where it last ran.
Such a scheduler might also benefit from doing lazy VMCLEARs (that is: performing a VMCLEAR on a VMCS only
when the scheduler knows the VMCS is being moved to a new logical processor). The remainder of this section
describes the steps a VMM must take to move a VMCS from one processor to another.
A VMM must check the VMCS revision identifier in the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC to determine if the
VMCS regions are identical between all logical processors. If the VMCS regions are identical (same revision ID) the
following sequence can be used to move or copy the VMCS from one logical processor to another:
•   Perform a VMCLEAR operation on the source logical processor. This ensures that all VMCS data that may be
    cached by the processor are flushed to memory.
•   Copy the VMCS region from one memory location to another location. This is an optional step assuming the
    VMM wishes to relocate the VMCS or move the VMCS to another system.
•   Perform a VMPTRLD of the physical address of VMCS region on the destination processor to establish its current
    VMCS pointer.
If the revision identifiers are different, each field must be copied to an intermediate structure using individual reads
(VMREAD) from the source fields and writes (VMWRITE) to destination fields. Care must be taken on fields that are
hard-wired to certain values on some processor implementations.

31.8.3      Paired Index-Data Registers
A VMM may need to virtualize hardware that is visible to software using paired index-data registers. Paired index-
data register interfaces, such as those used in PCI (CF8, CFC), require special treatment in cases where a VM
performing writes to these pairs can be moved during execution. In this case, the index (e.g. CF8) should be part
of the virtualized state. If the VM is moved during execution, writes to the index should be redone so subsequent
data reads/writes go to the right location.

31.8.4      External Data Structures
Certain fields in the VMCS point to external data structures (for example: the MSR bitmap, the I/O bitmaps). If a
logical processor is in VMX non-root operation, none of the external structures referenced by that logical

processor's current VMCS should be modified by any logical processor or DMA. Before updating one of these struc-
tures, the VMM must ensure that no logical processor whose current VMCS references the structure is in VMX non-
root operation.
If a VMM uses multiple VMCS with each VMCS using separate external structures, and these structures must be
kept synchronized, the VMM must apply the same care to updating these structures.

31.8.5          CPUID Emulation
CPUID reports information that is used by OS and applications to detect hardware features. It also provides multi-
threading/multi-core configuration information. For example, MP-aware OSs rely on data reported by CPUID to
discover the topology of logical processors in a platform (see Section 8.9, “Programming Considerations for Hard-
ware Multi-Threading Capable Processors,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual,
Volume 3A).
If a VMM is to support asymmetric allocation of logical processor resources to guest OSs that are MP aware, then
the VMM must emulate CPUID for its guests. The emulation of CPUID by the VMM must ensure the guest’s view of
CPUID leaves are consistent with the logical processor allocation committed by the VMM to each guest OS.

31.9            32-BIT AND 64-BIT GUEST ENVIRONMENTS
For the most part, extensions provided by VMX to support virtualization are orthogonal to the extensions provided
by Intel 64 architecture. There are considerations that impact VMM designs. These are described in the following
subsections.

31.9.1          Operating Modes of Guest Environments
For Intel 64 processors, VMX operation supports host and guest environments that run in IA-32e mode or without
IA-32e mode. VMX operation also supports host and guest environments on IA-32 processors.
A VMM entering VMX operation while IA-32e mode is active is considered to be an IA-32e mode host. A VMM
entering VMX operation while IA-32e mode is not activated or not available is referred to as a 32-bit VMM. The type
of guest operations such VMMs support are summarized in Table 31-1.

                          Table 31-1. Operating Modes for Host and Guest Environments
Capability                   Guest Operation                         Guest Operation
                             in IA-32e mode                          Not Requiring IA-32e Mode
IA-32e mode VMM              Yes                                     Yes
32-bit VMM                   Not supported                           Yes

A VM exit may occur to an IA-32e mode guest in either 64-bit sub-mode or compatibility sub-mode of IA-32e
mode. VMMs may resume guests in either mode. The sub-mode in which an IA-32e mode guest resumes VMX non-
root operation is determined by the attributes of the code segment which experienced the VM exit. If CS.L = 1, the
guest is executing in 64-bit mode; if CS.L = 0, the guest is executing in compatibility mode (see Section 31.9.5).
Not all of an IA-32e mode VMM must run in 64-bit mode. While some parts of an IA-32e mode VMM must run in 64-
bit mode, there are only a few restrictions preventing a VMM from executing in compatibility mode. The most
notable restriction is that most VMX instructions cause exceptions when executed in compatibility mode.

31.9.2          Handling Widths of VMCS Fields
Individual VMCS control fields must be accessed using VMREAD or VMWRITE instructions. Outside of 64-Bit mode,
VMREAD and VMWRITE operate on 32 bits of data. The widths of VMCS control fields may vary depending on
whether a processor supports Intel 64 architecture.

Many VMCS fields are architected to extend transparently on processors supporting Intel 64 architecture (64 bits
on processors that support Intel 64 architecture, 32 bits on processors that do not). Some VMCS fields are 64-bits
wide regardless of whether the processor supports Intel 64 architecture or is in IA-32e mode.

31.9.2.1    Natural-Width VMCS Fields
Many VMCS fields operate using natural width. Such fields return (on reads) and set (on writes) 32-bits when oper-
ating in 32-bit mode and 64-bits when operating in 64-bit mode. For the most part, these fields return the naturally
expected data widths. The “Guest RIP” field in the VMCS guest-state area is an example of this type of field.

31.9.2.2    64-Bit VMCS Fields
Unlike natural width fields, these fields are fixed to 64-bit width on all processors. When in 64-bit mode, reads of
these fields return 64-bit wide data and writes to these fields write 64-bits. When outside of 64-bit mode, reads of
these fields return the low 32-bits and writes to these fields write the low 32-bits and zero the upper 32-bits.
Should a non-IA-32e mode host require access to the upper 32-bits of these fields, a separate VMCS encoding is
used when issuing VMREAD/VMWRITE instructions.
The VMCS control field “MSR bitmap address” (which contains the physical address of a region of memory which
specifies which MSR accesses should generate VM-exits) is an example of this type of field. Specifying encoding
00002004H to VMREAD returns the lower 32-bits to non-IA-32e mode hosts and returns 64-bits to 64-bit hosts.
The separate encoding 00002005H returns only the upper 32-bits.

31.9.3      IA-32e Mode Hosts
An IA-32e mode host is required to support 64-bit guest environments. Because activating IA-32e mode currently
requires that paging be disabled temporarily and VMX entry requires paging to be enabled, IA-32e mode must be
enabled before entering VMX operation. For this reason, it is not possible to toggle in and out of IA-32e mode in a
VMM.
Section 31.5 describes the steps required to launch a VMM. An IA-32e mode host is also required to set the “host
address-space size” VMCS VM-exit control to 1. The value of this control is then loaded in the IA32_EFER.LME/LMA
and CS.L bits on each VM exit. This establishes a 64-bit host environment as execution transfers to the VMM entry
point. At a minimum, the entry point is required to be in a 64-bit code segment. Subsequently, the VMM can, if it
chooses, switch to 32-bit compatibility mode on a code-segment basis (see Section 31.9.1). Note, however, that
VMX instructions other than VMCALL and VMFUNC are not supported in compatibility mode; they generate an
invalid opcode exception if used.
The following VMCS controls determine the value of IA32_EFER when a VM exit occurs: the “host address-space
size” control (described above), the “load IA32_EFER” VM-exit control, the “VM-exit MSR-load count,” and the “VM-
exit MSR-load address” (see Section 27.3).
If the “load IA32_EFER” VM-exit control is 1, the value of the LME and LMA bits in the IA32_EFER field in the host-
state area must be the value of the “host address-space size” VM-exit control.
The loading of IA32_EFER.LME/LMA and CS.L bits established by the “host address-space size” control precede any
loading of the IA32_EFER MSR due from the VM-exit MSR-load area. If IA32_EFER is specified in the VM-exit MSR-
load area, the value of the LME bit in the load image of IA32_EFER should match the setting of the “host address-
space size” control. Otherwise the attempt to modify the LME bit (while paging is enabled) will lead to a VMX-abort.
However, IA32_EFER.LMA is always set by the processor to equal IA32_EFER.LME & CR0.PG; the value specified
for LMA in the load image of the IA32_EFER MSR is ignored. For these and performance reasons, VMM writers may
choose to not use the VM-exit/entry MSR-load/save areas for IA32_EFER.
On a VMM teardown, VMX operation should be exited before deactivating IA-32e mode if the latter is required.

31.9.4      IA-32e Mode Guests
A 32-bit guest can be launched by either IA-32e-mode hosts or non-IA-32e-mode hosts. A 64-bit guests can only
be launched by a IA-32e-mode host.

In addition to the steps outlined in Section 31.6, VMM writers need to:
•   Set the “IA-32e-mode guest” VM-entry control to 1 in the VMCS to assure VM-entry (VMLAUNCH or
    VMRESUME) will establish a 64-bit (or 32-bit compatible) guest operating environment.
•   Enable paging (CR0.PG) and PAE mode (CR4.PAE) to assure VM-entry to a 64-bit guest will succeed.
•   Ensure that the host to be in IA-32e mode (the IA32_EFER.LMA must be set to 1) and the setting of the VM-exit
    “host address-space size” control bit in the VMCS must also be set to 1.
If each of the above conditions holds true, then VM-entry will copy the value of the VM-entry “IA-32e-mode guest”
control bit into the guests IA32_EFER.LME bit, which will result in subsequent activation of IA-32e mode. If any of
the above conditions is false, the VM-entry will fail and load state from the host-state area of the working VMCS as
if a VM exit had occurred (see Section 26.7).
The following VMCS controls determine the value of IA32_EFER on a VM entry: the “IA-32e-mode guest” VM-entry
control (described above), the “load IA32_EFER” VM-entry control, the “VM-entry MSR-load count,” and the “VM-
entry MSR-load address” (see Section 26.4).
If the “load IA32_EFER” VM-entry control is 1, the value of the LME and LMA bits in the IA32_EFER field in the
guest-state area must be the value of the “IA-32e-mode guest” VM-entry control. Otherwise, the VM entry fails.
The loading of IA32_EFER.LME bit (described above) precedes any loading of the IA32_EFER MSR from the VM-
entry MSR-load area of the VMCS. If loading of IA32_EFER is specified in the VM-entry MSR-load area, the value of
the LME bit in the load image should be match the setting of the “IA-32e-mode guest” VM-entry control. Otherwise,
the attempt to modify the LME bit (while paging is enabled) results in a failed VM entry. However, IA32_EFER.LMA
is always set by the processor to equal IA32_EFER.LME & CR0.PG; the value specified for LMA in the load image of
the IA32_EFER MSR is ignored. For these and performance reasons, VMM writers may choose to not use the VM-
exit/entry MSR-load/save areas for IA32_EFER MSR.
Note that the VMM can control the processor’s architectural state when transferring control to a VM. VMM writers
may choose to launch guests in protected mode and subsequently allow the guest to activate IA-32e mode or they
may allow guests to toggle in and out of IA-32e mode. In this case, the VMM should require VM exit on accesses to
the IA32_EFER MSR to detect changes in the operating mode and modify the VM-entry “IA-32e-mode guest”
control accordingly.
A VMM should save/restore the extended (full 64-bit) contents of the guest general-purpose registers, the new
general-purpose registers (R8-R15) and the SIMD registers introduced in 64-bit mode should it need to modify
these upon VM exit.

31.9.5          32-Bit Guests
To launch or resume a 32-bit guest, VMM writers can follow the steps outlined in Section 31.6, making sure that the
“IA-32e-mode guest” VM-entry control bit is set to 0. Then the “IA-32e-mode guest” control bit is copied into the
guest IA32_EFER.LME bit, establishing IA32_EFER.LMA as 0.

31.10           HANDLING MODEL SPECIFIC REGISTERS
Model specific registers (MSR) provide a wide range of functionality. They affect processor features, control the
programming interfaces, or are used in conjunction with specific instructions. As part of processor virtualization, a
VMM may wish to protect some or all MSR resources from direct guest access.
VMX operation provides the following features to virtualize processor MSRs.

31.10.1 Using VM-Execution Controls
Processor-based VM-execution controls provide two levels of support for handling guest access to processor MSRs
using RDMSR and WRMSR:
•   MSR bitmaps: In VMX implementations that support a 1-setting (see Appendix A) of the user-MSR-bitmaps
    execution control bit, MSR bitmaps can be used to provide flexibility in managing guest MSR accesses. The

    MSR-bitmap-address in the guest VMCS can be programmed by VMM to point to a bitmap region which
    specifies VM-exit behavior when reading and writing individual MSRs.
    MSR bitmaps form a 4-KByte region in physical memory and are required to be aligned to a 4-KByte boundary.
    The first 1-KByte region manages read control of MSRs in the range 00000000H-00001FFFH; the second 1-
    KByte region covers read control of MSR addresses in the range C0000000H-C0001FFFH. The bitmaps for write
    control of these MSRs are located in the 2-KByte region immediately following the read control bitmaps. While
    the MSR bitmap address is part of VMCS, the MSR bitmaps themselves are not. This implies MSR bitmaps are
    not accessible through VMREAD and VMWRITE instructions but rather by using ordinary memory writes. Also,
    they are not specially cached by the processor and may be placed in normal cache-coherent memory by the
    VMM.
    When MSR bitmap addresses are properly programmed and the use-MSR-bitmap control (see Section 24.6.2)
    is set, the processor consults the associated bit in the appropriate bitmap on guest MSR accesses to the corre-
    sponding MSR and causes a VM exit if the bit in the bitmap is set. Otherwise, the access is permitted to
    proceed. This level of protection may be utilized by VMMs to selectively allow guest access to some MSRs while
    virtualizing others.
•   Default MSR protection: If the use-MSR-bitmap control is not set, an attempt by a guest to access any MSR
    causes a VM exit. This also occurs for any attempt to access an MSR outside the ranges identified above (even
    if the use-MSR-bitmap control is set).
VM exits due to guest MSR accesses may be identified by the VMM through VM-exit reason codes. The MSR-read
exit reason implies guest software attempted to read an MSR protected either by default or through MSR bitmaps.
The MSR-write exit reason implies guest software attempting to write a MSR protected through the VM-execution
controls. Upon VM exits caused by MSR accesses, the VMM may virtualize the guest MSR access through emulation
of RDMSR/WRMSR.

31.10.2 Using VM-Exit Controls for MSRs
If a VMM allows its guest to access MSRs directly, the VMM may need to store guest MSR values and load host MSR
values for these MSRs on VM exits. This is especially true if the VMM uses the same MSRs while in VMX root oper-
ation.
A VMM can use the VM-exit MSR-store-address and the VM-exit MSR-store-count exit control fields (see Section
24.7.2) to manage how MSRs are stored on VM exits. The VM-exit MSR-store-address field contains the physical
address (16-byte aligned) of the VM-exit MSR-store area (a table of entries with 16 bytes per entry). Each table
entry specifies an MSR whose value needs to be stored on VM exits. The VM-exit MSR-store-count contains the
number of entries in the table.
Similarly the VM-exit MSR-load-address and VM-exit MSR-load-count fields point to the location and size of the VM-
exit MSR load area. The entries in the VM-exit MSR-load area contain the host expected values of specific MSRs
when a VM exit occurs.
Upon VM-exit, bits 127:64 of each entry in the VM-exit MSR-store area is updated with the contents of the MSR
indexed by bits 31:0. Also, bits 127:64 of each entry in the VM-exit MSR-load area is updated by loading with
values from bits 127:64 the contents of the MSR indexed by bits 31:0.

31.10.3 Using VM-Entry Controls for MSRs
A VMM may require specific MSRs to be loaded explicitly on VM entries while launching or resuming guest execu-
tion. The VM-entry MSR-load-address and VM-entry MSR-load-count entry control fields determine how MSRs are
loaded on VM-entries. The VM-entry MSR-load-address and count fields are similar in structure and function to the
VM-exit MSR-load address and count fields, except the MSR loading is done on VM-entries.

31.10.4 Handling Special-Case MSRs and Instructions
A number of instructions make use of designated MSRs in their operation. The VMM may need to consider saving
the states of those MSRs. Instructions that merit such consideration include SYSENTER/SYSEXIT,
SYSCALL/SYSRET, SWAPGS.

31.10.4.1 Handling IA32_EFER MSR
The IA32_EFER MSR includes bit fields that allow system software to enable processor features. For example: the
SCE bit enables SYSCALL/SYSRET and the NXE bit enables the execute-disable bits in the paging-structure entries.
VMX provides hardware support to load the IA32_EFER MSR on VMX transitions and to save it on VM exits. Because
of this, VMM software need not use the RDMSR and WRMSR instruction to give the register different values during
host and guest execution.

31.10.4.2 Handling the SYSENTER and SYSEXIT Instructions
The SYSENTER and SYSEXIT instructions use three dedicated MSRs (IA32_SYSENTER_CS, IA32_SYSENTER_ESP
and IA32_SYSENTER_EIP) to manage fast system calls. These MSRs may be utilized by both the VMM and the
guest OS to manage system calls in VMX root operation and VMX non-root operation respectively.
VM entries load these MSRs from fields in the guest-state area of the VMCS. VM exits save the values of these MSRs
into those fields and loads the MSRs from fields in the host-state area.

31.10.4.3 Handling the SYSCALL and SYSRET Instructions
The SYSCALL/SYSRET instructions are similar to SYSENTER/SYSEXIT but are designed to operate within the
context of a 64-bit flat code segment. They are available only in 64-bit mode and only when the SCE bit of the
IA32_EFER MSR is set. SYSCALL/SYSRET invocations can occur from either 32-bit compatibility mode application
code or from 64-bit application code. Three related MSR registers (IA32_STAR, IA32_LSTAR, IA32_FMASK) are
used in conjunction with fast system calls/returns that use these instructions.
64-Bit hosts which make use of these instructions in the VMM environment will need to save the guest state of the
above registers on VM exit, load the host state, and restore the guest state on VM entry. One possible approach is
to use the VM-exit MSR-save and MSR-load areas and the VM-entry MSR-load area defined by controls in the VMCS.
A disadvantage to this approach, however, is that the approach results in the unconditional saving, loading, and
restoring of MSR registers on each VM exit or VM entry.
Depending on the design of the VMM, it is likely that many VM-exits will require no fast system call support but the
VMM will be burdened with the additional overhead of saving and restoring MSRs if the VMM chooses to support fast
system call uniformly. Further, even if the host intends to support fast system calls during a VM-exit, some of the
MSR values (such as the setting of the SCE bit in IA32_EFER) may not require modification as they may already be
set to the appropriate value in the guest.
For performance reasons, a VMM may perform lazy save, load, and restore of these MSR values on certain VM exits
when it is determined that this is acceptable. The lazy-save-load-restore operation can be carried out “manually”
using RDMSR and WRMSR.

31.10.4.4 Handling the SWAPGS Instruction
The SWAPGS instruction is available only in 64-bit mode. It swaps the contents of two specific MSRs
(IA32_GS_BASE and IA32_KERNEL_GS_BASE). The IA32_GS_BASE MSR shadows the base address portion of the
GS descriptor register; the IA32_KERNEL_GS_BASE MSR holds the base address of the GS segment used by the
kernel (typically it houses kernel structures). SWAPGS is intended for use with fast system calls when in 64-bit
mode to allow immediate access to kernel structures on transition to kernel mode.
Similar to SYSCALL/SYSRET, IA-32e mode hosts which use fast system calls may need to save, load, and restore
these MSR registers on VM exit and VM entry using the guidelines discussed in previous paragraphs.

31.10.4.5 Implementation Specific Behavior on Writing to Certain MSRs
As noted in Section 26.4 and Section 27.4, a processor may prevent writing to certain MSRs when loading guest
states on VM entries or storing guest states on VM exits. This is done to ensure consistent operation. The subset
and number of MSRs subject to restrictions are implementation specific. For initial VMX implementations, there are
two MSRs: IA32_BIOS_UPDT_TRIG and IA32_BIOS_SIGN_ID (see Chapter 35).

31.10.5 Handling Accesses to Reserved MSR Addresses
Privileged software (either a VMM or a guest OS) can access a model specific register by specifying addresses in
MSR address space. VMMs, however, must prevent a guest from accessing reserved MSR addresses in MSR address
space.
Consult Chapter 35 for lists of supported MSRs and their usage. Use the MSR bitmap control to cause a VM exit
when a guest attempts to access a reserved MSR address. The response to such a VM exit should be to reflect
#GP(0) back to the guest.

31.11       HANDLING ACCESSES TO CONTROL REGISTERS
Bit fields in control registers (CR0, CR4) control various aspects of processor operation. The VMM must prevent
guests from modifying bits in CR0 or CR4 that are reserved at the time the VMM is written.
Guest/host masks should be used by the VMM to cause VM exits when a guest attempts to modify reserved bits.
Read shadows should be used to ensure that the guest always reads the reserved value (usually 0) for such bits.
The VMM response to VM exits due to attempts from a guest to modify reserved bits should be to emulate the
response which the processor would have normally produced (usually a #GP(0)).

31.12       PERFORMANCE CONSIDERATIONS
VMX provides hardware features that may be used for improving processor virtualization performance. VMMs must
be designed to use this support properly. The basic idea behind most of these performance optimizations of the
VMM is to reduce the number of VM exits while executing a guest VM.
This section lists ways that VMMs can take advantage of the performance enhancing features in VMX.
•   Read Access to Control Registers. Analysis of common client workloads with common PC operating systems
    in a virtual machine shows a large number of VM-exits are caused by control register read accesses (particu-
    larly CR0). Reads of CR0 and CR4 does not cause VM exits. Instead, they return values from the CR0/CR4 read-
    shadows configured by the VMM in the guest controlling-VMCS with the guest-expected values.
•   Write Access to Control Registers. Most VMM designs require only certain bits of the control registers to be
    protected from direct guest access. Write access to CR0/CR4 registers can be reduced by defining the host-
    owned and guest-owned bits in them through the CR0/CR4 host/guest masks in the VMCS. CR0/CR4 write
    values by the guest are qualified with the mask bits. If they change only guest-owned bits, they are allowed
    without causing VM exits. Any write that cause changes to host-owned bits cause VM exits and need to be
    handled by the VMM.
•   Access Rights based Page Table protection. For VMM that implement access-rights-based page table
    protection, the VMCS provides a CR3 target value list that can be consulted by the processor to determine if a
    VM exit is required. Loading of CR3 with a value matching an entry in the CR3 target-list are allowed to proceed
    without VM exits. The VMM can utilize the CR3 target-list to save page-table hierarchies whose state is
    previously verified by the VMM.
•   Page-fault handling. Another common cause for a VM exit is due to page-faults induced by guest address
    remapping done through virtual memory virtualization. VMX provides page-fault error-code mask and match
    fields in the VMCS to filter VM exits due to page-faults based on their cause (reflected in the error-code).

31.13       USE OF THE VMX-PREEMPTION TIMER
The VMX-preemption timer allows VMM software to preempt guest VM execution after a specified amount of time.
Typical VMX-preemption timer usage is to program the initial VM quantum into the timer, save the timer value on
each successive VM-exit (using the VM-exit control “save preemption timer value”) and run the VM until the timer
expires.
In an alternative scenario, the VMM may use another timer (e.g. the TSC) to track the amount of time the VM has
run while still using the VMX-preemption timer for VM preemption. In this scenario the VMM would not save the

VMX-preemption timer on each VM-exit but instead would reload the VMX-preemption timer with initial VM
quantum less the time the VM has already run. This scenario includes all the VM-entry and VM-exit latencies in the
VM run time.
In both scenarios, on each successive VM-entry the VMX-preemption timer contains a smaller value until the VM
quantum ends. If the VMX-preemption timer is loaded with a value smaller than the VM-entry latency then the VM
will not execute any instructions before the timer expires. The VMM must ensure the initial VM quantum is greater
than the VM-entry latency; otherwise the VM will make no forward progress.

