                                                                                 CHAPTER 32

32.1          OVERVIEW
When a VMM is hosting multiple guest environments (VMs), it must monitor potential interactions between soft-
ware components using the same system resources. These interactions can require the virtualization of resources.
This chapter describes the virtualization of system resources. These include: debugging facilities, address transla-
tion, physical memory, and microcode update facilities.

32.2          VIRTUALIZATION SUPPORT FOR DEBUGGING FACILITIES
The Intel 64 and IA-32 debugging facilities (see Chapter 17) provide breakpoint instructions, exception conditions,
register flags, debug registers, control registers and storage buffers for functions related to debugging system and
application software. In VMX operation, a VMM can support debugging system and application software from within
virtual machines if the VMM properly virtualizes debugging facilities. The following list describes features relevant
to virtualizing these facilities.
•   The VMM can program the exception-bitmap (see Section 24.6.3) to ensure it gets control on debug functions
    (like breakpoint exceptions occurring while executing guest code such as INT3 instructions). Normally, debug
    exceptions modify debug registers (such as DR6, DR7, IA32_DEBUGCTL). However, if debug exceptions cause
    VM exits, exiting occurs before register modification.
•   The VMM may utilize the VM-entry event injection facilities described in Section 26.5 to inject debug or
    breakpoint exceptions to the guest. See Section 32.2.1 for a more detailed discussion.
•   The MOV-DR exiting control bit in the processor-based VM-execution control field (see Section 24.6.2) can be
    enabled by the VMM to cause VM exits on explicit guest access of various processor debug registers (for
    example, MOV to/from DR0-DR7). These exits would always occur on guest access of DR0-DR7 registers
    regardless of the values in CPL, DR4.DE or DR7.GD. Since all guest task switches cause VM exits, a VMM can
    control any indirect guest access or modification of debug registers during guest task switches.
•   Guest software access to debug-related model-specific registers (such as IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR) can be
    trapped by the VMM through MSR access control features (such as the MSR-bitmaps that are part of processor-
    based VM-execution controls). See Section 31.10 for details on MSR virtualization.
•   Debug registers such as DR7 and the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR may be explicitly modified by the guest (through
    MOV-DR or WRMSR instructions) or modified implicitly by the processor as part of generating debug
    exceptions. The current values of DR7 and the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR are saved to guest-state area of VMCS on
    every VM exit. Pending debug exceptions are debug exceptions that are recognized by the processor but not yet
    delivered. See Section 26.6.3 for details on pending debug exceptions.
•   DR7 and the IA32-DEBUGCTL MSR are loaded from values in the guest-state area of the VMCS on every VM
    entry. This allows the VMM to properly virtualize debug registers when injecting debug exceptions to guest.
    Similarly, the RFLAGS1 register is loaded on every VM entry (or pushed to stack if injecting a virtual event) from
    guest-state area of the VMCS. Pending debug exceptions are also loaded from guest-state area of VMCS so that
    they may be delivered after VM entry is completed.

32.2.1        Debug Exceptions
If a VMM emulates a guest instruction that would encounter a debug trap (single step or data or I/O breakpoint), it
should cause that trap to be delivered. The VMM should not inject the debug exception using VM-entry event injec-
tion, but should set the appropriate bits in the pending debug exceptions field. This method will give the trap the

1. This chapter uses the notation RAX, RIP, RSP, RFLAGS, etc. for processor registers because most processors that support VMX oper-
   ation also support Intel 64 architecture. For processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture, this notation refers to the 32-bit
   forms of those registers (EAX, EIP, ESP, EFLAGS, etc.).

right priority with respect to other events. (If the exception bitmap was programmed to cause VM exits on debug
exceptions, the debug trap will cause a VM exit. At this point, the trap can be injected during VM entry with the
proper priority.)
There is a valid pending debug exception if the BS bit (see Table 24-4) is set, regardless of the values of RFLAGS.TF
or IA32_DEBUGCTL.BTF. The values of these bits do not impact the delivery of pending debug exceptions.
VMMs should exercise care when emulating a guest write (attempted using WRMSR) to IA32_DEBUGCTL to modify
BTF if this is occurring with RFLAGS.TF = 1 and after a MOV SS or POP SS instruction (for example: while debug
exceptions are blocked). Note the following:
•   Normally, if WRMSR clears BTF while RFLAGS.TF = 1 and with debug exceptions blocked, a single-step trap will
    occur after WRMSR. A VMM emulating such an instruction should set the BS bit (see Table 24-4) in the pending
    debug exceptions field before VM entry.
•   Normally, if WRMSR sets BTF while RFLAGS.TF = 1 and with debug exceptions blocked, neither a single-step
    trap nor a taken-branch trap can occur after WRMSR. A VMM emulating such an instruction should clear the BS
    bit (see Table 24-4) in the pending debug exceptions field before VM entry.

32.3           MEMORY VIRTUALIZATION
VMMs must control physical memory to ensure VM isolation and to remap guest physical addresses in host physical
address space for virtualization. Memory virtualization allows the VMM to enforce control of physical memory and
yet support guest OSs’ expectation to manage memory address translation.

32.3.1         Processor Operating Modes & Memory Virtualization
Memory virtualization is required to support guest execution in various processor operating modes. This includes:
protected mode with paging, protected mode with no paging, real-mode and any other transient execution modes.
VMX allows guest operation in protected-mode with paging enabled and in virtual-8086 mode (with paging
enabled) to support guest real-mode execution. Guest execution in transient operating modes (such as in real
mode with one or more segment limits greater than 64-KByte) must be emulated by the VMM.
Since VMX operation requires processor execution in protected mode with paging (through CR0 and CR4 fixed bits),
the VMM may utilize paging structures to support memory virtualization. To support guest real-mode execution,
the VMM may establish a simple flat page table for guest linear to host physical address mapping. Memory virtual-
ization algorithms may also need to capture other guest operating conditions (such as guest performing A20M#
address masking) to map the resulting 20-bit effective guest physical addresses.

32.3.2         Guest & Host Physical Address Spaces
Memory virtualization provides guest software with contiguous guest physical address space starting zero and
extending to the maximum address supported by the guest virtual processor’s physical address width. The VMM
utilizes guest physical to host physical address mapping to locate all or portions of the guest physical address space
in host memory. The VMM is responsible for the policies and algorithms for this mapping which may take into
account the host system physical memory map and the virtualized physical memory map exposed to a guest by the
VMM. The memory virtualization algorithm needs to accommodate various guest memory uses (such as: accessing
DRAM, accessing memory-mapped registers of virtual devices or core logic functions and so forth). For example:
•   To support guest DRAM access, the VMM needs to map DRAM-backed guest physical addresses to host-DRAM
    regions. The VMM also requires the guest to host memory mapping to be at page granularity.
•   Virtual devices (I/O devices or platform core logic) emulated by the VMM may claim specific regions in the guest
    physical address space to locate memory-mapped registers. Guest access to these virtual registers may be
    configured to cause page-fault induced VM-exits by marking these regions as always not present. The VMM
    may handle these VM exits by invoking appropriate virtual device emulation code.

32.3.3      Virtualizing Virtual Memory by Brute Force
VMX provides the hardware features required to fully virtualize guest virtual memory accesses. VMX allows the
VMM to trap guest accesses to the PAT (Page Attribute Table) MSR and the MTRR (Memory Type Range Registers).
This control allows the VMM to virtualize the specific memory type of a guest memory. The VMM may control
caching by controlling the guest CR0.CRD and CR0.NW bits, as well as by trapping guest execution of the INVD
instruction. The VMM can trap guest CR3 loads and stores, and it may trap guest execution of INVLPG.
Because a VMM must retain control of physical memory, it must also retain control over the processor’s address-
translation mechanisms. Specifically, this means that only the VMM can access CR3 (which contains the base of the
page directory) and can execute INVLPG (the only other instruction that directly manipulates the TLB).
At the same time that the VMM controls address translation, a guest operating system will also expect to perform
normal memory management functions. It will access CR3, execute INVLPG, and modify (what it believes to be)
page directories and page tables. Virtualization of address translation must tolerate and support guest attempts to
control address translation.
A simple-minded way to do this would be to ensure that all guest attempts to access address-translation hardware
trap to the VMM where such operations can be properly emulated. It must ensure that accesses to page directories
and page tables also get trapped. This may be done by protecting these in-memory structures with conventional
page-based protection. The VMM can do this because it can locate the page directory because its base address is
in CR3 and the VMM receives control on any change to CR3; it can locate the page tables because their base
addresses are in the page directory.
Such a straightforward approach is not necessarily desirable. Protection of the in-memory translation structures
may be cumbersome. The VMM may maintain these structures with different values (e.g., different page base
addresses) than guest software. This means that there must be traps on guest attempt to read these structures
and that the VMM must maintain, in auxiliary data structures, the values to return to these reads. There must also
be traps on modifications to these structures even if the translations they effect are never used. All this implies
considerable overhead that should be avoided.

32.3.4      Alternate Approach to Memory Virtualization
Guest software is allowed to freely modify the guest page-table hierarchy without causing traps to the VMM.
Because of this, the active page-table hierarchy might not always be consistent with the guest hierarchy. Any
potential problems arising from inconsistencies can be solved using techniques analogous to those used by the
processor and its TLB.
This section describes an alternative approach that allows guest software to freely access page directories and
page tables. Traps occur on CR3 accesses and executions of INVLPG. They also occur when necessary to ensure
that guest modifications to the translation structures actually take effect. The software mechanisms to support this
approach are collectively called virtual TLB. This is because they emulate the functionality of the processor’s phys-
ical translation look-aside buffer (TLB).
The basic idea behind the virtual TLB is similar to that behind the processor TLB. While the page-table hierarchy
defines the relationship between physical to linear address, it does not directly control the address translation of
each memory access. Instead, translation is controlled by the TLB, which is occasionally filled by the processor with
translations derived from the page-table hierarchy. With a virtual TLB, the page-table hierarchy established by
guest software (specifically, the guest operating system) does not control translation, either directly or indirectly.
Instead, translation is controlled by the processor (through its TLB) and by the VMM (through a page-table hier-
archy that it maintains).
Specifically, the VMM maintains an alternative page-table hierarchy that effectively caches translations derived
from the hierarchy maintained by guest software. The remainder of this document refers to the former as the
active page-table hierarchy (because it is referenced by CR3 and may be used by the processor to load its TLB) and
the latter as the guest page-table hierarchy (because it is maintained by guest software). The entries in the active
hierarchy may resemble the corresponding entries in the guest hierarchy in some ways and may differ in others.
Guest software is allowed to freely modify the guest page-table hierarchy without causing VM exits to the VMM.
Because of this, the active page-table hierarchy might not always be consistent with the guest hierarchy. Any
potential problems arising from any inconsistencies can be solved using techniques analogous to those used by the
processor and its TLB. Note the following:

•   Suppose the guest page-table hierarchy allows more access than active hierarchy (for example: there is a
    translation for a linear address in the guest hierarchy but not in the active hierarchy); this is analogous to a
    situation in which the TLB allows less access than the page-table hierarchy. If an access occurs that would be
    allowed by the guest hierarchy but not the active one, a page fault occurs; this is analogous to a TLB miss. The
    VMM gains control (as it handles all page faults) and can update the active page-table hierarchy appropriately;
    this corresponds to a TLB fill.
•   Suppose the guest page-table hierarchy allows less access than the active hierarchy; this is analogous to a
    situation in which the TLB allows more access than the page-table hierarchy. This situation can occur only if the
    guest operating system has modified a page-table entry to reduce access (for example: by marking it not-
    present). Because the older, more permissive translation may have been cached in the TLB, the processor is
    architecturally permitted to use the older translation and allow more access. Thus, the VMM may (through the
    active page-table hierarchy) also allow greater access. For the new, less permissive translation to take effect,
    guest software should flush any older translations from the TLB either by executing INVLPG or by loading CR3.
    Because both these operations will cause a trap to the VMM, the VMM will gain control and can remove from the
    active page-table hierarchy the translations indicated by guest software (the translation of a specific linear
    address for INVLPG or all translations for a load of CR3).
As noted previously, the processor reads the page-table hierarchy to cache translations in the TLB. It also writes to
the hierarchy to main the accessed (A) and dirty (D) bits in the PDEs and PTEs. The virtual TLB emulates this
behavior as follows:
•   When a page is accessed by guest software, the A bit in the corresponding PTE (or PDE for a 4-MByte page) in
    the active page-table hierarchy will be set by the processor (the same is true for PDEs when active page tables
    are accessed by the processor). For guest software to operate properly, the VMM should update the A bit in the
    guest entry at this time. It can do this reliably if it keeps the active PTE (or PDE) marked not-present until it has
    set the A bit in the guest entry.
•   When a page is written by guest software, the D bit in the corresponding PTE (or PDE for a 4-MByte page) in
    the active page-table hierarchy will be set by the processor. For guest software to operate properly, the VMM
    should update the D bit in the guest entry at this time. It can do this reliably if it keeps the active PTE (or PDE)
    marked read-only until it has set the D bit in the guest entry. This solution is valid for guest software running at
    privilege level 3; support for more privileged guest software is described in Section 32.3.5.

32.3.5         Details of Virtual TLB Operation
This section describes in more detail how a VMM could support a virtual TLB. It explains how an active page-table
hierarchy is initialized and how it is maintained in response to page faults, uses of INVLPG, and accesses to CR3.
The mechanisms described here are the minimum necessary. They may not result in the best performance.

                                      "Virtual TLB"

                                Active Page-Table Hierarchy            Guest Page-Table Hierarchy

                                   Active                                    Guest
                                   CR3                         F              CR3                      F
                                                        PT                                    PT
                                refill on                              refill on
                               TLB miss                        F      page fault                       F
                    TLB                     PD                                        PD
                                set dirty                            set accessed
                               accessed                              and dirty bits
                                                               F                                       F
                                                        PT                                    PT
                   INVLPG                                      F                                       F
                   MOV to
                     CR3
                 task switch                                                  INVLPG
                                                                            MOV to CR3
                   PD = page directory                                      task switch
                   PT = page table
                   F = page frame
                                                                                                     OM19040

                                                 Figure 32-1. Virtual TLB Scheme

As noted above, the VMM maintains an active page-table hierarchy for each virtual machine that it supports. It also
maintains, for each machine, values that the machine expects for control registers CR0, CR2, CR3, and CR4 (they
control address translation). These values are called the guest control registers.
In general, the VMM selects the physical-address space that is allocated to guest software. The term guest address
refers to an address installed by guest software in the guest CR3, in a guest PDE (as a page table base address or
a page base address), or in a guest PTE (as a page base address). While guest software considers these to be
specific physical addresses, the VMM may map them differently.

32.3.5.1    Initialization of Virtual TLB
To enable the Virtual TLB scheme, the VMCS must be set up to trigger VM exits on:
•   All writes to CR3 (the CR3-target count should be 0) or the paging-mode bits in CR0 and CR4 (using the CR0
    and CR4 guest/host masks)
•   Page-fault (#PF) exceptions
•   Execution of INVLPG
When guest software first enables paging, the VMM creates an aligned 4-KByte active page directory that is invalid
(all entries marked not-present). This invalid directory is analogous to an empty TLB.

32.3.5.2    Response to Page Faults
Page faults can occur for a variety of reasons. In some cases, the page fault alerts the VMM to an inconsistency
between the active and guest page-table hierarchy. In such cases, the VMM can update the former and re-execute
the faulting instruction. In other cases, the hierarchies are already consistent and the fault should be handled by
the guest operating system. The VMM can detect this and use an established mechanism for raising a page fault to
guest software.
The VMM can handle a page fault by following these steps (The steps below assume the guest is operating in a
paging mode without PAE. Analogous steps to handle address translation using PAE or four-level paging mecha-

nisms can be derived by VMM developers according to the paging behavior defined in Chapter 3 of the Intel® 64
and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A):
1. First consult the active PDE, which can be located using the upper 10 bits of the faulting address and the
   current value of CR3. The active PDE is the source of the fault if it is marked not present or if its R/W bit and
   U/S bits are inconsistent with the attempted guest access (the guest privilege level and the values of CR0.WP
   and CR4.SMEP should also be taken into account).
2. If the active PDE is the source of the fault, consult the corresponding guest PDE using the same 10 bits from the
   faulting address and the physical address that corresponds to the guest address in the guest CR3. If the guest
   PDE would cause a page fault (for example: it is marked not present), then raise a page fault to the guest
   operating system.
    The following steps assume that the guest PDE would not have caused a page fault.
3. If the active PDE is the source of the fault and the guest PDE contains, as page-table base address (if PS = 0)
   or page base address (PS = 1), a guest address that the VMM has chosen not to support; then raise a machine
   check (or some other abort) to the guest operating system.
    The following steps assume that the guest address in the guest PDE is supported for the virtual machine.
4. If the active PDE is marked not-present, then set the active PDE to correspond to guest PDE as follows:
    a. If the active PDE contains a page-table base address (if PS = 0), then allocate an aligned 4-KByte active
       page table marked completely invalid and set the page-table base address in the active PDE to be the
       physical address of the newly allocated page table.
    b. If the active PDE contains a page base address (if PS = 1), then set the page base address in the active PDE
       to be the physical page base address that corresponds to the guest address in the guest PDE.
    c.   Set the P, U/S, and PS bits in the active PDE to be identical to those in the guest PDE.
    d. Set the PWT, PCD, and G bits according to the policy of the VMM.
    e. Set A = 1 in the guest PDE.
    f.   If D = 1 in the guest PDE or PS = 0 (meaning that this PDE refers to a page table), then set the R/W bit in
         the active PDE as in the guest PDE.
    g. If D = 0 in the guest PDE, PS = 1 (this is a 4-MByte page), and the attempted access is a write; then set
       R/W in the active PDE as in the guest PDE and set D = 1 in the guest PDE.
    h. If D = 0 in the guest PDE, PS = 1, and the attempted access is not a write; then set R/W = 0 in the active
       PDE.
    i.   After modifying the active PDE, re-execute the faulting instruction.
    The remaining steps assume that the active PDE is already marked present.
5. If the active PDE is the source of the fault, the active PDE refers to a 4-MByte page (PS = 1), the attempted
   access is a write; D = 0 in the guest PDE, and the active PDE has caused a fault solely because it has R/W = 0;
   then set R/W in the active PDE as in the guest PDE; set D = 1 in the guest PDE, and re-execute the faulting
   instruction.
6. If the active PDE is the source of the fault and none of the above cases apply, then raise a page fault of the
   guest operating system.
    The remaining steps assume that the source of the original page fault is not the active PDE.

                                                        NOTE
         It is possible that the active PDE might be causing a fault even though the guest PDE would not.
         However, this can happen only if the guest operating system increased access in the guest PDE and
         did not take action to ensure that older translations were flushed from the TLB. Such translations
         might have caused a page fault if the guest software were running on bare hardware.

7. If the active PDE refers to a 4-MByte page (PS = 1) but is not the source of the fault, then the fault resulted
   from an inconsistency between the active page-table hierarchy and the processor’s TLB. Since the transition to

   the VMM caused an address-space change and flushed the processor’s TLB, the VMM can simply re-execute the
   faulting instruction.
   The remaining steps assume that PS = 0 in the active and guest PDEs.
8. Consult the active PTE, which can be located using the next 10 bits of the faulting address (bits 21–12) and the
   physical page-table base address in the active PDE. The active PTE is the source of the fault if it is marked not-
   present or if its R/W bit and U/S bits are inconsistent with the attempted guest access (the guest privilege level
   and the values of CR0.WP and CR4.SMEP should also be taken into account).
9. If the active PTE is not the source of the fault, then the fault has resulted from an inconsistency between the
   active page-table hierarchy and the processor’s TLB. Since the transition to the VMM caused an address-space
   change and flushed the processor’s TLB, the VMM simply re-executes the faulting instruction.
   The remaining steps assume that the active PTE is the source of the fault.
10. Consult the corresponding guest PTE using the same 10 bits from the faulting address and the physical address
    that correspond to the guest page-table base address in the guest PDE. If the guest PTE would cause a page
    fault (it is marked not-present), the raise a page fault to the guest operating system.
   The following steps assume that the guest PTE would not have caused a page fault.
11. If the guest PTE contains, as page base address, a physical address that is not valid for the virtual machine
    being supported; then raise a machine check (or some other abort) to the guest operating system.
   The following steps assume that the address in the guest PTE is valid for the virtual machine.
12. If the active PTE is marked not-present, then set the active PTE to correspond to guest PTE:
   a. Set the page base address in the active PTE to be the physical address that corresponds to the guest page
      base address in the guest PTE.
   b. Set the P, U/S, and PS bits in the active PTE to be identical to those in the guest PTE.
   c.   Set the PWT, PCD, and G bits according to the policy of the VMM.
   d. Set A = 1 in the guest PTE.
   e. If D = 1 in the guest PTE, then set the R/W bit in the active PTE as in the guest PTE.
   f.   If D = 0 in the guest PTE and the attempted access is a write, then set R/W in the active PTE as in the guest
        PTE and set D = 1 in the guest PTE.
   g. If D = 0 in the guest PTE and the attempted access is not a write, then set R/W = 0 in the active PTE.
   h. After modifying the active PTE, re-execute the faulting instruction.
   The remaining steps assume that the active PTE is already marked present.
13. If the attempted access is a write, D = 0 (not dirty) in the guest PTE and the active PTE has caused a fault
    solely because it has R/W = 0 (read-only); then set R/W in the active PTE as in the guest PTE, set D = 1 in the
    guest PTE and re-execute the faulting instruction.
14. If none of the above cases apply, then raise a page fault of the guest operating system.

32.3.5.3     Response to Uses of INVLPG
Operating-systems can use INVLPG to flush entries from the TLB. This instruction takes a linear address as an
operand and software expects any cached translations for the address to be flushed. A VMM should set the
processor-based VM-execution control “INVLPG exiting” to 1 so that any attempts by a privileged guest to execute
INVLPG will trap to the VMM. The VMM can then modify the active page-table hierarchy to emulate the desired
effect of the INVLPG.
The following steps are performed. Note that these steps are performed only if the guest invocation of INVLPG
would not fault and only if the guest software is running at privilege level 0:
1. Locate the relevant active PDE using the upper 10 bits of the operand address and the current value of CR3. If
   the PDE refers to a 4-MByte page (PS = 1), then set P = 0 in the PDE.
2. If the PDE is marked present and refers to a page table (PS = 0), locate the relevant active PTE using the next
   10 bits of the operand address (bits 21–12) and the page-table base address in the PDE. Set P = 0 in the PTE.

    Examine all PTEs in the page table; if they are now all marked not-present, de-allocate the page table and set
    P = 0 in the PDE (this step may be optional).

32.3.5.4       Response to CR3 Writes
A guest operating system may attempt to write to CR3. Any write to CR3 implies a TLB flush and a possible page
table change. The following steps are performed:
1. The VMM notes the new CR3 value (used later to walk guest page tables) and emulates the write.
2. The VMM allocates a new PD page, with all invalid entries.
3. The VMM sets actual processor CR3 register to point to the new PD page.
The VMM may, at this point, speculatively fill in VTLB mappings for performance reasons.

32.4           MICROCODE UPDATE FACILITY
The microcode code update facility may be invoked at various points during the operation of a platform. Typically,
the BIOS invokes the facility on all processors during the BIOS boot process. This is sufficient to boot the BIOS and
operating system. As a microcode update more current than the system BIOS may be available, system software
should provide another mechanism for invoking the microcode update facility. The implications of the microcode
update mechanism on the design of the VMM are described in this section.

                                                        NOTE
         Microcode updates must not be performed during VMX non-root operation. Updates performed in
         VMX non-root operation may result in unpredictable system behavior.

32.4.1         Early Load of Microcode Updates
The microcode update facility may be invoked early in the VMM or guest OS boot process. Loading the microcode
update early provides the opportunity to correct errata affecting the boot process but the technique generally
requires a reboot of the software.
A microcode update may be loaded from the OS or VMM image loader. Typically, such image loaders do not run on
every logical processor, so this method effects only one logical processor. Later in the VMM or OS boot process,
after bringing all application processors on-line, the VMM or OS needs to invoke the microcode update facility for all
application processors.
Depending on the order of the VMM and the guest OS boot, the microcode update facility may be invoked by the
VMM or the guest OS. For example, if the guest OS boots first and then loads the VMM, the guest OS may invoke
the microcode update facility on all the logical processors. If a VMM boots before its guests, then the VMM may
invoke the microcode update facility during its boot process. In both cases, the VMM or OS should invoke the micro-
code update facilities soon after performing the multiprocessor startup.
In the early load scenario, microcode updates may be contained in the VMM or OS image or, the VMM or OS may
manage a separate database or file of microcode updates. Maintaining a separate microcode update image data-
base has the advantage of reducing the number of required VMM or OS releases as a result of microcode update
releases.

32.4.2         Late Load of Microcode Updates
A microcode update may be loaded during normal system operation. This allows system software to activate the
microcode update at anytime without requiring a system reboot. This scenario does not allow the microcode update
to correct errata which affect the processor’s boot process but does allow high-availability systems to activate
microcode updates without interrupting the availability of the system. In this late load scenario, either the VMM or
a designated guest may load the microcode update. If the guest is loading the microcode update, the VMM must

make sure that the entire guest memory buffer (which contains the microcode update image) will not cause a page
fault when accessed.
If the VMM loads the microcode update, then the VMM must have access to the current set of microcode updates.
These updates could be part of the VMM image or could be contained in a separate microcode update image data-
base (for example: a database file on disk or in memory). Again, maintaining a separate microcode update image
database has the advantage of reducing the number of required VMM or OS releases as a result of microcode
update releases.
The VMM may wish to prevent a guest from loading a microcode update or may wish to support the microcode
update requested by a guest using emulation (without actually loading the microcode update). To prevent micro-
code update loading, the VMM may return a microcode update signature value greater than the value of
IA32_BIOS_SIGN_ID MSR. A well behaved guest will not attempt to load an older microcode update. The VMM may
also drop the guest attempts to write to IA32_BIOS_UPDT_TRIG MSR, preventing the guest from loading any
microcode updates. Later, when the guest queries IA32_BIOS_SIGN_ID MSR, the VMM could emulate the micro-
code update signature that the guest expects.
In general, loading a microcode update later will limit guest software’s visibility of features that may be enhanced
by a microcode update.

