                                                   CHAPTER 33

33.1          OVERVIEW
This chapter describes what a VMM must consider when handling exceptions, interrupts, error conditions, and tran-
sitions between activity states.

33.2          INTERRUPT HANDLING IN VMX OPERATION
The following bullets summarize VMX support for handling interrupts:
•   Control of processor exceptions. The VMM can get control on specific guest exceptions through the
    exception-bitmap in the guest controlling VMCS. The exception bitmap is a 32-bit field that allows the VMM to
    specify processor behavior on specific exceptions (including traps, faults, and aborts). Setting a specific bit in
    the exception bitmap implies VM exits will be generated when the corresponding exception occurs. Any
    exceptions that are programmed not to cause VM exits are delivered directly to the guest through the guest
    IDT. The exception bitmap also controls execution of relevant instructions such as BOUND, INTO and INT3. VM
    exits on page-faults are treated in such a way the page-fault error code is qualified through the page-fault-
    error-code mask and match fields in the VMCS.
•   Control over triple faults. If a fault occurs while attempting to call a double-fault handler in the guest and
    that fault is not configured to cause a VM exit in the exception bitmap, the resulting triple fault causes a
    VM exit.
•   Control of external interrupts. VMX allows both host and guest control of external interrupts through the
    “external-interrupt exiting” VM execution control. If the control is 0, external-interrupts do not cause VM exits
    and the interrupt delivery is masked by the guest programmed RFLAGS.IF value.1 If the control is 1, external-
    interrupts causes VM exits and are not masked by RFLAGS.IF. The VMM can identify VM exits due to external
    interrupts by checking the exit reason for an “external interrupt” (value = 1).
•   Control of other events. There is a pin-based VM-execution control that controls system behavior (exit or no-
    exit) for NMI events. Most VMM usages will need handling of NMI external events in the VMM and hence will
    specify host control of these events.
    Some processors also support a pin-based VM-execution control called “virtual NMIs.” When this control is set,
    NMIs cause VM exits, but the processor tracks guest readiness for virtual NMIs. This control interacts with the
    “NMI-window exiting” VM-execution control (see below).
    INIT and SIPI events always cause VM exits.
•   Acknowledge interrupt on exit. The “acknowledge interrupt on exit” VM-exit control in the controlling VMCS
    controls processor behavior for external interrupt acknowledgement. If the control is 1, the processor acknowl-
    edges the interrupt controller to acquire the interrupt vector upon VM exit, and stores the vector in the VM-exit
    interruption-information field. If the control is 0, the external interrupt is not acknowledged during VM exit.
    Since RFLAGS.IF is automatically cleared on VM exits due to external interrupts, VMM re-enabling of interrupts
    (setting RFLAGS.IF = 1) initiates the external interrupt acknowledgement and vectoring of the external
    interrupt through the monitor/host IDT.
•   Event-masking Support. VMX captures the masking conditions of specific events while in VMX non-root
    operation through the interruptibility-state field in the guest-state area of the VMCS.
    This feature allows proper virtualization of various interrupt blocking states, such as: (a) blocking of external
    interrupts for the instruction following STI; (b) blocking of interrupts for the instruction following a MOV-SS or
    POP-SS instruction; (c) SMI blocking of subsequent SMIs until the next execution of RSM; and (d) NMI/SMI
    blocking of NMIs until the next execution of IRET or RSM.

1. This chapter uses the notation RAX, RIP, RSP, RFLAGS, etc. for processor registers because most processors that support VMX oper-
   ation also support Intel 64 architecture. For processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture, this notation refers to the 32-bit
   forms of those registers (EAX, EIP, ESP, EFLAGS, etc.).

    INIT and SIPI events are treated specially. INIT assertions are always blocked in VMX root operation and while
    in SMM, and unblocked otherwise. SIPI events are always blocked in VMX root operation.
    The interruptibility state is loaded from the VMCS guest-state area on every VM entry and saved into the VMCS
    on every VM exit.
•   Event injection. VMX operation allows injecting interruptions to a guest virtual machine through the use of
    VM-entry interrupt-information field in VMCS. Injectable interruptions include external interrupts, NMI,
    processor exceptions, software generated interrupts, and software traps. If the interrupt-information field
    indicates a valid interrupt, exception or trap event upon the next VM entry; the processor will use the
    information in the field to vector a virtual interruption through the guest IDT after all guest state and MSRs are
    loaded. Delivery through the guest IDT emulates vectoring in non-VMX operation by doing the normal privilege
    checks and pushing appropriate entries to the guest stack (entries may include RFLAGS, EIP and exception
    error code). A VMM with host control of NMI and external interrupts can use the event-injection facility to
    forward virtual interruptions to various guest virtual machines.
•   Interrupt-window exiting. When set to 1, the “interrupt-window exiting” VM-execution control (Section
    24.6.2) causes VM exits when guest RFLAGS.IF is 1 and no other conditions block external interrupts. A VM exit
    occurs at the beginning of any instruction at which RFLAGS.IF = 1 and on which the interruptibility state of the
    guest would allow delivery of an interrupt. For example: when the guest executes an STI instruction,
    RFLAGS = 1, and if at the completion of next instruction the interruptibility state masking due to STI is
    removed; a VM exit occurs if the “interrupt-window exiting” VM-execution control is 1. This feature allows a
    VMM to queue a virtual interrupt to the guest when the guest is not in an interruptible state. The VMM can set
    the “interrupt-window exiting” VM-execution control for the guest and depend on a VM exit to know when the
    guest becomes interruptible (and, therefore, when it can inject a virtual interrupt). The VMM can detect such
    VM exits by checking for the basic exit reason “interrupt-window” (value = 7). If this feature is not used, the
    VMM will need to poll and check the interruptibility state of the guest to deliver virtual interrupts.
•   NMI-window exiting. If the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution is set, the processor tracks virtual-NMI blocking.
    The “NMI-window exiting” VM-execution control (Section 24.6.2) causes VM exits when there is no virtual-NMI
    blocking. For example, after execution of the IRET instruction, a VM exit occurs if the “NMI-window exiting” VM-
    execution control is 1. This feature allows a VMM to queue a virtual NMI to a guest when the guest is not ready
    to receive NMIs. The VMM can set the “NMI-window exiting” VM-execution control for the guest and depend on
    a VM exit to know when the guest becomes ready for NMIs (and, therefore, when it can inject a virtual NMI).
    The VMM can detect such VM exits by checking for the basic exit reason “NMI window” (value = 8). If this
    feature is not used, the VMM will need to poll and check the interruptibility state of the guest to deliver virtual
    NMIs.
•   VM-exit information. The VM-exit information fields provide details on VM exits due to exceptions and
    interrupts. This information is provided through the exit-qualification, VM-exit-interruption-information,
    instruction-length and interruption-error-code fields. Also, for VM exits that occur in the course of vectoring
    through the guest IDT, information about the event that was being vectored through the guest IDT is provided
    in the IDT-vectoring-information and IDT-vectoring-error-code fields. These information fields allow the VMM to
    identify the exception cause and to handle it properly.

33.3           EXTERNAL INTERRUPT VIRTUALIZATION
VMX operation allows both host and guest control of external interrupts. While guest control of external interrupts
might be suitable for partitioned usages (different CPU cores/threads and I/O devices partitioned to independent
virtual machines), most VMMs built upon VMX are expected to utilize host control of external interrupts. The rest of
this section describes a general host-controlled interrupt virtualization architecture for standard PC platforms
through the use of VMX supported features.
With host control of external interrupts, the VMM (or the host OS in a hosted VMM model) manages the physical
interrupt controllers in the platform and the interrupts generated through them. The VMM exposes software-
emulated virtual interrupt controller devices (such as PIC and APIC) to each guest virtual machine instance.

33.3.1      Virtualization of Interrupt Vector Space
The Intel 64 and IA-32 architectures use 8-bit vectors of which 224 (20H – FFH) are available for external inter-
rupts. Vectors are used to select the appropriate entry in the interrupt descriptor table (IDT). VMX operation allows
each guest to control its own IDT. Host vectors refer to vectors delivered by the platform to the processor during
the interrupt acknowledgement cycle. Guest vectors refer to vectors programmed by a guest to select an entry in
its guest IDT. Depending on the I/O resource management models supported by the VMM design, the guest vector
space may or may not overlap with the underlying host vector space.
•   Interrupts from virtual devices: Guest vector numbers for virtual interrupts delivered to guests on behalf of
    emulated virtual devices have no direct relation to the host vector numbers of interrupts from physical devices
    on which they are emulated. A guest-vector assigned for a virtual device by the guest operating environment
    is saved by the VMM and utilized when injecting virtual interrupts on behalf of the virtual device.
•   Interrupts from assigned physical devices: Hardware support for I/O device assignment allows physical I/O
    devices in the host platform to be assigned (direct-mapped) to VMs. Guest vectors for interrupts from direct-
    mapped physical devices take up equivalent space from the host vector space, and require the VMM to perform
    host-vector to guest-vector mapping for interrupts.
Figure 33-1 illustrates the functional relationship between host external interrupts and guest virtual external inter-
rupts. Device A is owned by the host and generates external interrupts with host vector X. The host IDT is set up
such that the interrupt service routine (ISR) for device driver A is hooked to host vector X as normal. VMM
emulates (over device A) virtual device C in software which generates virtual interrupts to the VM with guest
expected vector P. Device B is assigned to a VM and generates external interrupts with host vector Y. The host IDT
is programmed to hook the VMM interrupt service routine (ISR) for assigned devices for vector Y, and the VMM
handler injects virtual interrupt with guest vector Q to the VM. The guest operating system programs the guest to
hook appropriate guest driver’s ISR to vectors P and Q.

                      VM
                                                       Guest IDT
                           Device Driver C
                                                                                     Device Driver B
                                           Guest
                                          Vector P                         Guest
                                                                          Vector Q
                                        Guest IDTR

                            Virtual Interrupt                                         Virtual Interrupt

                            Virtual Device C           Host IDT
                               Emulation
                                                                                     Monitor Handler
                            Device Driver A

                                 Host IDTR

                                                                                                       Vector Y
                                                                          Vector X
                                                                   Host

                                                                                                Host
                       Virtual Machine Monitor (VMM)

                                                              Platform Interrupt           Platform Interrupt

                        Hardware
                                                                   Device A                    Device B

                                                                                                                  OM19041

                           Figure 33-1. Host External Interrupts and Guest Virtual Interrupts

33.3.2         Control of Platform Interrupts
To meet the interrupt virtualization requirements, the VMM needs to take ownership of the physical interrupts and
the various interrupt controllers in the platform. VMM control of physical interrupts may be enabled through the
host-control settings of the “external-interrupt exiting” VM-execution control. To take ownership of the platform
interrupt controllers, the VMM needs to expose the virtual interrupt controller devices to the virtual machines and
restrict guest access to the platform interrupt controllers.
Intel 64 and IA-32 platforms can support three types of external interrupt control mechanisms: Programmable
Interrupt Controllers (PIC), Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controllers (APIC), and Message Signaled Inter-
rupts (MSI). The following sections provide information on the virtualization of each of these mechanisms.

33.3.2.1       PIC Virtualization
Typical PIC-enabled platform implementations support dual 8259 interrupt controllers cascaded as master and
slave controllers. They supporting up to 15 possible interrupt inputs. The 8259 controllers are programmed
through initialization command words (ICWx) and operation command words (OCWx) accessed through specific
I/O ports. The various interrupt line states are captured in the PIC through interrupt requests, interrupt service
routines and interrupt mask registers.
Guest access to the PIC I/O ports can be restricted by activating I/O bitmaps in the guest controlling-VMCS (acti-
vate-I/O-bitmap bit in VM-execution control field set to 1) and pointing the I/O-bitmap physical addresses to valid

bitmap regions. Bits corresponding to the PIC I/O ports can be cleared to cause a VM exit on guest access to these
ports.
If the VMM is not supporting direct access to any I/O ports from a guest, it can set the unconditional-I/O-exiting in
the VM-execution control field instead of activating I/O bitmaps. The exit-reason field in VM-exit information allows
identification of VM exits due to I/O access and can provide an exit-qualification to identify details about the guest
I/O operation that caused the VM exit.
The VMM PIC virtualization needs to emulate the platform PIC functionality including interrupt priority, mask,
request and service states, and specific guest programmed modes of PIC operation.

33.3.2.2     xAPIC Virtualization
Most modern Intel 64 and IA-32 platforms include support for an APIC. While the standard PIC is intended for use
on uniprocessor systems, APIC can be used in either uniprocessor or multi-processor systems.
APIC based interrupt control consists of two physical components: the interrupt acceptance unit (Local APIC) which
is integrated with the processor, and the interrupt delivery unit (I/O APIC) which is part of the I/O subsystem. APIC
virtualization involves protecting the platform’s local and I/O APICs and emulating them for the guest.

33.3.2.3     Local APIC Virtualization
The local APIC is responsible for the local interrupt sources, interrupt acceptance, dispensing interrupts to the
logical processor, and generating inter-processor interrupts. Software interacts with the local APIC by reading and
writing its memory-mapped registers residing within a 4-KByte uncached memory region with base address stored
in the IA32_APIC_BASE MSR. Since the local APIC registers are memory-mapped, the VMM can utilize memory
virtualization techniques (such as page-table virtualization) to trap guest accesses to the page frame hosting the
virtual local APIC registers.
Local APIC virtualization in the VMM needs to emulate the various local APIC operations and registers, such as:
APIC identification/format registers, the local vector table (LVT), the interrupt command register (ICR), interrupt
capture registers (TMR, IRR and ISR), task and processor priority registers (TPR, PPR), the EOI register and the
APIC-timer register. Since local APICs are designed to operate with non-specific EOI, local APIC emulation also
needs to emulate broadcast of EOI to the guest’s virtual I/O APICs for level triggered virtual interrupts.
A local APIC allows interrupt masking at two levels: (1) mask bit in the local vector table entry for local interrupts
and (2) raising processor priority through the TPR registers for masking lower priority external interrupts. The VMM
needs to comprehend these virtual local APIC mask settings as programmed by the guest in addition to the guest
virtual processor interruptibility state (when injecting APIC routed external virtual interrupts to a guest VM).
VMX provides several features which help the VMM to virtualize the local APIC. These features allow many of guest
TPR accesses (using CR8 only) to occur without VM exits to the VMM:
•   The VMCS contains a “virtual-APIC address” field. This 64-bit field is the physical address of the 4-KByte virtual
    APIC page (4-KByte aligned). The virtual-APIC page contains a TPR shadow, which is accessed by the MOV CR8
    instruction. The TPR shadow comprises bits 7:4 in byte 80H of the virtual-APIC page.
•   The TPR threshold: bits 3:0 of this 32-bit field determine the threshold below which the TPR shadow cannot fall.
    A VM exit will occur after an execution of MOV CR8 that reduces the TPR shadow below this value.
•   The processor-based VM-execution controls field contains a “use TPR shadow” bit and a “CR8-store exiting” bit.
    If the “use TPR shadow” VM-execution control is 1 and the “CR8-store exiting” VM-execution control is 0, then
    a MOV from CR8 reads from the TPR shadow. If the “CR8-store exiting” VM-execution control is 1, then MOV
    from CR8 causes a VM exit; the “use TPR shadow” VM-execution control is ignored in this case.
•   The processor-based VM-execution controls field contains a “CR8-load exiting” bit. If the “use TPR shadow”
    VM-execution control is set and the “CR8-load exiting” VM-execution control is clear, then MOV to CR8 writes to
    the “TPR shadow”. A VM exit will occur after this write if the value written is below the TPR threshold. If the
    “CR8-load exiting” VM-execution control is set, then MOV to CR8 causes a VM exit; the “use TPR shadow” VM-
    execution control is ignored in this case.

33.3.2.4       I/O APIC Virtualization
The I/O APIC registers are typically mapped to a 1 MByte region where each I/O APIC is allocated a 4K address
window within this range. The VMM may utilize physical memory virtualization to trap guest accesses to the virtual
I/O APIC memory-mapped registers. The I/O APIC virtualization needs to emulate the various I/O APIC operations
and registers such as identification/version registers, indirect-I/O-access registers, EOI register, and the I/O redi-
rection table. I/O APIC virtualization also need to emulate various redirection table entry settings such as delivery
mode, destination mode, delivery status, polarity, masking, and trigger mode programmed by the guest and track
remote-IRR state on guest EOI writes to various virtual local APICs.

33.3.2.5       Virtualization of Message Signaled Interrupts
The PCI Local Bus Specification (Rev. 2.2) introduces the concept of message signaled interrupts (MSI). MSI enable
PCI devices to request service by writing a system-specified message to a system specified address. The transac-
tion address specifies the message destination while the transaction data specifies the interrupt vector, trigger
mode and delivery mode. System software is expected to configure the message data and address during MSI
device configuration, allocating one or more no-shared messages to MSI capable devices. Chapter 10, “Advanced
Programmable Interrupt Controller (APIC),” specifies the MSI message address and data register formats to be
followed on Intel 64 and IA-32 platforms. While MSI is optional for conventional PCI devices, it is the preferred
interrupt mechanism for PCI-Express devices.
Since the MSI address and data are configured through PCI configuration space, to control these physical interrupts
the VMM needs to assume ownership of PCI configuration space. This allows the VMM to capture the guest config-
uration of message address and data for MSI-capable virtual and assigned guest devices. PCI configuration trans-
actions on PC-compatible systems are generated by software through two different methods:
1. The standard CONFIG_ADDRESS/CONFIG_DATA register mechanism (CFCH/CF8H ports) as defined in the PCI
   Local Bus Specification.
2. The enhanced flat memory-mapped (MEMCFG) configuration mechanism as defined in the PCI-Express Base
   Specification (Rev. 1.0a.).
The CFCH/CF8H configuration access from guests can be trapped by the VMM through use of I/O-bitmap VM-
execution controls. The memory-mapped PCI-Express MEMCFG guest configuration accesses can be trapped by
VMM through physical memory virtualization.

33.3.3         Examples of Handling of External Interrupts
The following sections illustrate interrupt processing in a VMM (when used to support the external interrupt virtu-
alization requirements).

33.3.3.1       Guest Setup
The VMM sets up the guest to cause a VM exit to the VMM on external interrupts. This is done by setting the
“external-interrupt exiting” VM-execution control in the guest controlling-VMCS.

33.3.3.2       Processor Treatment of External Interrupt
Interrupts are automatically masked by hardware in the processor on VM exit by clearing RFLAGS.IF. The exit-
reason field in VMCS is set to 1 to indicate an external interrupt as the exit reason.
If the VMM is utilizing the acknowledge-on-exit feature (by setting the “acknowledge interrupt on exit” VM-exit
control), the processor acknowledges the interrupt, retrieves the host vector, and saves the interrupt in the VM-
exit-interruption-information field (in the VM-exit information region of the VMCS) before transitioning control to
the VMM.

33.3.3.3     Processing of External Interrupts by VMM
Upon VM exit, the VMM can determine the exit cause of an external interrupt by checking the exit-reason field
(value = 1) in VMCS. If the acknowledge-interrupt-on-exit control (see Section 24.7.1) is enabled, the VMM can
use the saved host vector (in the exit-interruption-information field) to switch to the appropriate interrupt handler.
If the “acknowledge interrupt on exit” VM-exit control is 0, the VMM may re-enable interrupts (by setting
RFLAGS.IF) to allow vectoring of external interrupts through the monitor/host IDT.
The following steps may need to be performed by the VMM to process an external interrupt:
•   Host Owned I/O Devices: For host-owned I/O devices, the interrupting device is owned by the VMM (or
    hosting OS in a hosted VMM). In this model, the interrupt service routine in the VMM/host driver is invoked and,
    upon ISR completion, the appropriate write sequences (TPR updates, EOI etc.) to respective interrupt
    controllers are performed as normal. If the work completion indicated by the driver implies virtual device
    activity, the VMM runs the virtual device emulation. Depending on the device class, physical device activity
    could imply activity by multiple virtual devices mapped over the device. For each affected virtual device, the
    VMM injects a virtual external interrupt event to respective guest virtual machines. The guest driver interacts
    with the emulated virtual device to process the virtual interrupt. The interrupt controller emulation in the VMM
    supports various guest accesses to the VMM’s virtual interrupt controller.
•   Guest Assigned I/O Devices: For assigned I/O devices, either the VMM uses a software proxy or it can
    directly map the physical device to the assigned VM. In both cases, servicing of the interrupt condition on the
    physical device is initiated by the driver running inside the guest VM. With host control of external interrupts,
    interrupts from assigned physical devices cause VM exits to the VMM and vectoring through the host IDT to the
    registered VMM interrupt handler. To unblock delivery of other low priority platform interrupts, the VMM
    interrupt handler must mask the interrupt source (for level triggered interrupts) and issue the appropriate EOI
    write sequences.
Once the physical interrupt source is masked and the platform EOI generated, the VMM can map the host vector to
its corresponding guest vector to inject the virtual interrupt into the assigned VM. The guest software does EOI
write sequences to its virtual interrupt controller after completing interrupt processing. For level triggered inter-
rupts, these EOI writes to the virtual interrupt controller may be trapped by the VMM which may in turn unmask
the previously masked interrupt source.

33.3.3.4     Generation of Virtual Interrupt Events by VMM
The following provides some of the general steps that need to be taken by VMM designs when generating virtual
interrupts:
1. Check virtual processor interruptibility state. The virtual processor interruptibility state is reflected in the guest
   RFLAGS.IF flag and the processor interruptibility-state saved in the guest state area of the controlling-VMCS. If
   RFLAGS.IF is set and the interruptibility state indicates readiness to take external interrupts (STI-masking and
   MOV-SS/POP-SS-masking bits are clear), the guest virtual processor is ready to take external interrupts. If the
   VMM design supports non-active guest sleep states, the VMM needs to make sure the current guest sleep state
   allows injection of external interrupt events.
2. If the guest virtual processor state is currently not interruptible, a VMM may utilize the “interrupt-window
   exiting” VM-execution to notify the VMM (through a VM exit) when the virtual processor state changes to inter-
   ruptible state.
3. Check the virtual interrupt controller state. If the guest VM exposes a virtual local APIC, the current value of its
   processor priority register specifies if guest software allows dispensing an external virtual interrupt with a
   specific priority to the virtual processor. If the virtual interrupt is routed through the local vector table (LVT)
   entry of the local APIC, the mask bits in the corresponding LVT entry specifies if the interrupt is currently
   masked. Similarly, the virtual interrupt controller’s current mask (IO-APIC or PIC) and priority settings reflect
   guest state to accept specific external interrupts. The VMM needs to check both the virtual processor and
   interrupt controller states to verify its guest interruptibility state. If the guest is currently interruptible, the
   VMM can inject the virtual interrupt. If the current guest state does not allow injecting a virtual interrupt, the
   interrupt needs to be queued by the VMM until it can be delivered.
4. Prioritize the use of VM-entry event injection. A VMM may use VM-entry event injection to deliver various
   virtual events (such as external interrupts, exceptions, traps, and so forth). VMM designs may prioritize use of
   virtual-interrupt injection between these event types. Since each VM entry allows injection of one event,

    depending on the VMM event priority policies, the VMM may need to queue the external virtual interrupt if a
    higher priority event is to be delivered on the next VM entry. Since the VMM has masked this particular interrupt
    source (if it was level triggered) and done EOI to the platform interrupt controller, other platform interrupts can
    be serviced while this virtual interrupt event is queued for later delivery to the VM.
5. Update the virtual interrupt controller state. When the above checks have passed, before generating the virtual
   interrupt to the guest, the VMM updates the virtual interrupt controller state (Local-APIC, IO-APIC and/or PIC)
   to reflect assertion of the virtual interrupt. This involves updating the various interrupt capture registers, and
   priority registers as done by the respective hardware interrupt controllers. Updating the virtual interrupt
   controller state is required for proper interrupt event processing by guest software.
6. Inject the virtual interrupt on VM entry. To inject an external virtual interrupt to a guest VM, the VMM sets up
   the VM-entry interruption-information field in the guest controlling-VMCS before entry to guest using
   VMRESUME. Upon VM entry, the processor will use this vector to access the gate in guest’s IDT and the value of
   RFLAGS and EIP in guest-state area of controlling-VMCS is pushed on the guest stack. If the guest RFLAGS.IF
   is clear, the STI-masking bit is set, or the MOV- SS/POP-SS-masking bit is set, the VM entry will fail and the
   processor will load state from the host-state area of the working VMCS as if a VM exit had occurred (see Section
   26.7).

33.4           ERROR HANDLING BY VMM
Error conditions may occur during VM entries and VM exits and a few other situations. This section describes how
VMM should handle these error conditions, including triple faults and machine-check exceptions.

33.4.1         VM-Exit Failures
All VM exits load processor state from the host-state area of the VMCS that was the controlling VMCS before the VM
exit. This state is checked for consistency while being loaded. Because the host-state is checked on VM entry, these
checks will generally succeed. Failure is possible only if host software is incorrect or if VMCS data in the VMCS
region in memory has been written by guest software (or by I/O DMA) since the last VM entry. VM exits may fail for
the following reasons:
•   There was a failure on storing guest MSRs.
•   There was failure in loading a PDPTR.
•   The controlling VMCS has been corrupted (through writes to the corresponding VMCS region) in such a way that
    the implementation cannot complete the VM exit.
•   There was a failure on loading host MSRs.
•   A machine-check event occurred.
If one of these problems occurs on a VM exit, a VMX abort results.

33.4.2         Machine-Check Considerations
The following sequence determine how machine-check events are handled during VMXON, VMXOFF, VM entries,
and VM exits:
•   VMXOFF and VMXON:
    If a machine-check event occurs during VMXOFF or VMXON and CR4.MCE = 1, a machine-check exception
    (#MC) is generated. If CR4.MCE = 0, the processor goes to shutdown state.
•   VM entry:
    If a machine-check event occurs during VM entry, one of the following three treatments must occur:
    a. Normal delivery before VM entry. If CR4.MCE = 1 before VM entry, delivery of a machine-check exception
       (#MC) through the host IDT occurs. If CR4.MCE = 0, the processor goes to shutdown state.

    b. Normal delivery after VM entry. If CR4.MCE = 1 after VM entry, delivery of a machine-check exception
       (#MC) through the guest IDT occurs (alternatively, this exception may cause a VM exit). If CR4.MCE = 0,
       the processor goes to shutdown state.
    c.   Load state from the host-state area of the working VMCS as if a VM exit had occurred (see Section 26.7).
         The basic exit reason will be “VM-entry failure due to machine-check event.”
    If the machine-check event occurs after any guest state has been loaded, option a above will not be used; it
    may be used if the machine-check event occurs while checking host state and VMX controls (or while reporting
    a failure due to such checks). An implementation may use option b only if all guest state has been loaded
    properly.
•   VM exit:
    If a machine-check event occurs during VM exit, one of the following three treatments must occur:
    a. Normal delivery before VM exit. If CR4.MCE = 1 before the VM exit, delivery of a machine-check exception
       (#MC) through the guest IDT (alternatively, this may cause a VM exit). If CR4.MCE = 0, the processor goes
       to shutdown state.
    b. Normal delivery after VM exit. If CR4.MCE = 1 after the VM exit, delivery of a machine-check exception
       (#MC) through the host IDT. If CR4.MCE = 0, the processor goes to shutdown state.
    c.   Fail the VM exit. If the VM exit is to VMX root operation, a VMX abort will result; it will block events as done
         normally in VMX abort. The VMX abort indicator will show that a machine-check event induced the abort
         operation.
    If a machine-check event is induced by an action in VMX non-root operation before any determination is made
    that the inducing action may cause a VM exit, that machine-check event should be considered as happening
    during guest execution in VMX non-root operation. This is the case even if the part of the action that caused the
    machine-check event was VMX-specific (for example, the processor’s consulting an I/O bitmap). If a machine-
    check exception occurs and if bit 12H of the exception bitmap is cleared to 0, the exception is delivered to the
    guest through gate 12H of its IDT; if the bit is set to 1, the machine-check exception causes a VM exit.

                                                          NOTE
         The state saved in the guest-state area on VM exits due to machine-check exceptions should be
         considered suspect. A VMM should consult the RIPV and EIPV bits in the IA32_MCG_STATUS MSR
         before resuming a guest that caused a VM exit due to a machine-check exception.

33.4.3       MCA Error Handling Guidelines for VMM
Section 33.4.2 covers general requirements for VMMs to handle machine-check exceptions, when normal operation
of the guest machine and/or the VMM is no longer possible. enhancements of machine-check architecture in newer
processors may support software recovery of uncorrected MC errors (UCR) signaled through either machine-check
exceptions or corrected machine-check interrupt (CMCI). Section 15.5 and Section 15.6 describes details of these
more recent enhancements of machine-check architecture.
In general, Virtual Machine Monitor (VMM) error handling should follow the recommendations for OS error handling
described in Section 15.3, Section 15.6, Section 15.9, and Section 15.10. This section describes additional guide-
lines for hosted and native hypervisor-based VMM implementations to support corrected MC errors and recoverable
uncorrected MC errors.
Because a hosted VMM provides virtualization services in the context of an existing standard host OS, the host OS
controls platform hardware through the host OS services such as the standard OS device drivers. In hosted VMMs.
MCA errors will be handled by the host OS error handling software.
In native VMMs, the hypervisor runs on the hardware directly, and may provide only a limited set of platform
services for guest VMs. Most platform services may instead be provided by a “control OS”. In hypervisor-based
VMMs, MCA errors will either be delivered directly to the VMM MCA handler (when the error is signaled while in the
VMM context) or cause by a VM exit from a guest VM or be delivered to the MCA intercept handler. There are two
general approaches the hypervisor can use to handle the MCA error: either within the hypervisor itself or by
forwarding the error to the control OS.

33.4.3.1        VMM Error Handling Strategies
Broadly speaking, there are two strategies that VMMs may take for error handling:
•   Basic error handling: in this approach the guest VM is treated as any other thread of execution. If the error
    recovery action does not support restarting the thread after handling the error, the guest VM should be
    terminated.
•   MCA virtualization: in this approach, the VMM virtualizes the MCA events and hardware. This enables the VMM
    to intercept MCA events and inject an MCA into the guest VM. The guest VM then has the opportunity to attempt
    error recovery actions, rather than being terminated by the VMM.
Details of these approaches and implementation considerations for hosted and native VMMs are discussed below.

33.4.3.2        Basic VMM MCA error recovery handling
The simplest approach is for the VMM to treat the guest VM as any other thread of execution:
•   MCE's that occur outside the stream of execution of a virtual machine guest will cause an MCE abort and may
    be handled by the MCA error handler following the recovery actions and guidelines described in Section 15.9,
    and Section 15.10. This includes logging the error and taking appropriate recovery actions when necessary. The
    VMM must not resume the interrupted thread of execution or another VM until it has taken the appropriate
    recovery action or, in the case of fatal MCAs, reset the system.
•   MCE's that occur while executing in the context of a virtual machine will be intercepted by the VMM. The MCA
    intercept handler may follow the error handling guidelines listed in Section 15.9 and Section 15.10 for SRAO
    and SRAR errors. For SRAR errors, terminating the thread of execution will involve terminating the affected
    guest VM. For fatal errors the MCA handler should log the error and reset the system -- the VMM should not
    resume execution of the interrupted VM.

33.4.3.3        Implementation Considerations for the Basic Model
For hosted VMMs, the host OS MCA error handling code will perform error analysis and initiate the appropriate
recovery actions. For the basic model this flow does not change when terminating a guest VM although the specific
actions needed to terminate a guest VM may be different than terminating an application or user process.
For native, hypervisor-based VMMs, MCA errors will either be delivered directly to the VMM MCA handler (when the
error is signaled while in the VMM context) or cause a VM exit from a guest VM or be delivered to the MCA intercept
handler. There are two general approaches the hypervisor can use to handle the MCA error: either by forwarding
the error to the control OS or within the hypervisor itself. These approaches are described in the following para-
graphs.
The hypervisor may forward the error to the control OS for handling errors. This approach simplifies the hypervisor
error handling since it relies on the control OS to implement the basic error handling model. The control OS error
handling code will be similar to the error handling code in the hosted VMM. Errors can be forwarded to the control
OS via an OS callback or by injecting an MCE event into the control OS. Injecting an MCE will cause the control OS
MCA error handler to be invoked. The control OS is responsible for terminating the affected guest VM, if necessary,
which may require cooperation from the hypervisor.
Alternatively, the error may be handled completely in the hypervisor. The hypervisor error handler is enhanced to
implement the basic error handling model and the hypervisor error handler has the capability to fully analyze the
error information and take recovery actions based on the guidelines. In this case error handling steps in the hyper-
visor are similar to those for the hosted VMM described above (where the hypervisor replaces the host OS actions).
The hypervisor is responsible for terminating the affected guest VM, if necessary.
In all cases, if a fatal error is detected the VMM error handler should log the error and reset the system. The VMM
error handler must ensure that guest VMs are not resumed after a fatal error is detected to ensure error contain-
ment is maintained.

33.4.3.4        MCA Virtualization
A more sophisticated approach for handling errors is to virtualize the MCA. This involves virtualizing the MCA hard-
ware and intercepting the MCA event in the VMM when a guest VM is interrupted by an MCA. After analyzing the

error, the VMM error handler may then decide to inject an MCE abort into the guest VM for attempted guest VM
error recovery. This would enable the guest OS the opportunity to take recovery actions specific to that guest.
For MCA virtualization, the VMM must provide the guest physical address for memory errors instead of the system
physical address when reporting the errors to the guest VM. To compute the guest physical address, the VMM
needs to maintain a reverse mapping of system physical page addresses to guest physical page addresses.
When the MCE is injected into the guest VM, the guest OS MCA handler would be invoked. The guest OS imple-
ments the MCA handling guidelines and it could potentially terminate the interrupted thread of execution within the
guest instead of terminating the VM. The guest OS may also disable use of the affected page by the guest. When
disabling the page the VMM error handler may handle the case where a page is shared by the VMM and a guest or
by two guests. In these cases the page use must be disabled in both contexts to ensure no subsequent consump-
tion errors are generated.

33.4.3.5    Implementation Considerations for the MCA Virtualization Model
MCA virtualization may be done in either hosted VMMs or hypervisor-based VMMs. The error handling flow is
similar to the flow described in the basic handling case. The major difference is that the recovery action includes
injecting the MCE abort into the guest VM to enable recovery by the guest OS when the MCA interrupts the execu-
tion of a guest VM.

33.5        HANDLING ACTIVITY STATES BY VMM
A VMM might place a logic processor in the wait-for-SIPI activity state if supporting certain guest operating system
using the multi-processor (MP) start-up algorithm. A guest with direct access to the physical local APIC and using
the MP start-up algorithm sends an INIT-SIPI-SIPI IPI sequence to start the application processor. In order to trap
the SIPIs, the VMM must start the logic processor which is the target of the SIPIs in wait-for-SIPI mode.

