                                                                                CHAPTER 34

This chapter describes aspects of IA-64 and IA-32 architecture used in system management mode (SMM).
SMM provides an alternate operating environment that can be used to monitor and manage various system
resources for more efficient energy usage, to control system hardware, and/or to run proprietary code. It was
introduced into the IA-32 architecture in the Intel386 SL processor (a mobile specialized version of the Intel386
processor). It is also available in the Pentium M, Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, P6 family, and Pentium and Intel486
processors (beginning with the enhanced versions of the Intel486 SL and Intel486 processors).

34.1       SYSTEM MANAGEMENT MODE OVERVIEW
SMM is a special-purpose operating mode provided for handling system-wide functions like power management,
system hardware control, or proprietary OEM-designed code. It is intended for use only by system firmware, not by
applications software or general-purpose systems software. The main benefit of SMM is that it offers a distinct and
easily isolated processor environment that operates transparently to the operating system or executive and soft-
ware applications.
When SMM is invoked through a system management interrupt (SMI), the processor saves the current state of the
processor (the processor’s context), then switches to a separate operating environment defined by a new address
space. The system management software executive (SMI handler) starts execution in that environment, and the
critical code and data of the SMI handler reside in a physical memory region (SMRAM) within that address space.
While in SMM, the processor executes SMI handler code to perform operations such as powering down unused disk
drives or monitors, executing proprietary code, or placing the whole system in a suspended state. When the SMI
handler has completed its operations, it executes a resume (RSM) instruction. This instruction causes the processor
to reload the saved context of the processor, switch back to protected or real mode, and resume executing the
interrupted application or operating-system program or task.
The following SMM mechanisms make it transparent to applications programs and operating systems:
•   The only way to enter SMM is by means of an SMI.
•   The processor executes SMM code in a separate address space that can be made inaccessible from the other
    operating modes.
•   Upon entering SMM, the processor saves the context of the interrupted program or task.
•   All interrupts normally handled by the operating system are disabled upon entry into SMM.
•   The RSM instruction can be executed only in SMM.
Section 34.3 describes transitions into and out of SMM. The execution environment after entering SMM is in real-
address mode with paging disabled (CR0.PE = CR0.PG = 0). In this initial execution environment, the SMI handler
can address up to 4 GBytes of memory and can execute all I/O and system instructions. Section 34.5 describes in
detail the initial SMM execution environment for an SMI handler and operation within that environment. The SMI
handler may subsequently switch to other operating modes while remaining in SMM.

                                                      NOTES
       Software developers should be aware that, even if a logical processor was using the physical-
       address extension (PAE) mechanism (introduced in the P6 family processors) or was in IA-32e
       mode before an SMI, this will not be the case after the SMI is delivered. This is because delivery of
       an SMI disables paging (see Table 34-4). (This does not apply if the dual-monitor treatment of SMIs
       and SMM is active; see Section 34.15.)

34.1.1      System Management Mode and VMX Operation
Traditionally, SMM services system management interrupts and then resumes program execution (back to the soft-
ware stack consisting of executive and application software; see Section 34.2 through Section 34.13).

A virtual machine monitor (VMM) using VMX can act as a host to multiple virtual machines and each virtual machine
can support its own software stack of executive and application software. On processors that support VMX, virtual-
machine extensions may use system-management interrupts (SMIs) and system-management mode (SMM) in one
of two ways:
•   Default treatment. System firmware handles SMIs. The processor saves architectural states and critical
    states relevant to VMX operation upon entering SMM. When the firmware completes servicing SMIs, it uses
    RSM to resume VMX operation.
•   Dual-monitor treatment. Two VM monitors collaborate to control the servicing of SMIs: one VMM operates
    outside of SMM to provide basic virtualization in support for guests; the other VMM operates inside SMM (while
    in VMX operation) to support system-management functions. The former is referred to as executive monitor,
    the latter SMM-transfer monitor (STM).1
The default treatment is described in Section 34.14, “Default Treatment of SMIs and SMM with VMX Operation and
SMX Operation”. Dual-monitor treatment of SMM is described in Section 34.15, “Dual-Monitor Treatment of SMIs
and SMM”.

34.2           SYSTEM MANAGEMENT INTERRUPT (SMI)
The only way to enter SMM is by signaling an SMI through the SMI# pin on the processor or through an SMI
message received through the APIC bus. The SMI is a nonmaskable external interrupt that operates independently
from the processor’s interrupt- and exception-handling mechanism and the local APIC. The SMI takes precedence
over an NMI and a maskable interrupt. SMM is non-reentrant; that is, the SMI is disabled while the processor is in
SMM.

                                                            NOTES
         In the Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, and P6 family processors, when a processor that is designated as an
         application processor during an MP initialization sequence is waiting for a startup IPI (SIPI), it is in
         a mode where SMIs are masked. However if a SMI is received while an application processor is in
         the wait for SIPI mode, the SMI will be pended. The processor then responds on receipt of a SIPI by
         immediately servicing the pended SMI and going into SMM before handling the SIPI.
         An SMI may be blocked for one instruction following execution of STI, MOV to SS, or POP into SS.

34.3           SWITCHING BETWEEN SMM AND THE OTHER
               PROCESSOR OPERATING MODES
Figure 2-3 shows how the processor moves between SMM and the other processor operating modes (protected,
real-address, and virtual-8086). Signaling an SMI while the processor is in real-address, protected, or virtual-8086
modes always causes the processor to switch to SMM. Upon execution of the RSM instruction, the processor always
returns to the mode it was in when the SMI occurred.

34.3.1         Entering SMM
The processor always handles an SMI on an architecturally defined “interruptible” point in program execution
(which is commonly at an IA-32 architecture instruction boundary). When the processor receives an SMI, it waits
for all instructions to retire and for all stores to complete. The processor then saves its current context in SMRAM
(see Section 34.4), enters SMM, and begins to execute the SMI handler.
Upon entering SMM, the processor signals external hardware that SMI handling has begun. The signaling mecha-
nism used is implementation dependent. For the P6 family processors, an SMI acknowledge transaction is gener-

1. The dual-monitor treatment may not be supported by all processors. Software should consult the VMX capability MSR
   IA32_VMX_BASIC (see Appendix A.1) to determine whether it is supported.

ated on the system bus and the multiplexed status signal EXF4 is asserted each time a bus transaction is generated
while the processor is in SMM. For the Pentium and Intel486 processors, the SMIACT# pin is asserted.
An SMI has a greater priority than debug exceptions and external interrupts. Thus, if an NMI, maskable hardware
interrupt, or a debug exception occurs at an instruction boundary along with an SMI, only the SMI is handled.
Subsequent SMI requests are not acknowledged while the processor is in SMM. The first SMI interrupt request that
occurs while the processor is in SMM (that is, after SMM has been acknowledged to external hardware) is latched
and serviced when the processor exits SMM with the RSM instruction. The processor will latch only one SMI while
in SMM.
See Section 34.5 for a detailed description of the execution environment when in SMM.

34.3.2      Exiting From SMM
The only way to exit SMM is to execute the RSM instruction. The RSM instruction is only available to the SMI
handler; if the processor is not in SMM, attempts to execute the RSM instruction result in an invalid-opcode excep-
tion (#UD) being generated.
The RSM instruction restores the processor’s context by loading the state save image from SMRAM back into the
processor’s registers. The processor then returns an SMIACK transaction on the system bus and returns program
control back to the interrupted program.
Upon successful completion of the RSM instruction, the processor signals external hardware that SMM has been
exited. For the P6 family processors, an SMI acknowledge transaction is generated on the system bus and the
multiplexed status signal EXF4 is no longer generated on bus cycles. For the Pentium and Intel486 processors, the
SMIACT# pin is deserted.
If the processor detects invalid state information saved in the SMRAM, it enters the shutdown state and generates
a special bus cycle to indicate it has entered shutdown state. Shutdown happens only in the following situations:
•   A reserved bit in control register CR4 is set to 1 on a write to CR4. This error should not happen unless SMI
    handler code modifies reserved areas of the SMRAM saved state map (see Section 34.4.1). CR4 is saved in the
    state map in a reserved location and cannot be read or modified in its saved state.
•   An illegal combination of bits is written to control register CR0, in particular PG set to 1 and PE set to 0, or NW
    set to 1 and CD set to 0.
•   CR4.PCIDE would be set to 1 and IA32_EFER.LMA to 0.
•   (For the Pentium and Intel486 processors only.) If the address stored in the SMBASE register when an RSM
    instruction is executed is not aligned on a 32-KByte boundary. This restriction does not apply to the P6 family
    processors.
In the shutdown state, Intel processors stop executing instructions until a RESET#, INIT# or NMI# is asserted.
While Pentium family processors recognize the SMI# signal in shutdown state, P6 family and Intel486 processors
do not. Intel does not support using SMI# to recover from shutdown states for any processor family; the response
of processors in this circumstance is not well defined. On Pentium 4 and later processors, shutdown will inhibit
INTR and A20M but will not change any of the other inhibits. On these processors, NMIs will be inhibited if no action
is taken in the SMI handler to uninhibit them (see Section 34.8).
If the processor is in the HALT state when the SMI is received, the processor handles the return from SMM slightly
differently (see Section 34.10). Also, the SMBASE address can be changed on a return from SMM (see Section
34.11).

34.4        SMRAM
Upon entering SMM, the processor switches to a new address space. Because paging is disabled upon entering
SMM, this initial address space maps all memory accesses to the low 4 GBytes of the processor's physical address
space. The SMI handler's critical code and data reside in a memory region referred to as system-management RAM
(SMRAM). The processor uses a pre-defined region within SMRAM to save the processor's pre-SMI context. SMRAM
can also be used to store system management information (such as the system configuration and specific informa-
tion about powered-down devices) and OEM-specific information.

The default SMRAM size is 64 KBytes beginning at a base physical address in physical memory called the SMBASE
(see Figure 34-1). The SMBASE default value following a hardware reset is 30000H. The processor looks for the
first instruction of the SMI handler at the address [SMBASE + 8000H]. It stores the processor’s state in the area
from [SMBASE + FE00H] to [SMBASE + FFFFH]. See Section 34.4.1 for a description of the mapping of the state
save area.
The system logic is minimally required to decode the physical address range for the SMRAM from [SMBASE +
8000H] to [SMBASE + FFFFH]. A larger area can be decoded if needed. The size of this SMRAM can be between 32
KBytes and 4 GBytes.
The location of the SMRAM can be changed by changing the SMBASE value (see Section 34.11). It should be noted
that all processors in a multiple-processor system are initialized with the same SMBASE value (30000H). Initializa-
tion software must sequentially place each processor in SMM and change its SMBASE so that it does not overlap
those of other processors.
The actual physical location of the SMRAM can be in system memory or in a separate RAM memory. The processor
generates an SMI acknowledge transaction (P6 family processors) or asserts the SMIACT# pin (Pentium and
Intel486 processors) when the processor receives an SMI (see Section 34.3.1).
System logic can use the SMI acknowledge transaction or the assertion of the SMIACT# pin to decode accesses to
the SMRAM and redirect them (if desired) to specific SMRAM memory. If a separate RAM memory is used for
SMRAM, system logic should provide a programmable method of mapping the SMRAM into system memory space
when the processor is not in SMM. This mechanism will enable start-up procedures to initialize the SMRAM space
(that is, load the SMI handler) before executing the SMI handler during SMM.

34.4.1         SMRAM State Save Map
When an IA-32 processor that does not support Intel 64 architecture initially enters SMM, it writes its state to the
state save area of the SMRAM. The state save area begins at [SMBASE + 8000H + 7FFFH] and extends down to
[SMBASE + 8000H + 7E00H]. Table 34-1 shows the state save map. The offset in column 1 is relative to the
SMBASE value plus 8000H. Reserved spaces should not be used by software.
Some of the registers in the SMRAM state save area (marked YES in column 3) may be read and changed by the
SMI handler, with the changed values restored to the processor registers by the RSM instruction. Some register
images are read-only, and must not be modified (modifying these registers will result in unpredictable behavior).
An SMI handler should not rely on any values stored in an area that is marked as reserved.

                                                               SMRAM
                            SMBASE + FFFFH
                                                        Start of State Save Area

                                                        SMI Handler Entry Point
                            SMBASE + 8000H

                                   SMBASE

                                             Figure 34-1. SMRAM Usage

                                                Table 34-1. SMRAM State Save Map
               Offset                                                  Register                               Writable?
    (Added to SMBASE + 8000H)
                7FFCH                                                    CR0                                     No
                7FF8H                                                    CR3                                     No
                7FF4H                                                  EFLAGS                                   Yes
                7FF0H                                                     EIP                                   Yes
                7FECH                                                     EDI                                   Yes
                7FE8H                                                     ESI                                   Yes
                7FE4H                                                    EBP                                    Yes
                7FE0H                                                     ESP                                   Yes
                7FDCH                                                    EBX                                    Yes
                7FD8H                                                    EDX                                    Yes
                7FD4H                                                    ECX                                    Yes
                7FD0H                                                    EAX                                    Yes
                7FCCH                                                    DR6                                     No
                7FC8H                                                    DR7                                     No
                                                                               1
                7FC4H                                                     TR                                     No
                7FC0H                                                  Reserved                                  No
                7FBCH                                                     GS1                                    No
                                                                            1
                7FB8H                                                     FS                                     No
                                                                               1
                7FB4H                                                     DS                                     No
                7FB0H                                                     SS1                                    No
                                                                            1
                7FACH                                                     CS                                     No
                                                                            1
                7FA8H                                                     ES                                     No
                7FA4H                                      I/O State Field, see Section 34.7                     No
                7FA0H                                 I/O Memory Address Field, see Section 34.7                 No
            7F9FH-7F03H                                                Reserved                                  No
                7F02H                                      Auto HALT Restart Field (Word)                       Yes
                7F00H                                     I/O Instruction Restart Field (Word)                  Yes
                7EFCH                                 SMM Revision Identifier Field (Doubleword)                 No
                7EF8H                                        SMBASE Field (Doubleword)                          Yes
           7EF7H - 7E00H                                               Reserved                                  No
    NOTE:
    1. The two most significant bytes are reserved.

The following registers are saved (but not readable) and restored upon exiting SMM:
•      Control register CR4. (This register is cleared to all 0s when entering SMM).
•      The hidden segment descriptor information stored in segment registers CS, DS, ES, FS, GS, and SS.
If an SMI request is issued for the purpose of powering down the processor, the values of all reserved locations in
the SMM state save must be saved to nonvolatile memory.
The following state is not automatically saved and restored following an SMI and the RSM instruction, respectively:

•   Debug registers DR0 through DR3.
•   The x87 FPU registers.
•   The MTRRs.
•   Control register CR2.
•   The model-specific registers (for the P6 family and Pentium processors) or test registers TR3 through TR7 (for
    the Pentium and Intel486 processors).
•   The state of the trap controller.
•   The machine-check architecture registers.
•   The APIC internal interrupt state (ISR, IRR, etc.).
•   The microcode update state.
If an SMI is used to power down the processor, a power-on reset will be required before returning to SMM, which
will reset much of this state back to its default values. So an SMI handler that is going to trigger power down should
first read these registers listed above directly, and save them (along with the rest of RAM) to nonvolatile storage.
After the power-on reset, the continuation of the SMI handler should restore these values, along with the rest of
the system's state. Anytime the SMI handler changes these registers in the processor, it must also save and restore
them.

                                                          NOTES
         A small subset of the MSRs (such as, the time-stamp counter and performance-monitoring
         counters) are not arbitrarily writable and therefore cannot be saved and restored. SMM-based
         power-down and restoration should only be performed with operating systems that do not use or
         rely on the values of these registers.
         Operating system developers should be aware of this fact and insure that their operating-system
         assisted power-down and restoration software is immune to unexpected changes in these register
         values.

34.4.1.1       SMRAM State Save Map and Intel 64 Architecture
When the processor initially enters SMM, it writes its state to the state save area of the SMRAM. The state save area
on an Intel 64 processor at [SMBASE + 8000H + 7FFFH] and extends to [SMBASE + 8000H + 7C00H].
Support for Intel 64 architecture is reported by CPUID.80000001:EDX[29] = 1. The layout of the SMRAM state save
map is shown in Table 34-3.
Additionally, the SMRAM state save map shown in Table 34-3 also applies to processors with the following CPUID
signatures listed in Table 34-2, irrespective of the value in CPUID.80000001:EDX[29].

                   Table 34-2. Processor Signatures and 64-bit SMRAM State Save Map Format
DisplayFamily_DisplayModel Processor Families/Processor Number Series
06_17H                       Intel Xeon Processor 5200, 5400 series, Intel Core 2 Quad processor Q9xxx, Intel Core 2 Duo
                             processors E8000, T9000,
06_0FH                       Intel Xeon Processor 3000, 3200, 5100, 5300, 7300 series, Intel Core 2 Quad, Intel Core 2 Extreme,
                             Intel Core 2 Duo processors, Intel Pentium dual-core processors
06_1CH                       45 nm Intel® Atom™ processors

                        Table 34-3. SMRAM State Save Map for Intel 64 Architecture
           Offset                                        Register                                Writable?
(Added to SMBASE + 8000H)
         7FF8H                                             CR0                                      No
         7FF0H                                             CR3                                      No
         7FE8H                                            RFLAGS                                   Yes
         7FE0H                                          IA32_EFER                                  Yes
         7FD8H                                              RIP                                    Yes
         7FD0H                                             DR6                                      No
         7FC8H                                             DR7                                      No
                                                                   1
         7FC4H                                           TR SEL                                     No
                                                                       1
         7FC0H                                          LDTR SEL                                    No
                                                                   1
         7FBCH                                            GS SEL                                    No
         7FB8H                                            FS SEL1                                   No
                                                                   1
         7FB4H                                            DS SEL                                    No
                                                                   1
         7FB0H                                            SS SEL                                    No
         7FACH                                            CS SEL1                                   No
                                                                  1
         7FA8H                                            ES SEL                                    No
         7FA4H                                            IO_MISC                                   No
         7F9CH                                        IO_MEM_ADDR                                   No
         7F94H                                              RDI                                    Yes
         7F8CH                                              RSI                                    Yes
         7F84H                                             RBP                                     Yes
         7F7CH                                              RSP                                    Yes
         7F74H                                             RBX                                     Yes
         7F6CH                                             RDX                                     Yes
         7F64H                                             RCX                                     Yes
         7F5CH                                             RAX                                     Yes
         7F54H                                              R8                                     Yes
         7F4CH                                              R9                                     Yes
         7F44H                                             R10                                     Yes
         7F3CH                                             R11                                     Yes
         7F34H                                             R12                                     Yes
         7F2CH                                             R13                                     Yes
         7F24H                                             R14                                     Yes
         7F1CH                                             R15                                     Yes
      7F1BH-7F04H                                        Reserved                                   No
         7F02H                                Auto HALT Restart Field (Word)                       Yes
         7F00H                              I/O Instruction Restart Field (Word)                   Yes
         7EFCH                           SMM Revision Identifier Field (Doubleword)                 No
         7EF8H                                  SMBASE Field (Doubleword)                          Yes

                            Table 34-3. SMRAM State Save Map for Intel 64 Architecture (Contd.)
               Offset                                                  Register                          Writable?
    (Added to SMBASE + 8000H)
           7EF7H - 7EE4H                                               Reserved                             No
                7EE0H                                 Setting of “enable EPT” VM-execution control          No
               7ED8H                                   Value of EPTP VM-execution control field             No
           7ED7H - 7EA0H                                               Reserved                             No
                7E9CH                                          LDT Base (lower 32 bits)                     No
                7E98H                                                  Reserved                             No
                7E94H                                           IDT Base (lower 32 bits)                    No
                7E90H                                                  Reserved                             No
                7E8CH                                          GDT Base (lower 32 bits)                     No
           7E8BH - 7E44H                                               Reserved                             No
                7E40H                                                     CR4                               No
           7E3FH - 7DF0H                                               Reserved                             No
               7DE8H                                                    IO_RIP                             Yes
           7DE7H - 7DDCH                                               Reserved                             No
               7DD8H                                            IDT Base (Upper 32 bits)                    No
               7DD4H                                           LDT Base (Upper 32 bits)                     No
               7DD0H                                           GDT Base (Upper 32 bits)                     No
           7DCFH - 7C00H                                               Reserved                             No
    NOTE:
    1. The two most significant bytes are reserved.

34.4.2          SMRAM Caching
An IA-32 processor does not automatically write back and invalidate its caches before entering SMM or before
exiting SMM. Because of this behavior, care must be taken in the placement of the SMRAM in system memory and
in the caching of the SMRAM to prevent cache incoherence when switching back and forth between SMM and
protected mode operation. Either of the following three methods of locating the SMRAM in system memory will
guarantee cache coherency:
•      Place the SRAM in a dedicated section of system memory that the operating system and applications are
       prevented from accessing. Here, the SRAM can be designated as cacheable (WB, WT, or WC) for optimum
       processor performance, without risking cache incoherence when entering or exiting SMM.
•      Place the SRAM in a section of memory that overlaps an area used by the operating system (such as the video
       memory), but designate the SMRAM as uncacheable (UC). This method prevents cache access when in SMM to
       maintain cache coherency, but the use of uncacheable memory reduces the performance of SMM code.
•      Place the SRAM in a section of system memory that overlaps an area used by the operating system and/or
       application code, but explicitly flush (write back and invalidate) the caches upon entering and exiting SMM
       mode. This method maintains cache coherency, but incurs the overhead of two complete cache flushes.
For Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, and P6 family processors, a combination of the first two methods of locating the SMRAM
is recommended. Here the SMRAM is split between an overlapping and a dedicated region of memory. Upon
entering SMM, the SMRAM space that is accessed overlaps video memory (typically located in low memory). This
SMRAM section is designated as UC memory. The initial SMM code then jumps to a second SMRAM section that is
located in a dedicated region of system memory (typically in high memory). This SMRAM section can be cached for
optimum processor performance.

For systems that explicitly flush the caches upon entering SMM (the third method described above), the cache flush
can be accomplished by asserting the FLUSH# pin at the same time as the request to enter SMM (generally initi-
ated by asserting the SMI# pin). The priorities of the FLUSH# and SMI# pins are such that the FLUSH# is serviced
first. To guarantee this behavior, the processor requires that the following constraints on the interaction of FLUSH#
and SMI# be met. In a system where the FLUSH# and SMI# pins are synchronous and the set up and hold times
are met, then the FLUSH# and SMI# pins may be asserted in the same clock. In asynchronous systems, the
FLUSH# pin must be asserted at least one clock before the SMI# pin to guarantee that the FLUSH# pin is serviced
first.
Upon leaving SMM (for systems that explicitly flush the caches), the WBINVD instruction should be executed prior
to leaving SMM to flush the caches.

                                                       NOTES
        In systems based on the Pentium processor that use the FLUSH# pin to write back and invalidate
        cache contents before entering SMM, the processor will prefetch at least one cache line in between
        when the Flush Acknowledge cycle is run and the subsequent recognition of SMI# and the assertion
        of SMIACT#.
        It is the obligation of the system to ensure that these lines are not cached by returning KEN#
        inactive to the Pentium processor.

34.4.2.1       System Management Range Registers (SMRR)
SMI handler code and data stored by SMM code resides in SMRAM. The SMRR interface is an enhancement in Intel
64 architecture to limit cacheable reference of addresses in SMRAM to code running in SMM. The SMRR interface
can be configured only by code running in SMM. Details of SMRR is described in Section 11.11.2.4.

34.5           SMI HANDLER EXECUTION ENVIRONMENT
Section 34.5.1 describes the initial execution environment for an SMI handler. An SMI handler may re-configure its
execution environment to other supported operating modes. Section 34.5.2 discusses modifications an SMI
handler can make to its execution environment.

34.5.1         Initial SMM Execution Environment
After saving the current context of the processor, the processor initializes its core registers to the values shown in
Table 34-4. Upon entering SMM, the PE and PG flags in control register CR0 are cleared, which places the processor
in an environment similar to real-address mode. The differences between the SMM execution environment and the
real-address mode execution environment are as follows:
•   The addressable address space ranges from 0 to FFFFFFFFH (4 GBytes).
•   The normal 64-KByte segment limit for real-address mode is increased to 4 GBytes.
•   The default operand and address sizes are set to 16 bits, which restricts the addressable SMRAM address space
    to the 1-MByte real-address mode limit for native real-address-mode code. However, operand-size and
    address-size override prefixes can be used to access the address space beyond the 1-MByte.

                                Table 34-4. Processor Register Initialization in SMM
 Register                                      Contents
 General-purpose registers                     Undefined
 EFLAGS                                        00000002H
 EIP                                           00008000H
 CS selector                                   SMM Base shifted right 4 bits (default 3000H)
 CS base                                       SMM Base (default 30000H)
 DS, ES, FS, GS, SS Selectors                  0000H

                               Table 34-4. Processor Register Initialization in SMM
 DS, ES, FS, GS, SS Bases                     000000000H
 DS, ES, FS, GS, SS Limits                    0FFFFFFFFH
 CR0                                          PE, EM, TS, and PG flags set to 0; others unmodified
 CR4                                          Cleared to zero
 DR6                                          Undefined
 DR7                                          00000400H

•   Near jumps and calls can be made to anywhere in the 4-GByte address space if a 32-bit operand-size override
    prefix is used. Due to the real-address-mode style of base-address formation, a far call or jump cannot transfer
    control to a segment with a base address of more than 20 bits (1 MByte). However, since the segment limit in
    SMM is 4 GBytes, offsets into a segment that go beyond the 1-MByte limit are allowed when using 32-bit
    operand-size override prefixes. Any program control transfer that does not have a 32-bit operand-size override
    prefix truncates the EIP value to the 16 low-order bits.
•   Data and the stack can be located anywhere in the 4-GByte address space, but can be accessed only with a 32-
    bit address-size override if they are located above 1 MByte. As with the code segment, the base address for a
    data or stack segment cannot be more than 20 bits.
The value in segment register CS is automatically set to the default of 30000H for the SMBASE shifted 4 bits to the
right; that is, 3000H. The EIP register is set to 8000H. When the EIP value is added to shifted CS value (the
SMBASE), the resulting linear address points to the first instruction of the SMI handler.
The other segment registers (DS, SS, ES, FS, and GS) are cleared to 0 and their segment limits are set to 4 GBytes.
In this state, the SMRAM address space may be treated as a single flat 4-GByte linear address space. If a segment
register is loaded with a 16-bit value, that value is then shifted left by 4 bits and loaded into the segment base
(hidden part of the segment register). The limits and attributes are not modified.
Maskable hardware interrupts, exceptions, NMI interrupts, SMI interrupts, A20M interrupts, single-step traps,
breakpoint traps, and INIT operations are inhibited when the processor enters SMM. Maskable hardware interrupts,
exceptions, single-step traps, and breakpoint traps can be enabled in SMM if the SMM execution environment
provides and initializes an interrupt table and the necessary interrupt and exception handlers (see Section 34.6).

34.5.2          SMI Handler Operating Mode Switching
Within SMM, an SMI handler may change the processor's operating mode (e.g., to enable PAE paging, enter 64-bit
mode, etc.) after it has made proper preparation and initialization to do so. For example, if switching to 32-bit
protected mode, the SMI handler should follow the guidelines provided in Chapter 9, “Processor Management and
Initialization”. If the SMI handler does wish to change operating mode, it is responsible for executing the appro-
priate mode-transition code after each SMI.
It is recommended that the SMI handler make use of all means available to protect the integrity of its critical code
and data. In particular, it should use the system-management range register (SMRR) interface if it is available (see
Section 11.11.2.4). The SMRR interface can protect only the first 4 GBytes of the physical address space. The SMI
handler should take that fact into account if it uses operating modes that allow access to physical addresses beyond
that 4-GByte limit (e.g. PAE paging or 64-bit mode).
Execution of the RSM instruction restores the pre-SMI processor state from the SMRAM state-state map (see
Section 34.4.1) into which it was stored when the processor entered SMM. (The SMBASE field in the SMRAM state-
save map does not determine the state following RSM but rather the initial environment following the next entry to
SMM.) Any required change to operating mode is performed by the RSM instruction; there is no need for the SMI
handler to change modes explicitly prior to executing RSM.

34.6            EXCEPTIONS AND INTERRUPTS WITHIN SMM
When the processor enters SMM, all hardware interrupts are disabled in the following manner:

•   The IF flag in the EFLAGS register is cleared, which inhibits maskable hardware interrupts from being
    generated.
•   The TF flag in the EFLAGS register is cleared, which disables single-step traps.
•   Debug register DR7 is cleared, which disables breakpoint traps. (This action prevents a debugger from acciden-
    tally breaking into an SMI handler if a debug breakpoint is set in normal address space that overlays code or
    data in SMRAM.)
•   NMI, SMI, and A20M interrupts are blocked by internal SMM logic. (See Section 34.8 for more information
    about how NMIs are handled in SMM.)
Software-invoked interrupts and exceptions can still occur, and maskable hardware interrupts can be enabled by
setting the IF flag. Intel recommends that SMM code be written in so that it does not invoke software interrupts
(with the INT n, INTO, INT 3, or BOUND instructions) or generate exceptions.
If the SMI handler requires interrupt and exception handling, an SMM interrupt table and the necessary exception
and interrupt handlers must be created and initialized from within SMM. Until the interrupt table is correctly initial-
ized (using the LIDT instruction), exceptions and software interrupts will result in unpredictable processor
behavior.
The following restrictions apply when designing SMM interrupt and exception-handling facilities:
•   The interrupt table should be located at linear address 0 and must contain real-address mode style interrupt
    vectors (4 bytes containing CS and IP).
•   Due to the real-address mode style of base address formation, an interrupt or exception cannot transfer control
    to a segment with a base address of more that 20 bits.
•   An interrupt or exception cannot transfer control to a segment offset of more than 16 bits (64 KBytes).
•   When an exception or interrupt occurs, only the 16 least-significant bits of the return address (EIP) are pushed
    onto the stack. If the offset of the interrupted procedure is greater than 64 KBytes, it is not possible for the
    interrupt/exception handler to return control to that procedure. (One solution to this problem is for a handler
    to adjust the return address on the stack.)
•   The SMBASE relocation feature affects the way the processor will return from an interrupt or exception
    generated while the SMI handler is executing. For example, if the SMBASE is relocated to above 1 MByte, but
    the exception handlers are below 1 MByte, a normal return to the SMI handler is not possible. One solution is
    to provide the exception handler with a mechanism for calculating a return address above 1 MByte from the 16-
    bit return address on the stack, then use a 32-bit far call to return to the interrupted procedure.
•   If an SMI handler needs access to the debug trap facilities, it must insure that an SMM accessible debug handler
    is available and save the current contents of debug registers DR0 through DR3 (for later restoration). Debug
    registers DR0 through DR3 and DR7 must then be initialized with the appropriate values.
•   If an SMI handler needs access to the single-step mechanism, it must insure that an SMM accessible single-
    step handler is available, and then set the TF flag in the EFLAGS register.
•   If the SMI design requires the processor to respond to maskable hardware interrupts or software-generated
    interrupts while in SMM, it must ensure that SMM accessible interrupt handlers are available and then set the
    IF flag in the EFLAGS register (using the STI instruction). Software interrupts are not blocked upon entry to
    SMM, so they do not need to be enabled.

34.7        MANAGING SYNCHRONOUS AND ASYNCHRONOUS
            SYSTEM MANAGEMENT INTERRUPTS
When coding for a multiprocessor system or a system with Intel HT Technology, it was not always possible for an
SMI handler to distinguish between a synchronous SMI (triggered during an I/O instruction) and an asynchronous
SMI. To facilitate the discrimination of these two events, incremental state information has been added to the SMM
state save map.
Processors that have an SMM revision ID of 30004H or higher have the incremental state information described
below.

34.7.1           I/O State Implementation
Within the extended SMM state save map, a bit (IO_SMI) is provided that is set only when an SMI is either taken
immediately after a successful I/O instruction or is taken after a successful iteration of a REP I/O instruction (the
successful notion pertains to the processor point of view; not necessarily to the corresponding platform function).
When set, the IO_SMI bit provides a strong indication that the corresponding SMI was synchronous. In this case,
the SMM State Save Map also supplies the port address of the I/O operation. The IO_SMI bit and the I/O Port
Address may be used in conjunction with the information logged by the platform to confirm that the SMI was
indeed synchronous.
The IO_SMI bit by itself is a strong indication, not a guarantee, that the SMI is synchronous. This is because an
asynchronous SMI might coincidentally be taken after an I/O instruction. In such a case, the IO_SMI bit would still
be set in the SMM state save map.
Information characterizing the I/O instruction is saved in two locations in the SMM State Save Map (Table 34-5).
The IO_SMI bit also serves as a valid bit for the rest of the I/O information fields. The contents of these I/O infor-
mation fields are not defined when the IO_SMI bit is not set.

                               Table 34-5. I/O Instruction Information in the SMM State Save Map
    State (SMM Rev. ID: 30004H or higher)          Format
                                                   31       16              15     8              7   4              3   1                0
    I/0 State Field
                                                                 I/O Port

                                                                                       Reserved

                                                                                                          I/O Type

                                                                                                                             I/O Length

                                                                                                                                              IO_SMI
    SMRAM offset 7FA4

                                                   31                                                                                     0
    I/O Memory Address Field                       I/O Memory Address
    SMRAM offset 7FA0

When IO_SMI is set, the other fields may be interpreted as follows:
•      I/O length:
            •   001 – Byte
            •   010 – Word
            •   100 – Dword
•      I/O instruction type (Table 34-6)

                                          Table 34-6. I/O Instruction Type Encodings
 Instruction                                                                Encoding
 IN Immediate                                                               1001
 IN DX                                                                      0001
 OUT Immediate                                                              1000
 OUT DX                                                                     0000
 INS                                                                        0011
 OUTS                                                                       0010
 REP INS                                                                    0111
 REP OUTS                                                                   0110

34.8        NMI HANDLING WHILE IN SMM
NMI interrupts are blocked upon entry to the SMI handler. If an NMI request occurs during the SMI handler, it is
latched and serviced after the processor exits SMM. Only one NMI request will be latched during the SMI handler.
If an NMI request is pending when the processor executes the RSM instruction, the NMI is serviced before the next
instruction of the interrupted code sequence. This assumes that NMIs were not blocked before the SMI occurred. If
NMIs were blocked before the SMI occurred, they are blocked after execution of RSM.
Although NMI requests are blocked when the processor enters SMM, they may be enabled through software by
executing an IRET instruction. If the SMI handler requires the use of NMI interrupts, it should invoke a dummy
interrupt service routine for the purpose of executing an IRET instruction. Once an IRET instruction is executed,
NMI interrupt requests are serviced in the same “real mode” manner in which they are handled outside of SMM.
A special case can occur if an SMI handler nests inside an NMI handler and then another NMI occurs. During NMI
interrupt handling, NMI interrupts are disabled, so normally NMI interrupts are serviced and completed with an
IRET instruction one at a time. When the processor enters SMM while executing an NMI handler, the processor
saves the SMRAM state save map but does not save the attribute to keep NMI interrupts disabled. Potentially, an
NMI could be latched (while in SMM or upon exit) and serviced upon exit of SMM even though the previous NMI
handler has still not completed. One or more NMIs could thus be nested inside the first NMI handler. The NMI inter-
rupt handler should take this possibility into consideration.
Also, for the Pentium processor, exceptions that invoke a trap or fault handler will enable NMI interrupts from inside
of SMM. This behavior is implementation specific for the Pentium processor and is not part of the IA-32 architec-
ture.

34.9        SMM REVISION IDENTIFIER
The SMM revision identifier field is used to indicate the version of SMM and the SMM extensions that are supported
by the processor (see Figure 34-2). The SMM revision identifier is written during SMM entry and can be examined
in SMRAM space at offset 7EFCH. The lower word of the SMM revision identifier refers to the version of the base
SMM architecture.

                          Register Offset
                          7EFCH
                          31                             18 17 16 15                             0
                                         Reserved                      SMM Revision Identifier

                               SMBASE Relocation
                               I/O Instruction Restart

                                            Figure 34-2. SMM Revision Identifier

The upper word of the SMM revision identifier refers to the extensions available. If the I/O instruction restart flag
(bit 16) is set, the processor supports the I/O instruction restart (see Section 34.12); if the SMBASE relocation flag
(bit 17) is set, SMRAM base address relocation is supported (see Section 34.11).

34.10       AUTO HALT RESTART
If the processor is in a HALT state (due to the prior execution of a HLT instruction) when it receives an SMI, the
processor records the fact in the auto HALT restart flag in the saved processor state (see Figure 34-3). (This flag is
located at offset 7F02H and bit 0 in the state save area of the SMRAM.)
If the processor sets the auto HALT restart flag upon entering SMM (indicating that the SMI occurred when the
processor was in the HALT state), the SMI handler has two options:

•       It can leave the auto HALT restart flag set, which instructs the RSM instruction to return program control to the
        HLT instruction. This option in effect causes the processor to re-enter the HALT state after handling the SMI.
        (This is the default operation.)
•       It can clear the auto HALT restart flag, which instructs the RSM instruction to return program control to the
        instruction following the HLT instruction.

                                        15                                1 0
                                                                                Register Offset
                                                   Reserved
                                                                                7F02H

                                                      Auto HALT Restart

                                             Figure 34-3. Auto HALT Restart Field

These options are summarized in Table 34-7. If the processor was not in a HALT state when the SMI was received
(the auto HALT restart flag is cleared), setting the flag to 1 will cause unpredictable behavior when the RSM instruc-
tion is executed.

                                        Table 34-7. Auto HALT Restart Flag Values
    Value of Flag After   Value of Flag When       Action of Processor When Exiting SMM
    Entry to SMM          Exiting SMM
    0                     0                        Returns to next instruction in interrupted program or task.
    0                     1                        Unpredictable.
    1                     0                        Returns to next instruction after HLT instruction.
    1                     1                        Returns to HALT state.

If the HLT instruction is restarted, the processor will generate a memory access to fetch the HLT instruction (if it is
not in the internal cache), and execute a HLT bus transaction. This behavior results in multiple HLT bus transactions
for the same HLT instruction.

34.10.1 Executing the HLT Instruction in SMM
The HLT instruction should not be executed during SMM, unless interrupts have been enabled by setting the IF flag
in the EFLAGS register. If the processor is halted in SMM, the only event that can remove the processor from this
state is a maskable hardware interrupt or a hardware reset.

34.11           SMBASE RELOCATION
The default base address for the SMRAM is 30000H. This value is contained in an internal processor register called
the SMBASE register. The operating system or executive can relocate the SMRAM by setting the SMBASE field in the
saved state map (at offset 7EF8H) to a new value (see Figure 34-4). The RSM instruction reloads the internal
SMBASE register with the value in the SMBASE field each time it exits SMM. All subsequent SMI requests will use
the new SMBASE value to find the starting address for the SMI handler (at SMBASE + 8000H) and the SMRAM state
save area (from SMBASE + FE00H to SMBASE + FFFFH). (The processor resets the value in its internal SMBASE
register to 30000H on a RESET, but does not change it on an INIT.)

                      31                                                                          0
                                                                                                      Register Offset
                                                    SMM Base
                                                                                                      7EF8H

                                          Figure 34-4. SMBASE Relocation Field

In multiple-processor systems, initialization software must adjust the SMBASE value for each processor so that the
SMRAM state save areas for each processor do not overlap. (For Pentium and Intel486 processors, the SMBASE
values must be aligned on a 32-KByte boundary or the processor will enter shutdown state during the execution of
a RSM instruction.)
If the SMBASE relocation flag in the SMM revision identifier field is set, it indicates the ability to relocate the
SMBASE (see Section 34.9).

34.12       I/O INSTRUCTION RESTART
If the I/O instruction restart flag in the SMM revision identifier field is set (see Section 34.9), the I/O instruction
restart mechanism is present on the processor. This mechanism allows an interrupted I/O instruction to be re-
executed upon returning from SMM mode. For example, if an I/O instruction is used to access a powered-down I/O
device, a chip set supporting this device can intercept the access and respond by asserting SMI#. This action
invokes the SMI handler to power-up the device. Upon returning from the SMI handler, the I/O instruction restart
mechanism can be used to re-execute the I/O instruction that caused the SMI.
The I/O instruction restart field (at offset 7F00H in the SMM state-save area, see Figure 34-5) controls I/O instruc-
tion restart. When an RSM instruction is executed, if this field contains the value FFH, then the EIP register is modi-
fied to point to the I/O instruction that received the SMI request. The processor will then automatically re-execute
the I/O instruction that the SMI trapped. (The processor saves the necessary machine state to insure that re-
execution of the instruction is handled coherently.)

                                     15                                     0
                                            I/O Instruction Restart Field       Register Offset
                                                                                7F00H

                                      Figure 34-5. I/O Instruction Restart Field

If the I/O instruction restart field contains the value 00H when the RSM instruction is executed, then the processor
begins program execution with the instruction following the I/O instruction. (When a repeat prefix is being used,
the next instruction may be the next I/O instruction in the repeat loop.) Not re-executing the interrupted I/O
instruction is the default behavior; the processor automatically initializes the I/O instruction restart field to 00H
upon entering SMM. Table 34-8 summarizes the states of the I/O instruction restart field.

                                   Table 34-8. I/O Instruction Restart Field Values
Value of Flag After          Value of Flag When                  Action of Processor When Exiting SMM
Entry to SMM                 Exiting SMM
00H                          00H                                 Does not re-execute trapped I/O instruction.
00H                          FFH                                 Re-executes trapped I/O instruction.

The I/O instruction restart mechanism does not indicate the cause of the SMI. It is the responsibility of the SMI
handler to examine the state of the processor to determine the cause of the SMI and to determine if an I/O instruc-
tion was interrupted and should be restarted upon exiting SMM. If an SMI interrupt is signaled on a non-I/O
instruction boundary, setting the I/O instruction restart field to FFH prior to executing the RSM instruction will likely
result in a program error.

34.12.1 Back-to-Back SMI Interrupts When I/O Instruction Restart Is Being Used
If an SMI interrupt is signaled while the processor is servicing an SMI interrupt that occurred on an I/O instruction
boundary, the processor will service the new SMI request before restarting the originally interrupted I/O instruc-
tion. If the I/O instruction restart field is set to FFH prior to returning from the second SMI handler, the EIP will point
to an address different from the originally interrupted I/O instruction, which will likely lead to a program error. To
avoid this situation, the SMI handler must be able to recognize the occurrence of back-to-back SMI interrupts when
I/O instruction restart is being used and insure that the handler sets the I/O instruction restart field to 00H prior to
returning from the second invocation of the SMI handler.

34.13           SMM MULTIPLE-PROCESSOR CONSIDERATIONS
The following should be noted when designing multiple-processor systems:
•   Any processor in a multiprocessor system can respond to an SMM.
•   Each processor needs its own SMRAM space. This space can be in system memory or in a separate RAM.
•   The SMRAMs for different processors can be overlapped in the same memory space. The only stipulation is that
    each processor needs its own state save area and its own dynamic data storage area. (Also, for the Pentium
    and Intel486 processors, the SMBASE address must be located on a 32-KByte boundary.) Code and static data
    can be shared among processors. Overlapping SMRAM spaces can be done more efficiently with the P6 family
    processors because they do not require that the SMBASE address be on a 32-KByte boundary.
•   The SMI handler will need to initialize the SMBASE for each processor.
•   Processors can respond to local SMIs through their SMI# pins or to SMIs received through the APIC interface.
    The APIC interface can distribute SMIs to different processors.
•   Two or more processors can be executing in SMM at the same time.
•   When operating Pentium processors in dual processing (DP) mode, the SMIACT# pin is driven only by the MRM
    processor and should be sampled with ADS#. For additional details, see Chapter 14 of the Pentium Processor
    Family User’s Manual, Volume 1.
SMM is not re-entrant, because the SMRAM State Save Map is fixed relative to the SMBASE. If there is a need to
support two or more processors in SMM mode at the same time then each processor should have dedicated SMRAM
spaces. This can be done by using the SMBASE Relocation feature (see Section 34.11).

34.14           DEFAULT TREATMENT OF SMIS AND SMM WITH VMX OPERATION AND
                SMX OPERATION
Under the default treatment, the interactions of SMIs and SMM with VMX operation are few. This section details
those interactions. It also explains how this treatment affects SMX operation.

34.14.1 Default Treatment of SMI Delivery
Ordinary SMI delivery saves processor state into SMRAM and then loads state based on architectural definitions.
Under the default treatment, processors that support VMX operation perform SMI delivery as follows:

enter SMM;
save the following internal to the processor:
    CR4.VMXE
    an indication of whether the logical processor was in VMX operation (root or non-root)
IF the logical processor is in VMX operation
    THEN
         save current VMCS pointer internal to the processor;
         leave VMX operation;
         save VMX-critical state defined below;

FI;
IF the logical processor supports SMX operation
    THEN
         save internal to the logical processor an indication of whether the Intel® TXT private space is locked;
         IF the TXT private space is unlocked
               THEN lock the TXT private space;
         FI;
FI;
CR4.VMXE ← 0;
perform ordinary SMI delivery:
    save processor state in SMRAM;
    set processor state to standard SMM values;1
    invalidate linear mappings and combined mappings associated with VPID 0000H (for all PCIDs); combined mappings for VPID 0000H
are invalidated for all EP4TA values (EP4TA is the value of bits 51:12 of EPTP; see Section 28.3);
The pseudocode above makes reference to the saving of VMX-critical state. This state consists of the following:
(1) SS.DPL (the current privilege level); (2) RFLAGS.VM2; (3) the state of blocking by STI and by MOV SS (see
Table 24-3 in Section 24.4.2); (4) the state of virtual-NMI blocking (only if the processor is in VMX non-root oper-
ation and the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control is 1); and (5) an indication of whether an MTF VM exit is pending
(see Section 25.5.2). These data may be saved internal to the processor or in the VMCS region of the current
VMCS. Processors that do not support SMI recognition while there is blocking by STI or by MOV SS need not save
the state of such blocking.
If the logical processor supports the 1-setting of the “enable EPT” VM-execution control and the logical processor
was in VMX non-root operation at the time of an SMI, it saves the value of that control into bit 0 of the 32-bit field
at offset SMBASE + 8000H + 7EE0H (SMBASE + FEE0H; see Table 34-3).3 If the logical processor was not in VMX
non-root operation at the time of the SMI, it saves 0 into that bit. If the logical processor saves 1 into that bit (it
was in VMX non-root operation and the “enable EPT” VM-execution control was 1), it saves the value of the EPT
pointer (EPTP) into the 64-bit field at offset SMBASE + 8000H + 7ED8H (SMBASE + FED8H).
Because SMI delivery causes a logical processor to leave VMX operation, all the controls associated with VMX non-
root operation are disabled in SMM and thus cannot cause VM exits while the logical processor in SMM.

34.14.2 Default Treatment of RSM
Ordinary execution of RSM restores processor state from SMRAM. Under the default treatment, processors that
support VMX operation perform RSM as follows:

IF VMXE = 1 in CR4 image in SMRAM
    THEN fail and enter shutdown state;
    ELSE
          restore state normally from SMRAM;
          invalidate linear mappings and combined mappings associated with all VPIDs and all PCIDs; combined mappings are invalidated
for all EP4TA values (EP4TA is the value of bits 51:12 of EPTP; see Section 28.3);
          IF the logical processor supports SMX operation andthe Intel® TXT private space was unlocked at the time of the last SMI (as
saved)
               THEN unlock the TXT private space;
          FI;
          CR4.VMXE ← value stored internally;

1. This causes the logical processor to block INIT signals, NMIs, and SMIs.
2. Section 34.14 and Section 34.15 use the notation RAX, RIP, RSP, RFLAGS, etc. for processor registers because most processors that
   support VMX operation also support Intel 64 architecture. For processors that do not support Intel 64 architecture, this notation
   refers to the 32-bit forms of these registers (EAX, EIP, ESP, EFLAGS, etc.). In a few places, notation such as EAX is used to refer spe-
   cifically to the lower 32 bits of the register.
3. “Enable EPT” is a secondary processor-based VM-execution control. If bit 31 of the primary processor-based VM-execution controls
   is 0, SMI functions as the “enable EPT” VM-execution control were 0. See Section 24.6.2.

         IF internal storage indicates that the logical processor
         had been in VMX operation (root or non-root)
               THEN
                    enter VMX operation (root or non-root);
                    restore VMX-critical state as defined in Section 34.14.1;
                    set to their fixed values any bits in CR0 and CR4 whose values must be fixed in VMX operation (see Section 23.8);1
                    IF RFLAGS.VM = 0 AND (in VMX root operation OR the “unrestricted guest” VM-execution control is 0)2
                         THEN
                              CS.RPL ← SS.DPL;
                              SS.RPL ← SS.DPL;
                    FI;
                    restore current VMCS pointer;
         FI;
         leave SMM;
         IF logical processor will be in VMX operation or in SMX operation after RSM
               THEN block A20M and leave A20M mode;
         FI;
FI;
RSM unblocks SMIs. It restores the state of blocking by NMI (see Table 24-3 in Section 24.4.2) as follows:
•     If the RSM is not to VMX non-root operation or if the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control will be 0, the state of
      NMI blocking is restored normally.
•     If the RSM is to VMX non-root operation and the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control will be 1, NMIs are not
      blocked after RSM. The state of virtual-NMI blocking is restored as part of VMX-critical state.
INIT signals are blocked after RSM if and only if the logical processor will be in VMX root operation.
If RSM returns a logical processor to VMX non-root operation, it re-establishes the controls associated with the
current VMCS. If the “interrupt-window exiting” VM-execution control is 1, a VM exit occurs immediately after RSM
if the enabling conditions apply. The same is true for the “NMI-window exiting” VM-execution control. Such
VM exits occur with their normal priority. See Section 25.2.
If an MTF VM exit was pending at the time of the previous SMI, an MTF VM exit is pending on the instruction
boundary following execution of RSM. The following items detail the treatment of MTF VM exits that may be
pending following RSM:
•     System-management interrupts (SMIs), INIT signals, and higher priority events take priority over these MTF
      VM exits. These MTF VM exits take priority over debug-trap exceptions and lower priority events.
•     These MTF VM exits wake the logical processor if RSM caused the logical processor to enter the HLT state (see
      Section 34.10). They do not occur if the logical processor just entered the shutdown state.

34.14.3 Protection of CR4.VMXE in SMM
Under the default treatment, CR4.VMXE is treated as a reserved bit while a logical processor is in SMM. Any
attempt by software running in SMM to set this bit causes a general-protection exception. In addition, software
cannot use VMX instructions or enter VMX operation while in SMM.

34.14.4 VMXOFF and SMI Unblocking
The VMXOFF instruction can be executed only with the default treatment (see Section 34.15.1) and only outside
SMM. If SMIs are blocked when VMXOFF is executed, VMXOFF unblocks them unless

1. If the RSM is to VMX non-root operation and both the “unrestricted guest” VM-execution control and bit 31 of the primary proces-
   sor-based VM-execution controls will be 1, CR0.PE and CR0.PG retain the values that were loaded from SMRAM regardless of what is
   reported in the capability MSR IA32_VMX_CR0_FIXED0.
2. “Unrestricted guest” is a secondary processor-based VM-execution control. If bit 31 of the primary processor-based VM-execution
   controls is 0, VM entry functions as if the “unrestricted guest” VM-execution control were 0. See Section 24.6.2.

IA32_SMM_MONITOR_CTL[bit 2] is 1 (see Section 34.15.5 for details regarding this MSR).1 Section 34.15.7 iden-
tifies a case in which SMIs may be blocked when VMXOFF is executed.
Not all processors allow this bit to be set to 1. Software should consult the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_MISC
(see Appendix A.6) to determine whether this is allowed.

34.15        DUAL-MONITOR TREATMENT OF SMIs AND SMM
Dual-monitor treatment is activated through the cooperation of the executive monitor (the VMM that operates
outside of SMM to provide basic virtualization) and the SMM-transfer monitor (STM; the VMM that operates
inside SMM—while in VMX operation—to support system-management functions). Control is transferred to the STM
through VM exits; VM entries are used to return from SMM.
The dual-monitor treatment may not be supported by all processors. Software should consult the VMX capability
MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC (see Appendix A.1) to determine whether it is supported.

34.15.1 Dual-Monitor Treatment Overview
The dual-monitor treatment uses an executive monitor and an SMM-transfer monitor (STM). Transitions from the
executive monitor or its guests to the STM are called SMM VM exits and are discussed in Section 34.15.2. SMM
VM exits are caused by SMIs as well as executions of VMCALL in VMX root operation. The latter allow the executive
monitor to call the STM for service.
The STM runs in VMX root operation and uses VMX instructions to establish a VMCS and perform VM entries to its
own guests. This is done all inside SMM (see Section 34.15.3). The STM returns from SMM, not by using the RSM
instruction, but by using a VM entry that returns from SMM. Such VM entries are described in Section 34.15.4.
Initially, there is no STM and the default treatment (Section 34.14) is used. The dual-monitor treatment is not used
until it is enabled and activated. The steps to do this are described in Section 34.15.5 and Section 34.15.6.
It is not possible to leave VMX operation under the dual-monitor treatment; VMXOFF will fail if executed. The dual-
monitor treatment must be deactivated first. The STM deactivates dual-monitor treatment using a VM entry that
returns from SMM with the “deactivate dual-monitor treatment” VM-entry control set to 1 (see Section 34.15.7).
The executive monitor configures any VMCS that it uses for VM exits to the executive monitor. SMM VM exits, which
transfer control to the STM, use a different VMCS. Under the dual-monitor treatment, each logical processor uses
a separate VMCS called the SMM-transfer VMCS. When the dual-monitor treatment is active, the logical
processor maintains another VMCS pointer called the SMM-transfer VMCS pointer. The SMM-transfer VMCS
pointer is established when the dual-monitor treatment is activated.

34.15.2 SMM VM Exits
An SMM VM exit is a VM exit that begins outside SMM and that ends in SMM.
Unlike other VM exits, SMM VM exits can begin in VMX root operation. SMM VM exits result from the arrival of an
SMI outside SMM or from execution of VMCALL in VMX root operation outside SMM. Execution of VMCALL in VMX
root operation causes an SMM VM exit only if the valid bit is set in the IA32_SMM_MONITOR_CTL MSR (see Section
34.15.5).
Execution of VMCALL in VMX root operation causes an SMM VM exit even under the default treatment. This SMM
VM exit activates the dual-monitor treatment (see Section 34.15.6).
Differences between SMM VM exits and other VM exits are detailed in Sections 34.15.2.1 through 34.15.2.5.
Differences between SMM VM exits that activate the dual-monitor treatment and other SMM VM exits are described
in Section 34.15.6.

1. Setting IA32_SMM_MONITOR_CTL[bit 2] to 1 prevents VMXOFF from unblocking SMIs regardless of the value of the register’s valid
   bit (bit 0).

34.15.2.1 Architectural State Before a VM Exit
System-management interrupts (SMIs) that cause SMM VM exits always do so directly. They do not save state to
SMRAM as they do under the default treatment.

34.15.2.2 Updating the Current-VMCS and Executive-VMCS Pointers
SMM VM exits begin by performing the following steps:
1. The executive-VMCS pointer field in the SMM-transfer VMCS is loaded as follows:
        — If the SMM VM exit commenced in VMX non-root operation, it receives the current-VMCS pointer.
        — If the SMM VM exit commenced in VMX root operation, it receives the VMXON pointer.
2. The current-VMCS pointer is loaded with the value of the SMM-transfer VMCS pointer.
The last step ensures that the current VMCS is the SMM-transfer VMCS. VM-exit information is recorded in that
VMCS, and VM-entry control fields in that VMCS are updated. State is saved into the guest-state area of that VMCS.
The VM-exit controls and host-state area of that VMCS determine how the VM exit operates.

34.15.2.3 Recording VM-Exit Information
SMM VM exits differ from other VM exit with regard to the way they record VM-exit information. The differences
follow.
•       Exit reason.
        — Bits 15:0 of this field contain the basic exit reason. The field is loaded with the reason for the SMM VM exit:
          I/O SMI (an SMI arrived immediately after retirement of an I/O instruction), other SMI, or VMCALL. See
          Appendix C, “VMX Basic Exit Reasons”.
        — SMM VM exits are the only VM exits that may occur in VMX root operation. Because the SMM-transfer
          monitor may need to know whether it was invoked from VMX root or VMX non-root operation, this
          information is stored in bit 29 of the exit-reason field (see Table 24-14 in Section 24.9.1). The bit is set by
          SMM VM exits from VMX root operation.
        — If the SMM VM exit occurred in VMX non-root operation and an MTF VM exit was pending, bit 28 of the exit-
          reason field is set; otherwise, it is cleared.
        — Bits 27:16 and bits 31:30 are cleared.
•       Exit qualification. For an SMM VM exit due an SMI that arrives immediately after the retirement of an I/O
        instruction, the exit qualification contains information about the I/O instruction that retired immediately before
        the SMI. It has the format given in Table 34-9.

        Table 34-9. Exit Qualification for SMIs That Arrive Immediately After the Retirement of an I/O Instruction

    Bit Position(s)      Contents

    2:0                  Size of access:
                           0 = 1-byte
                           1 = 2-byte
                           3 = 4-byte

                         Other values not used.

    3                    Direction of the attempted access (0 = OUT, 1 = IN)

    4                    String instruction (0 = not string; 1 = string)

    5                    REP prefixed (0 = not REP; 1 = REP)

    6                    Operand encoding (0 = DX, 1 = immediate)

Table 34-9. Exit Qualification for SMIs That Arrive Immediately After the Retirement of an I/O Instruction (Contd.)

    Bit Position(s)    Contents

    15:7               Reserved (cleared to 0)

    31:16              Port number (as specified in the I/O instruction)

    63:32              Reserved (cleared to 0). These bits exist only on processors
                       that support Intel 64 architecture.

•     Guest linear address. This field is used for VM exits due to SMIs that arrive immediately after the retirement
      of an INS or OUTS instruction for which the relevant segment (ES for INS; DS for OUTS unless overridden by
      an instruction prefix) is usable. The field receives the value of the linear address generated by ES:(E)DI (for
      INS) or segment:(E)SI (for OUTS; the default segment is DS but can be overridden by a segment override
      prefix) at the time the instruction started. If the relevant segment is not usable, the value is undefined. On
      processors that support Intel 64 architecture, bits 63:32 are clear if the logical processor was not in 64-bit
      mode before the VM exit.
•     I/O RCX, I/O RSI, I/O RDI, and I/O RIP. For an SMM VM exit due an SMI that arrives immediately after
      the retirement of an I/O instruction, these fields receive the values that were in RCX, RSI, RDI, and RIP, respec-
      tively, before the I/O instruction executed. Thus, the value saved for I/O RIP addresses the I/O instruction.

34.15.2.4 Saving Guest State
SMM VM exits save the contents of the SMBASE register into the corresponding field in the guest-state area.
The value of the VMX-preemption timer is saved into the corresponding field in the guest-state area if the “save
VMX-preemption timer value” VM-exit control is 1. That field becomes undefined if, in addition, either the SMM
VM exit is from VMX root operation or the SMM VM exit is from VMX non-root operation and the “activate VMX-
preemption timer” VM-execution control is 0.

34.15.2.5 Updating Non-Register State
SMM VM exits affect the non-register state of a logical processor as follows:
•     SMM VM exits cause non-maskable interrupts (NMIs) to be blocked; they may be unblocked through execution
      of IRET or through a VM entry (depending on the value loaded for the interruptibility state and the setting of
      the “virtual NMIs” VM-execution control).
•     SMM VM exits cause SMIs to be blocked; they may be unblocked by a VM entry that returns from SMM (see
      Section 34.15.4).
SMM VM exits invalidate linear mappings and combined mappings associated with VPID 0000H for all PCIDs.
Combined mappings for VPID 0000H are invalidated for all EP4TA values (EP4TA is the value of bits 51:12 of EPTP;
see Section 28.3). (Ordinary VM exits are not required to perform such invalidation if the “enable VPID” VM-execu-
tion control is 1; see Section 27.5.5.)

34.15.3 Operation of the SMM-Transfer Monitor
Once invoked, the SMM-transfer monitor (STM) is in VMX root operation and can use VMX instructions to configure
VMCSs and to cause VM entries to virtual machines supported by those structures. As noted in Section 34.15.1, the
VMXOFF instruction cannot be used under the dual-monitor treatment and thus cannot be used by the STM.
The RSM instruction also cannot be used under the dual-monitor treatment. As noted in Section 25.1.3, it causes
a VM exit if executed in SMM in VMX non-root operation. If executed in VMX root operation, it causes an invalid-
opcode exception. The STM uses VM entries to return from SMM (see Section 34.15.4).

34.15.4 VM Entries that Return from SMM
The SMM-transfer monitor (STM) returns from SMM using a VM entry with the “entry to SMM” VM-entry control
clear. VM entries that return from SMM reverse the effects of an SMM VM exit (see Section 34.15.2).
VM entries that return from SMM may differ from other VM entries in that they do not necessarily enter VMX non-
root operation. If the executive-VMCS pointer field in the current VMCS contains the VMXON pointer, the logical
processor remains in VMX root operation after VM entry.
For differences between VM entries that return from SMM and other VM entries see Sections 34.15.4.1 through
34.15.4.10.

34.15.4.1 Checks on the Executive-VMCS Pointer Field
VM entries that return from SMM perform the following checks on the executive-VMCS pointer field in the current
VMCS:
•   Bits 11:0 must be 0.
•   The pointer must not set any bits beyond the processor’s physical-address width.1,2
•   The 32 bits located in memory referenced by the physical address in the pointer must contain the processor’s
    VMCS revision identifier (see Section 24.2).
The checks above are performed before the checks described in Section 34.15.4.2 and before any of the following
checks:
•   'If the “deactivate dual-monitor treatment” VM-entry control is 0 and the executive-VMCS pointer field does not
    contain the VMXON pointer, the launch state of the executive VMCS (the VMCS referenced by the executive-
    VMCS pointer field) must be launched (see Section 24.11.3).
•   If the “deactivate dual-monitor treatment” VM-entry control is 1, the executive-VMCS pointer field must
    contain the VMXON pointer (see Section 34.15.7).3

34.15.4.2 Checks on VM-Execution Control Fields
VM entries that return from SMM differ from other VM entries with regard to the checks performed on the VM-
execution control fields specified in Section 26.2.1.1. They do not apply the checks to the current VMCS. Instead,
VM-entry behavior depends on whether the executive-VMCS pointer field contains the VMXON pointer:
•   If the executive-VMCS pointer field contains the VMXON pointer (the VM entry remains in VMX root operation),
    the checks are not performed at all.
•   If the executive-VMCS pointer field does not contain the VMXON pointer (the VM entry enters VMX non-root
    operation), the checks are performed on the VM-execution control fields in the executive VMCS (the VMCS
    referenced by the executive-VMCS pointer field in the current VMCS). These checks are performed after
    checking the executive-VMCS pointer field itself (for proper alignment).
Other VM entries ensure that, if “activate VMX-preemption timer” VM-execution control is 0, the “save VMX-
preemption timer value” VM-exit control is also 0. This check is not performed by VM entries that return from SMM.

34.15.4.3 Checks on VM-Entry Control Fields
VM entries that return from SMM differ from other VM entries with regard to the checks performed on the VM-entry
control fields specified in Section 26.2.1.3.

1. Software can determine a processor’s physical-address width by executing CPUID with 80000008H in EAX. The physical-address
   width is returned in bits 7:0 of EAX.
2. If IA32_VMX_BASIC[48] is read as 1, this pointer must not set any bits in the range 63:32; see Appendix A.1.
3. The STM can determine the VMXON pointer by reading the executive-VMCS pointer field in the current VMCS after the SMM VM exit
   that activates the dual-monitor treatment.

Specifically, if the executive-VMCS pointer field contains the VMXON pointer (the VM entry remains in VMX root
operation), the VM-entry interruption-information field must not indicate injection of a pending MTF VM exit (see
Section 26.5.2). Specifically, the following cannot all be true for that field:
•   the valid bit (bit 31) is 1
•   the interruption type (bits 10:8) is 7 (other event); and
•   the vector (bits 7:0) is 0 (pending MTF VM exit).

34.15.4.4 Checks on the Guest State Area
Section 26.3.1 specifies checks performed on fields in the guest-state area of the VMCS. Some of these checks are
conditioned on the settings of certain VM-execution controls (e.g., “virtual NMIs” or “unrestricted guest”).
VM entries that return from SMM modify these checks based on whether the executive-VMCS pointer field contains
the VMXON pointer:1
•   If the executive-VMCS pointer field contains the VMXON pointer (the VM entry remains in VMX root operation),
    the checks are performed as all relevant VM-execution controls were 0. (As a result, some checks may not be
    performed at all.)
•   If the executive-VMCS pointer field does not contain the VMXON pointer (the VM entry enters VMX non-root
    operation), this check is performed based on the settings of the VM-execution controls in the executive VMCS
    (the VMCS referenced by the executive-VMCS pointer field in the current VMCS).
For VM entries that return from SMM, the activity-state field must not indicate the wait-for-SIPI state if the execu-
tive-VMCS pointer field contains the VMXON pointer (the VM entry is to VMX root operation).

34.15.4.5 Loading Guest State
VM entries that return from SMM load the SMBASE register from the SMBASE field.
VM entries that return from SMM invalidate linear mappings and combined mappings associated with all VPIDs.
Combined mappings are invalidated for all EP4TA values (EP4TA is the value of bits 51:12 of EPTP; see Section
28.3). (Ordinary VM entries are required to perform such invalidation only for VPID 0000H and are not required to
do even that if the “enable VPID” VM-execution control is 1; see Section 26.3.2.5.)

34.15.4.6 VMX-Preemption Timer
A VM entry that returns from SMM activates the VMX-preemption timer only if the executive-VMCS pointer field
does not contain the VMXON pointer (the VM entry enters VMX non-root operation) and the “activate VMX-preemp-
tion timer” VM-execution control is 1 in the executive VMCS (the VMCS referenced by the executive-VMCS pointer
field). In this case, VM entry starts the VMX-preemption timer with the value in the VMX-preemption timer-value
field in the current VMCS.

34.15.4.7 Updating the Current-VMCS and SMM-Transfer VMCS Pointers
Successful VM entries (returning from SMM) load the SMM-transfer VMCS pointer with the current-VMCS pointer.
Following this, they load the current-VMCS pointer from a field in the current VMCS:
•   If the executive-VMCS pointer field contains the VMXON pointer (the VM entry remains in VMX root operation),
    the current-VMCS pointer is loaded from the VMCS-link pointer field.
•   If the executive-VMCS pointer field does not contain the VMXON pointer (the VM entry enters VMX non-root
    operation), the current-VMCS pointer is loaded with the value of the executive-VMCS pointer field.
If the VM entry successfully enters VMX non-root operation, the VM-execution controls in effect after the VM entry
are those from the new current VMCS. This includes any structures external to the VMCS referenced by VM-execu-
tion control fields.

1. The STM can determine the VMXON pointer by reading the executive-VMCS pointer field in the current VMCS after the SMM VM exit
   that activates the dual-monitor treatment.

The updating of these VMCS pointers occurs before event injection. Event injection is determined, however, by the
VM-entry control fields in the VMCS that was current when the VM entry commenced.

34.15.4.8 VM Exits Induced by VM Entry
Section 26.5.1.2 describes how the event-delivery process invoked by event injection may lead to a VM exit.
Section 26.6.3 to Section 26.6.7 describe other situations that may cause a VM exit to occur immediately after a
VM entry.
Whether these VM exits occur is determined by the VM-execution control fields in the current VMCS. For VM entries
that return from SMM, they can occur only if the executive-VMCS pointer field does not contain the VMXON pointer
(the VM entry enters VMX non-root operation).
In this case, determination is based on the VM-execution control fields in the VMCS that is current after the
VM entry. This is the VMCS referenced by the value of the executive-VMCS pointer field at the time of the VM entry
(see Section 34.15.4.7). This VMCS also controls the delivery of such VM exits. Thus, VM exits induced by a
VM entry returning from SMM are to the executive monitor and not to the STM.

34.15.4.9 SMI Blocking
VM entries that return from SMM determine the blocking of system-management interrupts (SMIs) as follows:
•   If the “deactivate dual-monitor treatment” VM-entry control is 0, SMIs are blocked after VM entry if and only if
    the bit 2 in the interruptibility-state field is 1.
•   If the “deactivate dual-monitor treatment” VM-entry control is 1, the blocking of SMIs depends on whether the
    logical processor is in SMX operation:1
    — If the logical processor is in SMX operation, SMIs are blocked after VM entry.
    — If the logical processor is outside SMX operation, SMIs are unblocked after VM entry.
VM entries that return from SMM and that do not deactivate the dual-monitor treatment may leave SMIs blocked.
This feature exists to allow the STM to invoke functionality outside of SMM without unblocking SMIs.

34.15.4.10 Failures of VM Entries That Return from SMM
Section 26.7 describes the treatment of VM entries that fail during or after loading guest state. Such failures record
information in the VM-exit information fields and load processor state as would be done on a VM exit. The VMCS
used is the one that was current before the VM entry commenced. Control is thus transferred to the STM and the
logical processor remains in SMM.

34.15.5 Enabling the Dual-Monitor Treatment
Code and data for the SMM-transfer monitor (STM) reside in a region of SMRAM called the monitor segment
(MSEG). Code running in SMM determines the location of MSEG and establishes its content. This code is also
responsible for enabling the dual-monitor treatment.
SMM code enables the dual-monitor treatment and specifies the location of MSEG by writing to the
IA32_SMM_MONITOR_CTL MSR (index 9BH). The MSR has the following format:
•   Bit 0 is the register’s valid bit. The STM may be invoked using VMCALL only if this bit is 1. Because VMCALL is
    used to activate the dual-monitor treatment (see Section 34.15.6), the dual-monitor treatment cannot be
    activated if the bit is 0. This bit is cleared when the logical processor is reset.
•   Bit 1 is reserved.

1. A logical processor is in SMX operation if GETSEC[SEXIT] has not been executed since the last execution of GETSEC[SENTER]. A logi-
   cal processor is outside SMX operation if GETSEC[SENTER] has not been executed or if GETSEC[SEXIT] was executed after the last
   execution of GETSEC[SENTER]. See Chapter 6, “Safer Mode Extensions Reference‚” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Soft-
   ware Developer’s Manual, Volume 2D.

•       Bit 2 determines whether executions of VMXOFF unblock SMIs under the default treatment of SMIs and SMM.
        Executions of VMXOFF unblock SMIs unless bit 2 is 1 (the value of bit 0 is irrelevant). See Section 34.14.4.
        Certain leaf functions of the GETSEC instruction clear this bit (see Chapter 6, “Safer Mode Extensions
        Reference,” in Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2D).
•       Bits 11:3 are reserved.
•       Bits 31:12 contain a value that, when shifted left 12 bits, is the physical address of MSEG (the MSEG base
        address).
•       Bits 63:32 are reserved.
The following items detail use of this MSR:
•       The IA32_SMM_MONITOR_CTL MSR is supported only on processors that support the dual-monitor treatment.1
        On other processors, accesses to the MSR using RDMSR or WRMSR generate a general-protection fault
        (#GP(0)).
•       A write to the IA32_SMM_MONITOR_CTL MSR using WRMSR generates a general-protection fault (#GP(0)) if
        executed outside of SMM or if an attempt is made to set any reserved bit. An attempt to write to the
        IA32_SMM_MONITOR_CTL MSR fails if made as part of a VM exit that does not end in SMM or part of a
        VM entry that does not begin in SMM.
•       Reads from the IA32_SMM_MONITOR_CTL MSR using RDMSR are allowed any time RDMSR is allowed. The
        MSR may be read as part of any VM exit.
•       The dual-monitor treatment can be activated only if the valid bit in the MSR is set to 1.
The 32 bytes located at the MSEG base address are called the MSEG header. The format of the MSEG header is
given in Table 34-10 (each field is 32 bits).

                                            Table 34-10. Format of MSEG Header

    Byte Offset       Field

    0                 MSEG-header revision identifier

    4                 SMM-transfer monitor features

    8                 GDTR limit

    12                GDTR base offset

    16                CS selector

    20                EIP offset

    24                ESP offset

    28                CR3 offset

To ensure proper behavior in VMX operation, software should maintain the MSEG header in writeback cacheable
memory. Future implementations may allow or require a different memory type.2 Software should consult the VMX
capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC (see Appendix A.1).
SMM code should enable the dual-monitor treatment (by setting the valid bit in IA32_SMM_MONITOR_CTL MSR)
only after establishing the content of the MSEG header as follows:

1. Software should consult the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC (see Appendix A.1) to determine whether the dual-monitor
   treatment is supported.
2. Alternatively, software may map the MSEG header with the UC memory type; this may be necessary, depending on how memory is
   organized. Doing so is strongly discouraged unless necessary as it will cause the performance of transitions using those structures
   to suffer significantly. In addition, the processor will continue to use the memory type reported in the VMX capability MSR
   IA32_VMX_BASIC with exceptions noted in Appendix A.1.

•   Bytes 3:0 contain the MSEG revision identifier. Different processors may use different MSEG revision identi-
    fiers. These identifiers enable software to avoid using an MSEG header formatted for one processor on a
    processor that uses a different format. Software can discover the MSEG revision identifier that a processor uses
    by reading the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_MISC (see Appendix A.6).
•   Bytes 7:4 contain the SMM-transfer monitor features field. Bits 31:1 of this field are reserved and must be
    zero. Bit 0 of the field is the IA-32e mode SMM feature bit. It indicates whether the logical processor will be
    in IA-32e mode after the STM is activated (see Section 34.15.6).
•   Bytes 31:8 contain fields that determine how processor state is loaded when the STM is activated (see Section
    34.15.6.5). SMM code should establish these fields so that activating of the STM invokes the STM’s initialization
    code.

34.15.6 Activating the Dual-Monitor Treatment
The dual-monitor treatment may be enabled by SMM code as described in Section 34.15.5. The dual-monitor treat-
ment is activated only if it is enabled and only by the executive monitor. The executive monitor activates the dual-
monitor treatment by executing VMCALL in VMX root operation.
When VMCALL activates the dual-monitor treatment, it causes an SMM VM exit. Differences between this SMM
VM exit and other SMM VM exits are discussed in Sections 34.15.6.1 through 34.15.6.6. See also “VMCALL—Call to
VM Monitor” in Chapter 30.

34.15.6.1 Initial Checks
An execution of VMCALL attempts to activate the dual-monitor treatment if (1) the processor supports the dual-
monitor treatment;1 (2) the logical processor is in VMX root operation; (3) the logical processor is outside SMM and
the valid bit is set in the IA32_SMM_MONITOR_CTL MSR; (4) the logical processor is not in virtual-8086 mode and
not in compatibility mode; (5) CPL = 0; and (6) the dual-monitor treatment is not active.
Such an execution of VMCALL begins with some initial checks. These checks are performed before updating the
current-VMCS pointer and the executive-VMCS pointer field (see Section 34.15.2.2).
The VMCS that manages SMM VM exit caused by this VMCALL is the current VMCS established by the executive
monitor. The VMCALL performs the following checks on the current VMCS in the order indicated:
1. There must be a current VMCS pointer.
2. The launch state of the current VMCS must be clear.
3. Reserved bits in the VM-exit controls in the current VMCS must be set properly. Software may consult the VMX
   capability MSR IA32_VMX_EXIT_CTLS to determine the proper settings (see Appendix A.4).
If any of these checks fail, subsequent checks are skipped and VMCALL fails. If all these checks succeed, the logical
processor uses the IA32_SMM_MONITOR_CTL MSR to determine the base address of MSEG. The following checks
are performed in the order indicated:
1. The logical processor reads the 32 bits at the base of MSEG and compares them to the processor’s MSEG
   revision identifier.
2. The logical processor reads the SMM-transfer monitor features field:
    — Bit 0 of the field is the IA-32e mode SMM feature bit, and it indicates whether the logical processor will be
      in IA-32e mode after the SMM-transfer monitor (STM) is activated.
        •       If the VMCALL is executed on a processor that does not support Intel 64 architecture, the IA-32e mode
                SMM feature bit must be 0.
        •       If the VMCALL is executed in 64-bit mode, the IA-32e mode SMM feature bit must be 1.
    — Bits 31:1 of this field are currently reserved and must be zero.
If any of these checks fail, subsequent checks are skipped and the VMCALL fails.

1. Software should consult the VMX capability MSR IA32_VMX_BASIC (see Appendix A.1) to determine whether the dual-monitor
   treatment is supported.

34.15.6.2 Updating the Current-VMCS and Executive-VMCS Pointers
Before performing the steps in Section 34.15.2.2, SMM VM exits that activate the dual-monitor treatment begin by
loading the SMM-transfer VMCS pointer with the value of the current-VMCS pointer.

34.15.6.3 Saving Guest State
As noted in Section 34.15.2.4, SMM VM exits save the contents of the SMBASE register into the corresponding field
in the guest-state area. While this is true also for SMM VM exits that activate the dual-monitor treatment, the
VMCS used for those VM exits exists outside SMRAM.
The SMM-transfer monitor (STM) can also discover the current value of the SMBASE register by using the RDMSR
instruction to read the IA32_SMBASE MSR (MSR address 9EH). The following items detail use of this MSR:
•   The MSR is supported only if IA32_VMX_MISC[15] = 1 (see Appendix A.6).
•   A write to the IA32_SMBASE MSR using WRMSR generates a general-protection fault (#GP(0)). An attempt to
    write to the IA32_SMBASE MSR fails if made as part of a VM exit or part of a VM entry.
•   A read from the IA32_SMBASE MSR using RDMSR generates a general-protection fault (#GP(0)) if executed
    outside of SMM. An attempt to read from the IA32_SMBASE MSR fails if made as part of a VM exit that does not
    end in SMM.

34.15.6.4 Saving MSRs
The VM-exit MSR-store area is not used by SMM VM exits that activate the dual-monitor treatment. No MSRs are
saved into that area.

34.15.6.5 Loading Host State
The VMCS that is current during an SMM VM exit that activates the dual-monitor treatment was established by the
executive monitor. It does not contain the VM-exit controls and host state required to initialize the STM. For this
reason, such SMM VM exits do not load processor state as described in Section 27.5. Instead, state is set to fixed
values or loaded based on the content of the MSEG header (see Table 34-10):
•   CR0 is set to as follows:
    — PG, NE, ET, MP, and PE are all set to 1.
    — CD and NW are left unchanged.
    — All other bits are cleared to 0.
•   CR3 is set as follows:
    — Bits 63:32 are cleared on processors that support IA-32e mode.
    — Bits 31:12 are set to bits 31:12 of the sum of the MSEG base address and the CR3-offset field in the MSEG
      header.
    — Bits 11:5 and bits 2:0 are cleared (the corresponding bits in the CR3-offset field in the MSEG header are
      ignored).
    — Bits 4:3 are set to bits 4:3 of the CR3-offset field in the MSEG header.
•   CR4 is set as follows:
    — MCE, PGE, and PCIDE are cleared.
    — PAE is set to the value of the IA-32e mode SMM feature bit.
    — If the IA-32e mode SMM feature bit is clear, PSE is set to 1 if supported by the processor; if the bit is set,
      PSE is cleared.
    — All other bits are unchanged.
•   DR7 is set to 400H.
•   The IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR is cleared to 00000000_00000000H.

•   The registers CS, SS, DS, ES, FS, and GS are loaded as follows:
    — All registers are usable.
    — CS.selector is loaded from the corresponding field in the MSEG header (the high 16 bits are ignored), with
      bits 2:0 cleared to 0. If the result is 0000H, CS.selector is set to 0008H.
    — The selectors for SS, DS, ES, FS, and GS are set to CS.selector+0008H. If the result is 0000H (if the CS
      selector was FFF8H), these selectors are instead set to 0008H.
    — The base addresses of all registers are cleared to zero.
    — The segment limits for all registers are set to FFFFFFFFH.
    — The AR bytes for the registers are set as follows:
        •       CS.Type is set to 11 (execute/read, accessed, non-conforming code segment).
        •       For SS, DS, ES, FS, and GS, the Type is set to 3 (read/write, accessed, expand-up data segment).
        •       The S bits for all registers are set to 1.
        •       The DPL for each register is set to 0.
        •       The P bits for all registers are set to 1.
        •       On processors that support Intel 64 architecture, CS.L is loaded with the value of the IA-32e mode SMM
                feature bit.
        •       CS.D is loaded with the inverse of the value of the IA-32e mode SMM feature bit.
        •       For each of SS, DS, ES, FS, and GS, the D/B bit is set to 1.
        •       The G bits for all registers are set to 1.
•   LDTR is unusable. The LDTR selector is cleared to 0000H, and the register is otherwise undefined (although the
    base address is always canonical)
•   GDTR.base is set to the sum of the MSEG base address and the GDTR base-offset field in the MSEG header
    (bits 63:32 are always cleared on processors that support IA-32e mode). GDTR.limit is set to the corre-
    sponding field in the MSEG header (the high 16 bits are ignored).
•   IDTR.base is unchanged. IDTR.limit is cleared to 0000H.
•   RIP is set to the sum of the MSEG base address and the value of the RIP-offset field in the MSEG header
    (bits 63:32 are always cleared on logical processors that support IA-32e mode).
•   RSP is set to the sum of the MSEG base address and the value of the RSP-offset field in the MSEG header
    (bits 63:32 are always cleared on logical processor that supports IA-32e mode).
•   RFLAGS is cleared, except bit 1, which is always set.
•   The logical processor is left in the active state.
•   Event blocking after the SMM VM exit is as follows:
    — There is no blocking by STI or by MOV SS.
    — There is blocking by non-maskable interrupts (NMIs) and by SMIs.
•   There are no pending debug exceptions after the SMM VM exit.
•   For processors that support IA-32e mode, the IA32_EFER MSR is modified so that LME and LMA both contain
    the value of the IA-32e mode SMM feature bit.
If any of CR3[63:5], CR4.PAE, CR4.PSE, or IA32_EFER.LMA is changing, the TLBs are updated so that, after
VM exit, the logical processor does not use translations that were cached before the transition. This is not neces-
sary for changes that would not affect paging due to the settings of other bits (for example, changes to CR4.PSE if
IA32_EFER.LMA was 1 before and after the transition).

34.15.6.6 Loading MSRs
The VM-exit MSR-load area is not used by SMM VM exits that activate the dual-monitor treatment. No MSRs are
loaded from that area.

34.15.7 Deactivating the Dual-Monitor Treatment
The SMM-transfer monitor may deactivate the dual-monitor treatment and return the processor to default treat-
ment of SMIs and SMM (see Section 34.14). It does this by executing a VM entry with the “deactivate dual-monitor
treatment” VM-entry control set to 1.
As noted in Section 26.2.1.3 and Section 34.15.4.1, an attempt to deactivate the dual-monitor treatment fails in
the following situations: (1) the processor is not in SMM; (2) the “entry to SMM” VM-entry control is 1; or (3) the
executive-VMCS pointer does not contain the VMXON pointer (the VM entry is to VMX non-root operation).
As noted in Section 34.15.4.9, VM entries that deactivate the dual-monitor treatment ignore the SMI bit in the
interruptibility-state field of the guest-state area. Instead, the blocking of SMIs following such a VM entry depends
on whether the logical processor is in SMX operation:1
•   If the logical processor is in SMX operation, SMIs are blocked after VM entry. SMIs may later be unblocked by
    the VMXOFF instruction (see Section 34.14.4) or by certain leaf functions of the GETSEC instruction (see
    Chapter 6, “Safer Mode Extensions Reference,” in Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s
    Manual, Volume 2D).
•   If the logical processor is outside SMX operation, SMIs are unblocked after VM entry.

34.16        SMI AND PROCESSOR EXTENDED STATE MANAGEMENT
On processors that support processor extended states using XSAVE/XRSTOR (see Chapter 13, “Managing State
Using the XSAVE Feature Set” of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1),
the processor does not save any XSAVE/XRSTOR related state on an SMI. It is the responsibility of the SMI handler
code to properly preserve the state information (including CR4.OSXSAVE, XCR0, and possibly processor extended
states using XSAVE/XRSTOR). Therefore, the SMI handler must follow the rules described in Chapter 13,
“Managing State Using the XSAVE Feature Set” of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s
Manual, Volume 1.

34.17        MODEL-SPECIFIC SYSTEM MANAGEMENT ENHANCEMENT
This section describes enhancement of system management features that apply only to the 4th generation Intel
Core processors. These features are model-specific. BIOS and SMM handler must use CPUID to enumerate
DisplayFamily_DisplayModel signature when programming with these interfaces.

34.17.1      SMM Handler Code Access Control
The BIOS may choose to restrict the address ranges of code that SMM handler executes. When SMM handler code
execution check is enabled, an attempt by the SMM handler to execute outside the ranges specified by SMRR (see
Section 34.4.2.1) will cause the assertion of an unrecoverable machine check exception (MCE).
The interface to enable SMM handler code access check resides in a per-package scope model-specific register
MSR_SMM_FEATURE_CONTROL at address 4E0H. An attempt to access MSR_SMM_FEATURE_CONTROL outside of
SMM will cause a #GP. Writes to MSR_SMM_FEATURE_CONTROL is further protected by configuration interface of
MSR_SMM_MCA_CAP at address 17DH.
Details of the interface of MSR_SMM_FEATURE_CONTROL and MSR_SMM_MCA_CAP are described in Table 35-27.

1. A logical processor is in SMX operation if GETSEC[SEXIT] has not been executed since the last execution of GETSEC[SENTER]. A logi-
   cal processor is outside SMX operation if GETSEC[SENTER] has not been executed or if GETSEC[SEXIT] was executed after the last
   execution of GETSEC[SENTER]. See Chapter 6, “Safer Mode Extensions Reference,” in Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software
   Developer’s Manual, Volume 2B.

34.17.2         SMI Delivery Delay Reporting
Entry into the system management mode occurs at instruction boundary. In situations where a logical processor is
executing an instruction involving a long flow of internal operations, servicing an SMI by that logical processor will
be delayed. Delayed servicing of SMI of each logical processor due to executing long flows of internal operation in
a physical processor can be queried via a package-scope register MSR_SMM_DELAYED at address 4E2H.
The interface to enable reporting of SMI delivery delay due to long internal flows resides in a per-package scope
model-specific register MSR_SMM_DELAYED. An attempt to access MSR_SMM_DELAYED outside of SMM will cause
a #GP. Availability to MSR_SMM_DELAYED is protected by configuration interface of MSR_SMM_MCA_CAP at
address 17DH.
Details of the interface of MSR_SMM_DELAYED and MSR_SMM_MCA_CAP are described in Table 35-27.

34.17.3         Blocked SMI Reporting
A logical processor may have entered into a state and blocked from servicing other interrupts (including SMI).
Logical processors in a physical processor that are blocked in serving SMI can be queried in a package-scope
register MSR_SMM_BLOCKED at address 4E3H. An attempt to access MSR_SMM_BLOCKED outside of SMM will
cause a #GP.
Details of the interface of MSR_SMM_BLOCKED is described in Table 35-27.

