
                                                                                         CHAPTER 39

The following aspects of enclave operation are described in this chapter:
•   Enclave creation: Includes loading code and data from outside of enclave into the EPC and establishing the
    enclave entity.
•   Adding pages and measuring the enclave.
•   Initialization of an enclave: Finalizes the cryptographic log and establishes the enclave identity and sealing
    identity.
•   Enclave entry and exiting including:
    — Controlled entry and exit.
    — Asynchronous Enclave Exit (AEX) and resuming execution after an AEX.

39.1        CONSTRUCTING AN ENCLAVE
Figure 39-1 illustrates a typical Enclave memory layout.

                                             SECS
                                                                                     OS Context
                Base + Size
                                             Enclave Memory

                                               Thread Data
               Replicated once
                 per thread                     TCS
                                                                                      Application Context

                                             Global Data

                                             Code

                        Base
                                                Enclave {Base, Size}
                                       Figure 39-1. Enclave Memory Layout

The enclave creation, commitment of memory resources, and finalizing the enclave’s identity with measurement
comprises multiple phases. This process can be illustrated by the following exemplary steps:
1. The application hands over the enclave content along with additional information required by the enclave
   creation API to the enclave creation service running at privilege level 0.
2. The enclave creation service running at privilege level 0 uses the ECREATE leaf function to set up the initial
   environment, specifying base address and size of the enclave. This address range, the ELRANGE, is part of the
   application's address space. This reserves the memory range. The enclave will now reside in this address

    region. ECREATE also allocates an Enclave Page Cache (EPC) page for the SGX Enclave Control Structure
    (SECS). Note that this page is not required to be a part of the enclave linear address space and is not required
    to be mapped into the process.
3. The enclave creation service uses the EADD leaf function to commit EPC pages to the enclave, and use
   EEXTEND to measure the committed memory content of the enclave. For each page to be added to the enclave:
    — Use EADD to add the new page to the enclave.
    — If the enclave developer requires measurement of the page as a proof for the content, use EEXTEND to add
      a measurement for 256 bytes of the page. Repeat this operation until the entire page is measured.
4. The enclave creation service uses the EINIT leaf function to complete the enclave creation process and finalize
   the enclave measurement to establish the enclave identity. Until an EINIT is executed, the enclave is not
   permitted to execute any enclave code (i.e. entering the enclave by executing EENTER would result in a fault).

39.1.1         ECREATE
The ECREATE leaf function sets up the initial environment for the enclave by reading an SGX Enclave Control Struc-
ture (SECS) that contains the enclave's address range (ELRANGE) as defined by BASEADDR and SIZE, the ATTRI-
BUTES and MISCSELECT bitmaps, and the SSAFRAMESIZE. It then securely stores this information in an Enclave
Page Cache (EPC) page. ELRANGE is part of the application's address space. ECREATE also initializes a crypto-
graphic log of the enclave's build process.

39.1.2         EADD and EEXTEND Interaction
Once the SECS has been created, enclave pages can be added to the enclave via EADD. This involves converting a
free EPC page into either a PT_REG or a PT_TCS page.
When EADD is invoked, the processor will update the EPCM entry with the type of page (PT_REG or PT_TCS), the
linear address used by the enclave to access the page, and the enclave access permissions for the page. It associ-
ates the page to the SECS provided as input. The EPCM entry information is used by hardware to manage access
control to the page. EADD records EPCM information in the cryptographic log stored in the SECS and copies 4
KBytes of data from unprotected memory outside the EPC to the allocated EPC page.
System software is responsible for selecting a free EPC page. System software is also responsible for providing the
type of page to be added, the attributes the page, the contents of the page, and the SECS (enclave) to which the
page is to be added as requested by the application. Incorrect data would lead to a failure of EADD or to an incor-
rect cryptographic log and a failure at EINIT time.
After a page has been added to an enclave, software can measure a 256 byte region as determined by the devel-
oper by invoking EEXTEND. Thus to measure an entire 4KB page, system software must execute EEXTEND 16
times. Each invocation of EEXTEND adds to the cryptographic log information about which region is being
measured and the measurement of the section.
Entries in the cryptographic log define the measurement of the enclave and are critical in gaining assurance that
the enclave was correctly constructed by the untrusted system software.

39.1.3         EINIT Interaction
Once system software has completed the process of adding and measuring pages, the enclave needs to be initial-
ized by the EINIT leaf function. After an enclave is initialized, EADD and EEXTEND are disabled for that enclave (An
attempt to execute EADD/EEXTEND to enclave after enclave initialization will result in a fault). The initialization
process finalizes the cryptographic log and establishes the enclave identity and sealing identity used by
EGETKEY and EREPORT.
A cryptographic hash of the log is stored as the enclave identity. Correct construction of the enclave results in the
cryptographic hash matching the one built by the enclave owner and included as the ENCLAVEHASH field of
SIGSTRUCT. The enclave identity provided by the EREPORT leaf function can be verified by a remote party.

The EINIT leaf function checks the EINIT token to validate that the enclave has been enabled on this platform. If
the enclave is not correctly constructed, or the EINIT token is not valid for the platform, or SIGSTRUCT isn't prop-
erly signed, then EINIT will fail. See the EINIT leaf function for details on the error reporting.
The enclave identity is a cryptographic hash that reflects the enclave attributes and MISCSELECT value, content
of the enclave, the order in which it was built, the addresses it occupies in memory, the security attributes, and
access right permissions of each page. The enclave identity is established by the EINIT leaf function.
The sealing identity is managed by a sealing authority represented by the hash of the public key used to sign the
SIGSTRUCT structure processed by EINIT. The sealing authority assigns a product ID (ISVPRODID) and security
version number (ISVSVN) to a particular enclave identity.
EINIT establishes the sealing identity using the following steps:
1. Verifies that SIGSTRUCT is properly signed using the public key enclosed in the SIGSTRUCT.
2. Checks that the measurement of the enclave matches the measurement of the enclave specified in SIGSTRUCT.
3. Checks that the enclave’s attributes and MISCSELECT values are compatible with those specified in SIGSTRUCT.
4. Finalizes the measurement of the enclave and records the sealing identity (the sealing authority, product id
and security version number) and enclave identity in the SECS.
5. Sets the ATTRIBUTES.INIT bit for the enclave.

39.1.4      Intel® SGX Launch Control Configuration
Intel® SGX Launch Control is a set of controls that govern the creation of enclaves. Before the EINIT leaf function
will successfully initialize an enclave, a designated Launch Enclave must create an EINITTOKEN for that enclave.
Launch Enclaves have SECS.ATTRIBUTES.EINITTOKENKEY = 1, granting them access to the EINITTOKENKEY from
the EGETKEY leaf function. EINITTOKENKEY must be used by the Launch Enclave when computing EINIT-
TOKEN.MAC, the Message Authentication Code of the EINITTOKEN.
The hash of the public key used to sign the SIGSTRUCT of the Launch Enclave must equal the value in the
IA32_SGXLEPUBKEYHASH MSRs. Only Launch Enclaves are allowed to launch without a valid token.
The IA32_SGXLEPUBKEYHASH MSRs are provided to designate the platform’s Launch Enclave.
IA32_SGXLEPUBKEYHASH defaults to digest of Intel’s launch enclave signing key after reset.
IA32_FEATURE_CONTROL bit 17 controls the permissions on the IA32_SGXLEPUBKEYHASH MSRs when
CPUID.(EAX=12H, ECX=00H):EAX[0] = 1. If IA32_FEATURE_CONTROL is locked with bit 17 set,
IA32_SGXLEPUBKEYHASH MSRs are reconfigurable (writeable). If either IA32_FEATURE_CONTROL is not locked or
bit 17 is clear, the MSRs are read only. By leaving these MSRs writable, system SW or a VMM can support a plurality
of Launch Enclaves for hosting multiple execution environments. See Section 42.3.2 for more details.

39.2        ENCLAVE ENTRY AND EXITING

39.2.1      Controlled Entry and Exit
The EENTER leaf function is the method to enter the enclave under program control. To execute EENTER, software
must supply an address of a TCS that is part of the enclave to be entered. The TCS holds the location inside the
enclave to transfer control to and a pointer to the SSA frame inside the enclave that an AEX should store the
register state to.
When a logical processor enters an enclave, the TCS is considered busy until the logical processors exits the
enclave. An attempt to enter an enclave through a busy TCS results in a fault. Intel® SGX allows an enclave builder
to define multiple TCSs, thereby providing support for multithreaded enclaves.
Software must also supply to EENTER the Asynchronous Exit Pointer (AEP) parameter. AEP is an address external
to the enclave which an exception handler will return to using IRET. Typically the location would contain the
ERESUME instruction. ERESUME transfers control back to the enclave, to the address retrieved from the enclave
thread’s saved state.
EENTER performs the following operations:

1. Check that TCS is not busy and flush all cached linear-to-physical mappings.
2. Change the mode of operation to be in enclave mode.
3. Save the old RSP, RBP for later restore on AEX (Software is responsible for setting up the new RSP, RBP to be
   used inside enclave).
4. Save XCR0 and replace it with the XFRM value for the enclave.
5. Check if software wishes to debug (applicable to a debuggable enclave):
    — If not debugging, then configure hardware so the enclave appears as a single instruction.
    — If debugging, then configure hardware to allow traps, breakpoints, and single steps inside the enclave.
6. Set the TCS as busy.
7. Transfer control from outside enclave to predetermined location inside the enclave specified by the TCS.
The EEXIT leaf function is the method of leaving the enclave under program control. EEXIT receives the target
address outside of the enclave that the enclave wishes to transfer control to. It is the responsibility of enclave soft-
ware to erase any secret from the registers prior to invoking EEXIT. To allow enclave software to easily perform an
external function call and re-enter the enclave (using EEXIT and EENTER leaf functions), EEXIT returns the value of
the AEP that was used when the enclave was entered.
EEXIT performs the following operations:
1. Clear enclave mode and flush all cached linear-to-physical mappings.
2. Mark TCS as not busy.
3. Transfer control from inside the enclave to a location on the outside specified as parameter to the EEXIT leaf
   function.

39.2.2         Asynchronous Enclave Exit (AEX)
Asynchronous and synchronous events, such as exceptions, interrupts, traps, SMIs, and VM exits may occur while
executing inside an enclave. These events are referred to as Enclave Exiting Events (EEE). Upon an EEE, the
processor state is securely saved inside the enclave (in the thread’s current SSA frame) and then replaced by a
synthetic state to prevent leakage of secrets. The process of securely saving state and establishing the synthetic
state is called an Asynchronous Enclave Exit (AEX). Details of AEX is described in Chapter 40, “Enclave Exiting
Events”.
As part of most EEEs, the AEP is pushed onto the stack as the location of the eventing address. This is the location
where control will return to after executing the IRET. The ERESUME leaf function can be executed from that point
to reenter the enclave and resume execution from the interrupted point.
After AEX has completed, the logical processor is no longer in enclave mode and the exiting event is processed
normally. Any new events that occur after the AEX has completed are treated as having occurred outside the
enclave (e.g. a #PF in dispatching to an interrupt handler).

39.2.3         Resuming Execution after AEX
After system software has serviced the event that caused the logical processor to exit an enclave, the logical
processor can continue enclave execution using ERESUME. ERESUME restores processor state and returns control
to where execution was interrupted.
If the cause of the exit was an exception or a fault and was not resolved, the event will be triggered again if the
enclave is re-entered using ERESUME. For example, if an enclave performs a divide by 0 operation, executing
ERESUME will cause the enclave to attempt to re-execute the faulting instruction and result in another divide by 0
exception. Intel® SGX provides the means for an enclave developer to handle enclave exceptions from within the
enclave. Software can enter the enclave at a different location and invoke the exception handler within the enclave
by executing the EENTER leaf function. The exception handler within the enclave can read the fault information
from the SSA frame and attempt to resolve the faulting condition or simply return and indicate to software that the
enclave should be terminated (e.g. using EEXIT).

39.2.3.1     ERESUME Interaction
ERESUME restores registers depending on the mode of the enclave (32 or 64 bit).
•   In 32-bit mode (IA32_EFER.LMA = 0 || CS.L = 0), the low 32-bits of the legacy registers (EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX,
    ESP, EBP, ESI, EDI, EIP and EFLAGS) are restored from the thread’s GPR area of the current SSA frame. Neither
    the upper 32 bits of the legacy registers nor the 64-bit registers (R8 … R15) are loaded.
•   In 64-bit mode (IA32_EFER.LMA = 1 && CS.L = 1), all 64 bits of the general processor registers (RAX, RBX,
    RCX, RDX, RSP, RBP, RSI, RDI, R8 … R15, RIP and RFLAGS) are loaded.
Extended features specified by SECS.ATTRIBUTES.XFRM are restored from the XSAVE area of the current SSA
frame. The layout of the x87 area depends on the current values of IA32_EFER.LMA and CS.L:
•   IA32_EFER.LMA = 0 || CS.L = 0
    — 32-bit load in the same format that XSAVE/FXSAVE uses with these values.
•   IA32_EFER.LMA = 1 && CS.L = 1
    — 64-bit load in the same format that XSAVE/FXSAVE uses with these values as if REX.W = 1.

39.3        CALLING ENCLAVE PROCEDURES

39.3.1      Calling Convention
In standard call conventions subroutine parameters are generally pushed onto the stack. The called routine, being
aware of its own stack layout, knows how to find parameters based on compile-time-computable offsets from the
SP or BP register (depending on runtime conventions used by the compiler).
Because of the stack switch when calling an enclave, stack-located parameters cannot be found in this manner.
Entering the enclave requires a modified parameter passing convention.
For example, the caller might push parameters onto the untrusted stack and then pass a pointer to those parame-
ters in RAX to the enclave software. The exact choice of calling conventions is up to the writer of the edge routines;
be those routines hand-coded or compiler generated.

39.3.2      Register Preservation
As with most systems, it is the responsibility of the callee to preserve all registers except that used for returning a
value. This is consistent with conventional usage and tends to optimize the number of register save/restore oper-
ations that need be performed. It has the additional security result that it ensures that data is scrubbed from any
registers that were used by enclave to temporarily contain secrets.

39.3.3      Returning to Caller
No registers are modified during EEXIT. It is the responsibility of software to remove secrets in registers before
executing EEXIT.

39.4        INTEL® SGX KEY AND ATTESTATION

39.4.1      Enclave Measurement
During the enclave build process, two “measurements” are taken of each enclave and are stored in two 256-bit
Measurement Registers (MR): MRENCLAVE and MRSIGNER. MRENCLAVE represents the enclave's contents and
build process. MRSIGNER represents the entity that signed the enclave's SIGSTRUCT.

The values of the Measurement Registers are included in attestations to identify the enclave to remote parties. The
MRs are also included in most keys, binding keys to enclaves with specific MRs.

39.4.1.1       MRENCLAVE
MRENCLAVE is a unique 256 bit value that identifies the code and data that was loaded into the enclave during the
initial launch. It is computed as a SHA256 hash that is initialized by the ECREATE leaf function. EADD and EEXTEND
leaf functions record information about each page and the content of those pages. The EINIT leaf function finalizes
the hash, which is stored in SECS.MRENCLAVE. Any tampering with the build process, contents of a page, page
permissions, etc will result in a different MRENCLAVE value.
Figure 39-2 illustrates a simplified flow of changes to the MRENCLAVE register when building an enclave:
•   Enclave creation with ECREATE.
•   Copying a non-enclave source page into the EPC of an un-initialized enclave with EADD.
•   Updating twice of the MRENCLAVE after modifying the enclave’s page content, i.e. EEXTEND twice.
•   Finalizing the enclave build with EINIT.
Details on specific values inserted in the hash are available in the individual instruction definitions.

                             Page              Data           Chunk 1    Data       Chunk 2
                             Metadata          Chunk 1        Metadata   Chunk 2    Metadata

         SHA_INIT         SHA_UPDATE               SHA_UPDATE               SHA_UPDATE            SHA_FINAL

       MRENCLAVE          MRENCLAVE                MRENCLAVE                MRENCLAVE           MRENCLAVE

        ECREATE              EADD                        EEXTEND              EEXTEND               EINIT

                              Figure 39-2. Measurement Flow of Enclave Build Process

39.4.1.2       MRSIGNER
Each enclave is signed using a 3072 bit RSA key. The signature is stored in the SIGSTRUCT. In the SIGSTRUCT, the
enclave's signer also assigns a product ID (ISVPRODID) and a security version (ISVSVN) to the enclave.
MRSIGNER is the SHA-256 hash of the signer's public key.
In attestation, MRSIGNER can be used to allow software to approve of an enclave based on the author rather than
maintaining a list of MRENCLAVEs. It is used in key derivation to allow software to create a lineage of an applica-
tion. By signing multiple enclaves with the same key, the enclaves will share the same keys and data. Combined
with security version numbering, the author can release multiple versions of an application which can access keys
for previous versions, but not future versions of that application.

39.4.2      Security Version Numbers (SVN)
Intel® SGX supports a versioning system that allows the signer to identify different versions of the same software
released by an author. The security version is independent of the functional version an author uses and is intended
to specify security equivalence. Multiple releases with functional enhancements may all share the same SVN if they
all have the same security properties or posture. Each enclave has an SVN and the underlying hardware has an
SVN.
The SVNs are attested to in EREPORT and are included in the derivation of most keys, thus providing separation
between data for older/newer versions.

39.4.2.1    Enclave Security Version
In the SIGSTRUCT, the MRSIGNER is associated with a 16-bit Product ID (ISVPRODID) and a 16 bit integer SVN
(ISVSVN). Together they define a specific group of versions of a specific product. Most keys, including the Seal Key,
can be bound to this pair.
To support upgrading from one release to another, EGETKEY will return keys corresponding to any value less than
or equal to the software's ISVSVN.

39.4.2.2    Hardware Security Version
CPUSVN is a 128 bit value that reflects the microcode update version and authenticated code modules supported
by the processor. Unlike ISVSVN, CPUSVN is not an integer and cannot be compared mathematically. Not all values
are valid CPUSVNs.
Software must ensure that the CPUSVN provided to EGETKEY is valid. EREPORT will return the CPUSVN of the
current environment. Software can execute EREPORT with TARGETINFO set to zeros to retrieve a CPUSVN from
REPORTDATA. Software can access keys for a CPUSVN recorded previously, provided that each of the elements
reflected in CPUSVN are the same or have been upgraded.

39.4.3      Keys
Intel® SGX provides software with access to keys unique to each processor and rooted in HW keys inserted into
the processor during manufacturing.
Each enclave requests keys using the EGETKEY leaf function. The key is based on enclave parameters such as
measurement, the enclave signing key, security attributes of the enclave, and the Hardware Security version of the
processor itself. A full list of parameter options is specified in the KEYREQUEST structure, see details in Section
38.17.
By deriving keys using enclave properties, SGX guarantees that if two enclaves call EGETKEY, they will receive a
unique key only accessible by the respective enclave. It also guarantees that the enclave will receive the same key
on every future execution of EGETKEY. Some parameters are optional or configurable by software. For example, a
Seal key can be based on the signer of the enclave, resulting in a key available to multiple enclaves signed by the
same party.
The EGETKEY leaf function provides several key types. Each key is specific to the processor, CPUSVN, and the
enclave that executed EGETKEY. The EGETKEY instruction definition details how each of these keys is derived, see
Table 41-56. Additionally,
•   SEAL Key: The Seal key is a general purpose key for the enclave to use to protect secrets. Typical uses of the
    Seal key are encrypting and calculating MAC of secrets on disk. There are 2 types of Seal Key described in
    Section 39.4.3.1.
•   REPORT Key: This key is used to compute the MAC on the REPORT structure. The EREPORT leaf function is used
    to compute this MAC, and destination enclave uses the Report key to verify the MAC. The software usage flow
    is detailed in Section 39.4.3.2.
•   EINITOKENKEY: This key is used by Launch Enclaves to compute the MAC on EINITTOKENs. These tokens are
    then verified in the EINIT leaf function. The key is only available to enclaves with ATTRIBUTE.EINITTOKENKEY set
    to 1.

•   PROVISIONING Key and PROVISIONING SEAL Key: These keys are used by attestation key provisioning
    software to prove to remote parties that the processor is genuine and identify the currently executing TCB.
    These keys are only available to enclaves with ATTRIBUTE.PROVISIONKEY set to 1.

39.4.3.1       Sealing Enclave Data
Enclaves can protect persistent data using Seal keys to provide encryption and/or integrity protection. EGETKEY
provides two types of Seal keys specified in KEYREQUEST.KEYPOLICY field: MRENCLAVE-based key and
MRSIGNER-based key.
The MRENCLAVE-based keys are available only to enclave instances sharing the same MRENCLAVE. If a new
version of the enclave is released, the Seal keys will be different. Retrieving previous data requires additional soft-
ware support.
The MRSIGNER-based keys are bound to the 3 tuple (MRSIGNER, ISVPRODID, ISVSVN). These keys are available
to any enclave with the same MRSIGNER and ISVPRODID and an ISVSVN equal to or greater than the key in ques-
tions. This is valuable for allowing new versions of the same software to retrieve keys created before an upgrade.

39.4.3.2       Using REPORTs for Local Attestation
SGX provides a means for enclaves to securely identify one another, this is referred to as “Local Attestation”. SGX
provides a hardware assertion, REPORT that contains calling enclaves Attributes, Measurements and User supplied
data (described in detail in Section 38.15). Figure 39-3 shows the basic flow of information.
1. The source enclave determines the identity of the target enclave to populate TARGETINFO.
2. The source enclave calls EREPORT instruction to generate a REPORT structure. The EREPORT instruction
   conducts the following:
    — Populates the REPORT with identify information about the calling enclave.
    — Derives the Report Key that is returned when the target enclave executes the EGETKEY. TARGETINFO
      provides information about the target.
    — Computes a MAC over the REPORT using derived target enclave Report Key.
3. Non-enclave software copies the REPORT from source to destination.
4. The target enclave executes the EGETKEY instruction to request its REPORT key, which is the same key used by
   EREPORT at the source.
5. The target enclave verifies the MAC and can then inspect the REPORT to identify the source.

               Source Enclave
                                TARGETINFO

                     EREPORT                                                      Destination Enclave
                   (Symmetric Key)
                                                                                             EGETKEY
                                                                                           REPORT KEY

                                                       REPORT
        Legend:                                                                             Verify REPORT
                                                                                           (Symmetric Key)
           Hardware             Software

                                             Figure 39-3. SGX Local Attestation

39.5        EPC AND MANAGEMENT OF EPC PAGES
EPC layout is implementation specific, and is enumerated through CPUID (see Table 37-6 for EPC layout). EPC is
typically configured by BIOS at system boot time.
The exact amount, size, and layout of EPC are model-specific, and depend on BIOS settings.

39.5.1      EPC Implementation
EPC must be properly protected against attacks. One example of EPC implementation could use a Memory Encryp-
tion Engine (MEE). An MEE provides a cost-effective mechanism of creating cryptographically protected volatile
storage using platform DRAM. These units provide integrity, replay, and confidentiality protection. Details are
implementation specific.

39.5.2      OS Management of EPC Pages
The EPC is a finite resource. SGX1 (i.e. CPUID.(EAX=12H, ECX=0):EAX.SGX1 = 1 but CPUID.(EAX=12H,
ECX=0):EAX.SGX2 = 0) provides the EPC manager with leaf functions to manage this resource and properly swap
pages out of and into the EPC. For that, the EPC manager would need to keep track of all EPC entries, type and
state, context affiliation, and SECS affiliation.
Enclave pages that are candidates for eviction should be moved to BLOCKED state using EBLOCK instruction that
ensures no new cached virtual to physical address mappings can be created by attempts to reference a BLOCKED
page.
Before evicting blocked pages, EPC manager should execute ETRACK leaf function on that enclave and ensure that
there are no stale cached virtual to physical address mappings for the blocked pages remain on any thread on the
platform.
After removing all stale translations from blocked pages, system software should use the EWB leaf function for
securely evicting pages out of the EPC. EWB encrypts a page in the EPC, writes it to unprotected memory, and
invalidates the copy in EPC. In addition, EWB also creates a cryptographic MAC (PCMD.MAC) of the page and stores
it in unprotected memory. A page can be reloaded back to the processor only if the data and MAC match. To ensure
that the only latest version of the evicted page can be loaded back, the version of the evicted page is stored
securely in a Version Array (VA) in EPC.
SGX1 includes two instructions for reloading pages that have been evicted by system software: ELDU and ELDB.
The difference between the two instructions is the value of the paging state at the end of the instruction. ELDU
results in a page being reloaded and set to an UNBLOCKED state, while ELDB results in a page loaded to a
BLOCKED state.
ELDB is intended for use by a Virtual Machine Monitor (VMM). When a VMM reloads an evicted page, it needs to
restore it to the correct state of the page (BLOCKED vs. UNBLOCKED) as it existed at the time the page was
evicted. Based on the state of the page at eviction, the VMM chooses either ELDB or ELDU.

39.5.2.1    Enhancement to Managing EPC Pages
On processors supporting SGX2 (i.e. CPUID.(EAX=12H, ECX=0):EAX.SGX2 = 1), the EPC manager can manage
EPC resources (while enclave is running) with more flexibility provided by the SGX2 leaf functions. The additional
flexibility is described in Section 39.5.7 through Section 39.5.11.

39.5.3      Eviction of Enclave Pages
Intel SGX paging is optimized to allow the Operating System (OS) to evict multiple pages out of the EPC under a
single synchronization.
The suggested flow for evicting a list of pages from the EPC is:
1. For each page to be evicted from the EPC:
   a. Select an empty slot in a Version Array (VA) page.

         •   If no empty VA page slots exist, create a new VA page using the EPA leaf function.
    b. Remove linear-address to physical-address mapping from the enclave contexts’s mapping tables (page
       table and EPT tables).
    c.   Execute the EBLOCK leaf function for the target page. This sets the target page state to BLOCKED. At this
         point no new mappings of the page will be created. So any access which does not have the mapping cached
         in the TLB will generate a #PF.
2. For each enclave containing pages selected in step 1:
    — Execute an ETRACK leaf function pointing to that enclave’s SECS. This initiates the tracking process that
      ensures that all caching of linear-address to physical-address translations for the blocked pages is cleared.
3. For all logical processors executing in processes (OS) or guests (VMM) that contain the enclaves selected in
   step 1:
    — Issue an IPI (inter-processor interrupt) to those threads. This causes those logical processors to asynchro-
      nously exit any enclaves they might be in, and as a result flush cached linear-address to physical-address
      translations that might hold stale translations to blocked pages. There is no need for additional measures
      such as performing a “TLB shootdown”.
4. After enclaves exit, allow logical processors can resume normal operation, including enclave re-entry as the
   tracking logic keeps track of the activity.
5. For each page to be evicted:
    — Evict the page using the EWB leaf function with parameters include the effective-address pointer to the EPC
      page, the VA slot, a 4K byte buffer to hold the encrypted page contents, and a 128 byte buffer to hold page
      metadata. The last three elements are tied together cryptographically and must be used to later reload the
      page.
At this point, system software has the only copy of each page data encrypted with its page metadata in main
memory.

39.5.4          Loading an Enclave Page
To reload a previously evicted page, system software needs four elements: the VA slot used when the page was
evicted, a buffer containing the encrypted page contents, a buffer containing the page metadata, and the parent
SECS to associate this page with. If the VA page or the parent SECS are not already in the EPC, they must be
reloaded first.
1. Execute ELDB/ELDU (depending on the desired BLOCKED state for the page), passing as parameters: the EPC
   page linear address, the VA slot, the encrypted page, and the page metadata.
2. Create a mapping in the enclave context’s mapping tables (page tables and EPT tables) to allow the application
   to access that page (OS: system page table; VMM: EPT).
The ELDB/ELDU instruction marks the VA slot empty so that the page cannot be replayed at a later date.

39.5.5          Eviction of an SECS Page
The eviction of an SECS page is similar to the eviction of an enclave page. The only difference is that an SECS page
cannot be evicted until all other pages belonging to the enclave have been evicted. Since all other pages have been
evicted, there will be no threads executing inside the enclave and tracking with ETRACK isn’t necessary. When
reloading an enclave, the SECS page must be reloaded before all other constituent pages.
1. Ensure all pages are evicted from enclave.
2. Select an empty slot in a Version Array page.
    — If no VA page exists with an empty slot, create a new one using the EPA function leaf.
3. Evict the page using the EWB leaf function with parameters include the effective-address pointer to the EPC
   page, the VA slot, a 4K byte buffer to hold the encrypted page contents and a 128 byte buffer to hold page
   metadata. The last three elements are tied together cryptographically and must be used to later reload the
   page.

39.5.6      Eviction of a Version Array Page
VA pages do not belong to any enclave and tracking with ETRACK isn’t necessary. When evicting the VA page, a slot
in a different VA page must be specified in order to provide versioning of the evicted VA page.
1. Select a slot in a Version Array page other than the page being evicted.
   — If no VA page exists with an empty slot, create a new one using the EPA leaf function.
2. Evict the page using the EWB leaf function with parameters include the effective-address pointer to the EPC
   page, the VA slot, a 4K byte buffer to hold the encrypted page contents, and a 128 byte buffer to hold page
   metadata. The last three elements are tied together cryptographically and must be used to later reload the
   page.

39.5.7      Allocating a Regular Page
On processors that support SGX2, allocating a new page to an already initialized enclave is accomplished by
invoking the EAUG leaf function. Typically, the enclave requests that the OS allocate a new page at a particular
location within the enclave’s address space. Once allocated, the page remains in a pending state until the enclave
executes the corresponding EACCEPT leaf function to accept the new page into the enclave. Page allocation opera-
tions may be batched to improve efficiency.
The typical process for allocating a regular page is as follows:
1. Enclave requests additional memory from OS when the current allocation becomes insufficient.
2. The OS invokes the EAUG leaf function to add a new memory page to the enclave.
   a. EAUG may only be called on a free EPC page.
   b. Successful completion of the EAUG instruction places the target page in the VALID and PENDING state.
   c.   All dynamically created pages have the type PT_REG and content of all zeros.
3. The OS maps the page in the enclave context's mapping tables.
4. The enclave issues an EACCEPT instruction, which verifies the page’s attributes and clears the PENDING state.
   At that point the page becomes accessible for normal enclave use.

39.5.8      Allocating a TCS Page
On processors that support SGX2, allocating a new TCS page to an already initialized enclave is a two-step process.
First the OS allocates a regular page with a call to EAUG. This page must then be accepted and initialized by the
enclave to which it belongs. Once the page has been initialized with appropriate values for a TCS page, the enclave
requests the OS to change the page’s type to PT_TCS. This change must also be accepted. As with allocating a
regular page, TCS allocation operations may be batched.
A typical process for allocating a TCS page is as follows:
1. Enclave requests an additional page from the OS.
2. The OS invokes EAUG to add a new regular memory page to the enclave.
   a. EAUG may only be called on a free EPC page.
   b. Successful completion of the EAUG instruction places the target page in the VALID and PENDING state.
3. The OS maps the page in the enclave context's mapping tables.
4. The enclave issues an EACCEPT instruction, at which point the page becomes accessible for normal enclave
   use.
5. The enclave initializes the contents of the new page.
6. The enclave requests that the OS convert the page from type PT_REG to PT_TCS.
7. OS issues an EMODT instruction on the page.
   a. The parameters to EMODT indicate that the regular page should be converted into a TCS.

    b. EMODT forces all access rights to a page to be removed because TCS pages may not be accessed by enclave
       code.
8. The enclave issues an EACCEPT instruction to confirm the requested modification.

39.5.9          Trimming a Page
On processors that support SGX2, Intel SGX supports the trimming of an enclave page as a special case of EMODT.
Trimming allows an enclave to actively participate in the process of removing a page from the enclave (dealloca-
tion) by splitting the process into first removing it from the enclave's access and then removing it from the EPC
using the EREMOVE leaf function. The page type PT_TRIM indicates that a page has been trimmed from the
enclave’s address space and that the page is no longer accessible to enclave software. Modifications to a page in
the PT_TRIM state are not permitted; the page must be removed and then reallocated by the OS before the enclave
may use the page again. Page deallocation operations may be batched to improve efficiency.
The typical process for trimming a page from an enclave is as follows:
1. Enclave signals OS that a particular page is no longer in use.
2. OS invokes the EMODT leaf function on the page, requesting that the page’s type be changed to PT_TRIM.
    a. SECS and VA pages cannot be trimmed in this way, so the initial type of the page must be PT_REG or
       PT_TCS.
    b. EMODT may only be called on valid enclave pages.
3. OS invokes the ETRACK leaf function on the enclave containing the page to track removal the TLB addresses
   from all the processors.
4. Issue an IPI (inter-processor interrupt) to flush the stale linear-address to physical-address translations for all
   logical processors executing in processes that contain the enclave.
5. Enclave issues an EACCEPT leaf function.
6. The OS may now permanently remove the page from the EPC (by issuing EREMOVE).

39.5.10 Restricting the EPCM Permissions of a Page
On processors that support SGX2, restricting the EPCM permissions associated with an enclave page is accom-
plished using the EMODPR leaf function. This operation requires the cooperation of the OS to flush stale entries to
the page and to update the page-table permissions of the page to match. Permissions restriction operations may
be batched.
The typical process for restricting the permissions of an enclave page is as follows:
1. Enclave requests that the OS to restrict the permissions of an EPC page.
2. OS performs permission restriction, flushing cached linear-address to physical-address translations, and page-
   table modifications.
    a. Invokes the EMODPR leaf function to restrict permissions (EMODPR may only be called on VALID pages).
    b. Invokes the ETRACK leaf function on the enclave containing the page to track removal of the TLB addresses
       from all the processor.
    c.   Issue an IPI (inter-processor interrupt) to flush the stale linear-address to physical-address translations for
         all logical processors executing in processes that contain the enclave.
    d. Sends IPIs to trigger enclave thread exit and TLB shootdown.
    e. OS informs the Enclave that all logical processors should now see the new restricted permissions.
3. Enclave invokes the EACCEPT leaf function.
    a. Enclave may access the page throughout the entire process.
    b. Successful call to EACCEPT guarantees that no stale cached linear-address to physical-address translations
       are present.

39.5.11 Extending the EPCM Permissions of a Page
On processors that support SGX2, extending the EPCM permissions associated with an enclave page is accom-
plished directly be the enclave using the EMODPE leaf function. After performing the EPCM permission extension,
the enclave requests the OS to update the page table permissions to match the extended permission. Security
wise, permission extension does not require enclave threads to leave the enclave as TLBs with stale references to
the more restrictive permissions will be flushed on demand, but to allow forward progress, an OS needs to be
aware that an application might signal a page fault.
The typical process for extending the permissions of an enclave page is as follows:
1. Enclave invokes EMODPE to extend the EPCM permissions associated with an EPC page (EMODPE may only be
   called on VALID pages).
2. Enclave requests that OS update the page tables to match the new EPCM permissions.
3. Enclave code resumes.
    a. If cached linear-address to physical-address translations are present to the more restrictive permissions,
       the enclave thread will page fault. The SGX2-aware OS will see that the page tables permit the access and
       resume the thread, which can now successfully access the page because exiting cleared the TLB.
    b. If cached linear-address to physical-address translations are not present, access to the page with the new
       permissions will succeed without an enclave exit.

39.6         CHANGES TO INSTRUCTION BEHAVIOR INSIDE AN ENCLAVE
This section covers instructions whose behavior changes when executed in enclave mode.

39.6.1       Illegal Instructions
The instructions listed in Table 39-1 are ring 3 instructions which become illegal when executed inside an enclave.
Executing these instructions inside an enclave will generate an exception.
The first row of Table 39-1 enumerates instructions that may cause a VM exit for VMM emulation. Since a VMM
cannot emulate enclave execution, execution of any these instructions inside an enclave results in an invalid-
opcode exception (#UD) and no VM exit.
The second row of Table 39-1 enumerates I/O instructions that may cause a fault or a VM exit for emulation. Again,
enclave execution cannot be emulated, so execution of any these instructions inside an enclave results in #UD.
The third row of Table 39-1 enumerates instructions that load descriptors from the GDT or the LDT or that change
privilege level. The former class is disallowed because enclave software should not depend on the contents of the
descriptor tables and the latter because enclave execution must be entirely with CPL = 3. Again, execution of any
these instructions inside an enclave results in #UD.
The fourth row of Table 39-1 enumerates instructions that provide access to kernel information from user mode
and can be used to aid kernel exploits from within enclave. Execution of any these instructions inside an enclave
results in #UD

                                     Table 39-1. Illegal Instructions Inside an Enclave
                          Instructions                             Result                          Comment
CPUID, GETSEC, RDPMC, SGDT, SIDT, SLDT, STR, VMCALL, VMFUNC #UD             Might cause VM exit.
IN, INS/INSB/INSW/INSD, OUT, OUTS/OUTSB/OUTSW/OUTSD               #UD       I/O fault may not safely recover. May require emulation.
Far call, Far jump, Far Ret, INT n/INTO, IRET, LDS/LES/LFS/LGS/LSS, #UD     Access segment register could change privilege level.
MOV to DS/ES/SS/FS/GS, POP DS/ES/SS/FS/GS, SYSCALL,
SYSENTER
SMSW                                                              #UD       Might provide access to kernel information.
ENCLU[EENTER], ENCLU[ERESUME]                                     #GP       Cannot enter an enclave from within an enclave.

RDTSC and RDTSCP are legal inside an enclave for processors that support SGX2 (subject to the value of CR4.TSD).
For processors which support SGX1 but not SGX2, RDTSC and RDTSCP will cause #UD.
RDTSC and RDTSCP instructions may cause a VM exit when inside an enclave.
Software developers must take into account that the RDTSC/RDTSCP results are not immune to influences by other
software, e.g. the TSC can be manipulated by software outside the enclave.

39.6.2          RDRAND and RDSEED Instructions
These instructions may cause a VM exit if the “RDRAND exiting” VM-execution control is 1. Unlike other instructions
that can cause VM exits, these instructions are legal inside an enclave. As noted in Section 6.5.5, any VM exit orig-
inating on an instruction boundary inside an enclave sets bit 27 of the exit-reason field of the VMCS. If a VMM
receives a VM exit due to an attempt to execute either of these instructions determines (by that bit) that the execu-
tion was inside an enclave, it can do either of two things. It can clear the “RDRAND exiting” VM-execution control
and execute VMRESUME; this will result in the enclave executing RDRAND or RDSEED again, and this time a VM
exit will not occur. Alternatively, the VMM might choose to discontinue execution of this virtual machine.

                                                       NOTE
        It is expected that VMMs that virtualize Intel SGX will not set “RDRAND exiting” to 1.

39.6.3          PAUSE Instruction
The PAUSE instruction may cause a VM exit if either of the “PAUSE exiting” and “PAUSE-loop exiting” VM-execution
controls is 1. Unlike other instructions that can cause VM exits, the PAUSE instruction is legal inside an enclave.
If a VMM receives a VM exit due to the 1-setting of “PAUSE-loop exiting”, it may take action to prevent recurrence
of the PAUSE loop (e.g., by scheduling another virtual CPU of this virtual machine) and then execute VMRESUME;
this will result in the enclave executing PAUSE again, but this time the PAUSE loop (and resulting VM exit) will not
occur.
If a VMM receives a VM exit due to the 1-setting of “PAUSE exiting”, it can do either of two things. It can clear the
“PAUSE exiting” VM-execution control and execute VMRESUME; this will result in the enclave executing PAUSE
again, but this time a VM exit will not occur. Alternatively, the VMM might choose to discontinue execution of this
virtual machine.

                                                       NOTE
        It is expected that VMMs that virtualize Intel SGX will not set “PAUSE exiting” to 1.

39.6.4          INT 3 Behavior Inside an Enclave
INT3 is legal inside an enclave, however, the behavior inside an enclave is different from its behavior outside an
enclave. See Section 43.4.1 for details.

39.6.5          INVD Handling when Enclaves Are Enabled
Once processor reserved memory protections are activated (see Section 39.5), any execution of INVD will result in
a #GP(0).

