Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this book, and the publisher was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed with initial
capital letters or in all capitals.
Ubuntu is a registered trademark of Canonical Limited, and is used with permission.

Debian is a registered trademark of Software in the Public Interest Incorporated.
CentOS is a registered trademark of Red Hat Inc., and is used with permission.

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation, and is used with permission.
The Linux Tux logo was created by Larry Ewing, lewing@isc.tamu.edu.

The authors and publisher have taken care in the preparation of this book, but make no expressed or implied warranty of any kind
and assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. No liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection
with or arising out of the use of the information or programs contained herein.
For information about buying this title in bulk quantities, or for special sales opportunities (which may include electronic versions;
custom cover designs; and content particular to your business, training goals, marketing focus, or branding interests), please contact
our corporate sales department at corpsales@pearsoned.com or (800) 382-3419.

For government sales inquiries, please contact governmentsales@pearsoned.com.
For questions about sales outside the U.S., please contact intlcs@pearson.com.
Visit us on the web: informit.com

Library of Congress Control Number: 2017945559
Copyright © 2018 Pearson Education, Inc.

All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. This publication is protected by copyright, and permission must be
obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. For information regarding permissions, request forms and the
appropriate contacts within the Pearson Education Global Rights & Permissions Department, please visit
www.pearsoned.com/permissions/.
ISBN-13: 978-0-13-427755-4
ISBN-10: 0-13-427755-4
1 17
