Foreword

In 1942, Winston Churchill described an early battle of WWII: “this is not the end—it is not even
the beginning of the end—but it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning.” I was reminded of these
words when I was approached to write this Foreword for the fifth edition of UNIX and Linux
System Administration Handbook. The loss at sea of Evi Nemeth has been a great sadness for the
UNIX community, but I’m pleased to see her legacy endure in the form of this book and in her
many contributions to the field of system administration.
The way the world got its Internet was, originally, through UNIX. A remarkable departure from
the complex and proprietary operating systems of its day, UNIX was minimalistic, tools-driven,
portable, and widely used by people who wanted to share their work with others. What we today
call open source software was already pervasive—but nameless—in the early days of UNIX and
the Internet. Open source was just how the technical and academic communities did things,
because the benefits so obviously outweighed the costs.

Detailed histories of UNIX, Linux, and the Internet have been lovingly presented elsewhere. I
bring up these high-level touchpoints only to remind us all that the modern world owes much to
open source software and to the Internet, and that the original foundation for this bounty was
UNIX.
As early UNIX and Internet companies fought to hire the most brilliant people and to deliver the
most innovative features, software portability was often sacrificed. Eventually, system
administrators had to know a little bit about a lot of things because no two UNIX-style operating
systems (then, or now) were entirely alike. As a working UNIX system administrator in the mid-
1980s and later, I had to know not just shell scripting and Sendmail configuration but also kernel
device drivers. It was also important to know how to fix a filesystem with an octal debugger. Fun
times!
Out of that era came the first edition of this book and all the editions that followed it. In the
parlance of the times, we called the authors “Evi and crew” or perhaps “Evi and her kids.”
Because of my work on Cron and BIND, Evi spent a week or two with me (and my family, and
my workplace) every time an edition of this book was in progress to make sure she was saying
enough, saying nothing wrong, and hopefully, saying something unique and useful about each of
those programs. Frankly, being around Evi was exhausting, especially when she was curious
about something, or on a deadline, or in my case, both. That having been said, I miss Evi terribly
and I treasure every memory and every photograph of her.
In the decades of this book’s multiple editions, much has changed. It has been fascinating to
watch this book evolve along with UNIX itself. Every new edition omitted some technologies
that were no longer interesting or relevant to make room for new topics that were just becoming
important to UNIX administrators, or that the authors thought soon would be.

It’s hard to believe that we ever spent dozens of kilowatts of power on truck-sized computers
whose capabilities are now dwarfed by an Android smartphone. It’s equally hard to believe that
we used to run hundreds or thousands of individual server and desktop computers with now-
antiquated technologies like rdist. In those years, various editions of this book helped people like
me (and like Evi herself) cope with heterogeneous and sometimes proprietary computers that
were each real rather than virtualized, and which each had to be maintained rather than being
reinstalled (or in Docker, rebuilt) every time something needed patching or upgrading.
We adapt, or we exit. The “Evi kids” who carry on Evi’s legacy have adapted, and they are back
in this fifth edition to tell you what you need to know about how modern UNIX and Linux
computers work and how you can make them work the way you want them to. Evi’s loss marks
the end of an era, but it’s also sobering to consider how many aspects of system administration
have passed into history alongside her. I know dozens of smart and successful technologists who
will never dress cables in the back of an equipment rack, hear the tone of a modem, or see an RS-
232 cable. This edition is for those whose systems live in the cloud or in virtualized data centers;
those whose administrative work largely takes the form of automation and configuration source
code; those who collaborate closely with developers, network engineers, compliance officers,
and all the other worker bees who inhabit the modern hive.
You hold in your hand the latest, best edition of a book whose birth and evolution have precisely
tracked the birth and evolution of the UNIX and Internet community. Evi would be extremely
proud of her kids, both because of this book, and because of who they have each turned out to be.
I am proud to know them.
Paul Vixie
La Honda, California
June 2017
