1 Where to Start

We’ve designed this book to occupy a specific niche in the vast ecosystem of man pages, blogs,
magazines, books, and other reference materials that address the needs of UNIX and Linux
system administrators.
First, it’s an orientation guide. It reviews the major administrative systems, identifies the
different pieces of each, and explains how they work together. In the many cases where you must
choose among various implementations of a concept, we describe the advantages and drawbacks
of the most popular options.
Second, it’s a quick-reference handbook that summarizes what you need to know to perform
common tasks on a variety of common UNIX and Linux systems. For example, the ps command,
which shows the status of running processes, supports more than 80 command-line options on
Linux systems. But a few combinations of options satisfy the majority of a system
administrator’s needs; we summarize them on this page.
Finally, this book focuses on the administration of enterprise servers and networks. That is,
serious, professional system administration. It’s easy to set up a single system; harder to keep a
distributed, cloud-based platform running smoothly in the face of viral popularity, network
partitions, and targeted attacks. We describe techniques and rules of thumb that help you recover
systems from adversity, and we help you choose solutions that scale as your empire grows in
size, complexity, and heterogeneity.
We don’t claim to do all of this with perfect objectivity, but we think we’ve made our biases
fairly clear throughout the text. One of the interesting things about system administration is that
reasonable people can have dramatically different notions of what constitutes the most
appropriate solution. We offer our subjective opinions to you as raw data. Decide for yourself
how much to accept and how much of our comments apply to your environment.
1.1 ESSENTIAL DUTIES OF A SYSTEM ADMINISTRATOR
The sections below summarize some of the main tasks that administrators are expected to
perform. These duties need not necessarily be carried out by a single person, and at many sites
the work is distributed among the members of a team. However, at least one person should
understand all the components and ensure that every task is performed correctly.
Controlling access

    See Chapters 8, 17, and 23 for information about user account provisioning.

The system administrator creates accounts for new users, removes the accounts of inactive users,
and handles all the account-related issues that come up in between (e.g., forgotten passwords and
lost key pairs). The process of actually adding and removing accounts is typically automated by a
configuration management system or centralized directory service.
Adding hardware
Administrators who work with physical hardware (as opposed to cloud or hosted systems) must
install it and configure it to be recognized by the operating system. Hardware support chores
might range from the simple task of adding a network interface card to configuring a specialized
external storage array.
Automating tasks

    See Chapter 7, Scripting and the Shell, for information about scripting and automation.

Using tools to automate repetitive and time-consuming tasks increases your efficiency, reduces
the likelihood of errors caused by humans, and improves your ability to respond rapidly to
changing requirements. Administrators strive to reduce the amount of manual labor needed to
keep systems functioning smoothly. Familiarity with scripting languages and automation tools is
a large part of the job.
Overseeing backups

    See this page for some tips on performing backups.

Backing up data and restoring it successfully when required are important administrative tasks.
Although backups are time consuming and boring, the frequency of real-world disasters is simply
too high to allow the job to be disregarded.
Operating systems and some individual software packages provide well-established tools and
techniques to facilitate backups. Backups must be executed on a regular schedule and restores
must be tested periodically to ensure that they are functioning correctly.
Installing and upgrading software

     See Chapter 6 for information about software management.

Software must be selected, installed, and configured, often on a variety of operating systems. As
patches and security updates are released, they must be tested, reviewed, and incorporated into
the local environment without endangering the stability of production systems.

     See Chapter 26 for information about software deployment and continuous delivery.

The term “software delivery” refers to the process of releasing updated versions of software—
especially software developed in-house—to downstream users. “Continuous delivery” takes this
process to the next level by automatically releasing software to users at a regular cadence as it is
developed. Administrators help implement robust delivery processes that meet the requirements
of the enterprise.
Monitoring

     See Chapter 28 for information about monitoring.

Working around a problem is usually faster than taking the time to document and report it, and
users internal to an organization often follow the path of least resistance. External users are more
likely to voice their complaints publicly than to open a support inquiry. Administrators can help
to prevent both of these outcomes by detecting problems and fixing them before public failures
occur.
Some monitoring tasks include ensuring that web services respond quickly and correctly,
collecting and analyzing log files, and keeping tabs on the availability of server resources such as
disk space. All of these are excellent opportunities for automation, and a slew of open source and
commercial monitoring systems can help sysadmins with these tasks.
Troubleshooting

    See this page for an introduction to network troubleshooting.

Networked systems fail in unexpected and sometimes spectacular fashion. It’s the administrator’s
job to play mechanic by diagnosing problems and calling in subject-matter experts as needed.
Finding the source of a problem is often more challenging than resolving it.
Maintaining local documentation

    See this page for suggestions regarding documentation.

Administrators choose vendors, write scripts, deploy software, and make many other decisions
that may not be immediately obvious or intuitive to others. Thorough and accurate
documentation is a blessing for team members who would otherwise need to reverse-engineer a
system to resolve problems in the middle of the night. A lovingly crafted network diagram is
more useful than many paragraphs of text when describing a design.
Vigilantly monitoring security

    See Chapter 27 for more information about security.

Administrators are the first line of defense for protecting network-attached systems. The
administrator must implement a security policy and set up procedures to prevent systems from
being breached. This responsibility might include only a few basic checks for unauthorized
access, or it might involve an elaborate network of traps and auditing programs, depending on the
context. System administrators are cautious by nature and are often the primary champions of
security across a technical organization.
Tuning performance

     See Chapter 29 for more information about performance.

UNIX and Linux are general purpose operating systems that are well suited to almost any
conceivable computing task. Administrators can tailor systems for optimal performance in accord
with the needs of users, the available infrastructure, and the services the systems provide. When a
server is performing poorly, it is the administrator’s job to investigate its operation and identify
areas that need improvement.
Developing site policies

    See the sections starting on this page for information about local policy-making.

For legal and compliance reasons, most sites need policies that govern the acceptable use of
computer systems, the management and retention of data, the privacy and security of networks
and systems, and other areas of regulatory interest. System administrators often help
organizations develop sensible policies that meet the letter and intent of the law and yet still
promote progress and productivity.
Working with vendors
Most sites rely on third parties to provide a variety of ancillary services and products related to
their computing infrastructure. These providers might include software developers, cloud
infrastructure providers, hosted software-as-a-service (SaaS) shops, help-desk support staff,
consultants, contractors, security experts, and platform or infrastructure vendors. Administrators
may be tasked with selecting vendors, assisting with contract negotiations, and implementing
solutions once the paperwork has been completed.
Fire fighting
Although helping other people with their various problems is rarely included in a system
administrator’s job description, these tasks claim a measurable portion of most administrators’
workdays. System administrators are bombarded with problems ranging from “It worked
yesterday and now it doesn’t! What did you change?” to “I spilled coffee on my keyboard!
Should I pour water on it to wash it out?”
In most cases, your response to these issues affects your perceived value as an administrator far
more than does any actual technical skill you might possess. You can either howl at the injustice
of it all, or you can delight in the fact that a single well-handled trouble ticket scores more
brownie points than five hours of midnight debugging. Your choice!
1.2 SUGGESTED BACKGROUND
We assume in this book that you have a certain amount of Linux or UNIX experience. In
particular, you should have a general concept of how the system looks and feels from a user’s
perspective since we do not review that material. Several good books can get you up to speed;
see Recommended reading.
We love well-designed graphical interfaces. Unfortunately, GUI tools for system administration
on UNIX and Linux remain rudimentary in comparison with the richness of the underlying
software. In the real world, administrators must be comfortable using the command line.

For text editing, we strongly recommend learning vi (now seen more commonly in its enhanced
form, vim), which is standard on all systems. It is simple, powerful, and efficient. Mastering vim
is perhaps the single best productivity enhancement available to administrators. Use the vimtutor
command for an excellent, interactive introduction.
Alternatively, GNU’s nano is a simple and low-impact “starter editor” that has on-screen
prompts. Use it discreetly; professional administrators may be visibly distressed if they witness a
peer running nano.

     See Chapter 7 for an introduction to scripting.

Although administrators are not usually considered software developers, industry trends are
blurring the lines between these functions. Capable administrators are usually polyglot
programmers who don’t mind picking up a new language when the need arises.

For new scripting projects, we recommend Bash (aka bash, aka sh), Ruby, or Python. Bash is the
default command shell on most UNIX and Linux systems. It is primitive as a programming
language, but it serves well as the duct tape in an administrative tool box. Python is a clever
language with a highly readable syntax, a large developer community, and libraries that facilitate
many common tasks. Ruby developers describe the language as “a joy to work with” and
“beautiful to behold.” Ruby and Python are similar in many ways, and we’ve found them to be
equally functional for administration. The choice between them is mostly a matter of personal
preference.
We also suggest that you learn expect, which is not a programming language so much as a front
end for driving interactive programs. It’s an efficient glue technology that can replace some
complex scripting and is easy to learn.
Chapter 7, Scripting and the Shell, summarizes the most important things to know about scripting
for Bash, Python, and Ruby. It also reviews regular expressions (text matching patterns) and
some shell idioms that are useful for sysadmins.
1.3 LINUX DISTRIBUTIONS
A Linux distribution comprises the Linux kernel, which is the core of the operating system, and
packages that make up all the commands you can run on the system. All distributions share the
same kernel lineage, but the format, type, and number of packages differ quite a bit. Distributions
also vary in their focus, support, and popularity. There continue to be hundreds of independent
Linux distributions, but our sense is that distributions derived from the Debian and Red Hat
lineages will predominate in production environments in the years ahead.
By and large, the differences among Linux distributions are not cosmically significant. In fact, it
is something of a mystery why so many different distributions exist, each claiming “easy
installation” and “a massive software library” as its distinguishing features. It’s hard to avoid the
conclusion that people just like to make new Linux distributions.

Most major distributions include a relatively painless installation procedure, a desktop
environment, and some form of package management. You can try them out easily by starting up
a cloud instance or a local virtual machine.

     See Chapter 25, Containers, for more information about Docker and containers.

Much of the insecurity of general-purpose operating systems derives from their complexity.
Virtually all leading distributions are cluttered with scores of unused software packages; security
vulnerabilities and administrative anguish often come along for the ride. In response, a relatively
new breed of minimalist distributions has been gaining traction. CoreOS is leading the charge
against the status quo and prefers to run all software in containers. Alpine Linux is a lightweight
distribution that is used as the basis of many public Docker images. Given this reductionist trend,
we expect the footprint of Linux to shrink over the coming years.
By adopting a distribution, you are making an investment in a particular vendor’s way of doing
things. Instead of looking only at the features of the installed software, it’s wise to consider how
your organization and that vendor are going to work with each other. Some important questions
to ask are:

      Is this distribution going to be around in five years?

      Is this distribution going to stay on top of the latest security patches?
      Does this distribution have an active community and sufficient documentation?
      If I have problems, will the vendor talk to me, and how much will that cost?

Table 1.1 lists some of the most popular mainstream distributions.
Table 1.1: Most popular general-purpose Linux distributions

The most viable distributions are not necessarily the most corporate. For example, we expect
Debian Linux (OK, OK, Debian GNU/Linux!) to remain viable for a long time despite the fact
that Debian is not a company, doesn’t sell anything, and offers no enterprise-level support.
Debian benefits from a committed group of contributors and from the enormous popularity of the
Ubuntu distribution, which is based on it.
A comprehensive list of distributions, including many non-English distributions, can be found at
lwn.net/Distributions or distrowatch.com.
1.4 EXAMPLE SYSTEMS USED IN THIS BOOK
We have chosen three popular Linux distributions and one UNIX variant as our primary
examples for this book: Debian GNU/Linux, Ubuntu Linux, Red Hat Enterprise Linux (and its
dopplegänger CentOS), and FreeBSD. These systems are representative of the overall
marketplace and account collectively for a substantial portion of installations in use at large sites
today.
Information in this book generally applies to all of our example systems unless a specific
attribution is given. Details particular to one system are marked with a logo:

Most of these marks belong to the vendors that release the corresponding software and are used
with the kind permission of their respective owners. However, the vendors have not reviewed or
endorsed the contents of this book.

We repeatedly attempted and failed to obtain permission from Red Hat to use their famous red
fedora logo, so you’re stuck with yet another technical acronym. At least this one is in the
margins.
The paragraphs below provide a bit more detail about each of the example systems.
Example Linux distributions
     Information that’s specific to Linux but not to any particular distribution is marked with the
     Tux penguin logo shown at left.
     Debian (pronounced deb-ian, named after the late founder Ian Murdock and his wife
     Debra), is one of the oldest and most well-regarded distributions. It is a noncommercial
project with more than a thousand contributors worldwide. Debian maintains an ideological
commitment to community development and open access, so there’s never any question about
which parts of the distribution are free or redistributable.
Debian defines three releases that are maintained simultaneously: stable, targeting production
servers; unstable, with current packages that may have bugs and security vulnerabilities; and
testing, which is somewhere in between.
     Ubuntu is based on Debian and maintains Debian’s commitment to free and open source
     software. The business behind Ubuntu is Canonical Ltd., founded by entrepreneur Mark
Shuttleworth.

Canonical offers a variety of editions of Ubuntu targeting the cloud, the desktop, and bare metal.
There are even releases intended for phones and tablets. Ubuntu version numbers derive from the
year and month of release, so version 16.10 is from October, 2016. Each release also has an
alliterative code name such as Vivid Vervet or Wily Werewolf.
Two versions of Ubuntu are released annually: one in April and one in October. The April
releases in even-numbered years are long-term support (LTS) editions that promise five years of
maintenance updates. These are the releases recommended for production use.
      Red Hat has been a dominant force in the Linux world for more than two decades, and its
      distributions are widely used in North America and beyond. By the numbers, Red Hat, Inc.,
is the most successful open source software company in the world.
Red Hat Enterprise Linux, often shortened to RHEL, targets production environments at large
enterprises that require support and consulting services to keep their systems running smoothly.
Somewhat paradoxically, RHEL is open source but requires a license. If you’re not willing to pay
for the license, you’re not going to be running Red Hat.

Red Hat also sponsors Fedora, a community-based distribution that serves as an incubator for
bleeding-edge software not considered stable enough for RHEL. Fedora is used as the initial test
bed for software and configurations that later find their way to RHEL.
     CentOS is virtually identical to Red Hat Enterprise Linux, but free of charge. The CentOS
     Project (centos.org) is owned by Red Hat and employs its lead developers. However, they
operate separately from the Red Hat Enterprise Linux team. The CentOS distribution lacks Red
Hat’s branding and a few proprietary tools, but is in other respects equivalent.
CentOS is an excellent choice for sites that want to deploy a production-oriented distribution
without paying tithes to Red Hat. A hybrid approach is also feasible: front-line servers can run
Red Hat Enterprise Linux and avail themselves of Red Hat’s excellent support, even as
nonproduction systems run CentOS. This arrangement covers the important bases in terms of risk
and support while also minimizing cost and administrative complexity.
CentOS aspires to full binary and bug-for-bug compatibility with Red Hat Enterprise Linux.
Rather than repeating “Red Hat and CentOS” ad nauseam, we generally mention only one or the
other in this book. The text applies equally to Red Hat and CentOS unless we note otherwise.

Other popular distributions are also Red Hat descendants. Oracle sells a rebranded and
customized version of CentOS to customers of its enterprise database software. Amazon Linux,
available to Amazon Web Services users, was initially derived from CentOS and still shares
many of its conventions.
Most administrators will encounter a Red Hat-like system at some point in their careers, and
familiarity with its nuances is helpful even if it isn’t the system of choice at your site.
Example UNIX distribution
The popularity of UNIX has been waning for some time, and most of the stalwart UNIX
distributions (e.g., Solaris, HP-UX, and AIX) are no longer in common use. The open source
descendants of BSD are exceptions to this trend and continue to enjoy a cult following,
particularly among operating system experts, free software evangelists, and security-minded
administrators. In other words, some of the world’s foremost operating system authorities rely on
the various BSD distributions. Apple’s macOS has a BSD heritage.
     FreeBSD, first released in late 1993, is the most widely used of the BSD derivatives. It
     commands a 70% market share among BSD variants according to some usage statistics.
Users include major Internet companies such as WhatsApp, Google, and Netflix.
Unlike Linux, FreeBSD is a complete operating system, not just a kernel. Both the kernel and
userland software are licensed under the permissive BSD License, a fact that encourages
development by and additions from the business community.
1.5 NOTATION AND TYPOGRAPHICAL CONVENTIONS
In this book, filenames, commands, and literal arguments to commands are shown in boldface.
Placeholders (e.g., command arguments that should not be taken literally) are in italics. For
example, in the command

you’re supposed to replace file and directory with the names of an actual file and an actual
directory.
Excerpts from configuration files and terminal sessions are shown in a code font. Sometimes, we
annotate sessions with the bash comment character # and italic text. For example:

We use $ to denote the shell prompt for a normal, unprivileged user, and # for the root user. When
a command is specific to a distribution or family of distributions, we prefix the prompt with the
distribution name. For example:

This convention is aligned with the one used by standard UNIX and Linux shells.
Outside of these specific cases, we have tried to keep special fonts and formatting conventions to
a minimum as long as we could do so without compromising intelligibility. For example, we
often talk about entities such as the daemon group with no special formatting at all.

We use the same conventions as the manual pages for command syntax:

      Anything between square brackets (“[” and “]”) is optional.
      Anything followed by an ellipsis (“…”) can be repeated.
      Curly braces (“{” and “}”) mean that you should select one of the items separated by
      vertical bars (“|”).

For example, the specification

would match any of the following commands:
We use shell-style globbing characters for pattern matching:

      A star (*) matches zero or more characters.
      A question mark (?) matches one character.
      A tilde or “twiddle” (~) means the home directory of the current user.
      ~user means the home directory of user.

For example, we might refer to the startup script directories /etc/rc0.d, /etc/rc1.d, and so on with
the shorthand pattern /etc/rc*.d.

Text within quotation marks often has a precise technical meaning. In these cases, we ignore the
normal rules of U.S. English and put punctuation outside the quotes so that there can be no
confusion about what’s included and what’s not.
1.6 UNITS
Metric prefixes such as kilo-, mega-, and giga- are defined as powers of 10; one megabuck is
$1,000,000. However, computer types have long poached these prefixes and used them to refer to
powers of 2. For example, one “megabyte” of memory is really 220 or 1,048,576 bytes. The stolen
units have even made their way into formal standards such as the JEDEC Solid State Technology
Association’s Standard 100B.01, which recognizes the prefixes as denoting powers of 2 (albeit
with some misgivings).
In an attempt to restore clarity, the International Electrotechnical Commission has defined a set
of numeric prefixes (kibi-, mebi-, gibi-, and so on, abbreviated Ki, Mi, and Gi) based explicitly
on powers of 2. Those units are always unambiguous, but they are just starting to be widely used.
The original kilo-series prefixes are still used in both senses.

Context helps with decoding. RAM is always denominated in powers of 2, but network
bandwidth is always a power of 10. Storage space is usually quoted in power-of-10 units, but
block and page sizes are in fact powers of 2.
In this book, we use IEC units for powers of 2, metric units for powers of 10, and metric units for
rough values and cases in which the exact basis is unclear, undocumented, or impossible to
determine. In command output and in excerpts from configuration files, or where the delineation
is not important, we leave the original values and unit designators. We abbreviate bit as b and
byte as B. Table 1.2 shows some examples.

Table 1.2: Unit decoding examples

The abbreviation K, as in “8KB of RAM!”, is not part of any standard. It’s a computerese
adaptation of the metric abbreviation k, for kilo-, and originally meant 1,024 as opposed to 1,000.
But since the abbreviations for the larger metric prefixes are already upper case, the analogy
doesn’t scale. Later, people became confused about the distinction and started using K for factors
of 1,000, too.
Most of the world doesn’t consider this to be an important matter and, like the use of imperial
units in the United States, metric prefixes are likely to be misused for the foreseeable future.
Ubuntu maintains a helpful units policy, though we suspect it has not been widely adopted even
at Canonical; see wiki.ubuntu.com/UnitsPolicy for some additional details.
1.7 MAN PAGES AND OTHER ON-LINE DOCUMENTATION
The manual pages, usually called “man pages” because they are read with the man command,
constitute the traditional “on-line” documentation. (Of course, these days all documentation is
on-line in some form or another.) Program-specific man pages come along for the ride when you
install new software packages. Even in the age of Google, we continue to consult man pages as
an authoritative resource because they are accessible from the command line, typically include
complete details on a program’s options, and show helpful examples and related commands.
Man pages are concise descriptions of individual commands, drivers, file formats, or library
routines. They do not address more general topics such as “How do I install a new device?” or
“Why is this system so damn slow?”
Organization of the man pages
FreeBSD and Linux divide the man pages into sections. Table 1.3 shows the basic schema. Other
UNIX variants sometimes define the sections slightly differently.

Table 1.3: Sections of the man pages

The exact structure of the sections isn’t important for most topics because man finds the
appropriate page wherever it is stored. Just be aware of the section definitions when a topic with
the same name appears in multiple sections. For example, passwd is both a command and a
configuration file, so it has entries in both section 1 and section 5.
man: read man pages
man title formats a specific manual page and sends it to your terminal through more, less, or
whatever program is specified in your PAGER environment variable. title is usually a command,
device, filename, or name of a library routine. The sections of the manual are searched in roughly
numeric order, although sections that describe commands (sections 1 and 8) are usually searched
first.

     See this page to learn about environment variables.

The form man section title gets you a man page from a particular section. Thus, on most
systems, man sync gets you the man page for the sync command, and man 2 sync gets you the
man page for the sync system call.
man -k keyword or apropos keyword prints a list of man pages that have keyword in their one-
line synopses. For example:

The keywords database can become outdated. If you add additional man pages to your system,
you may need to rebuild this file with makewhatis (Red Hat and FreeBSD) or mandb (Ubuntu).
Storage of man pages
nroff input for man pages (i.e., the man page source code) is stored in directories under
/usr/share/man and compressed with gzip to save space. The man command knows how to
decompress them on the fly.
man maintains a cache of formatted pages in /var/cache/man or /usr/share/man if the
appropriate directories are writable; however, this is a security risk. Most systems preformat the
man pages once at installation time (see catman) or not at all.
The man command can search several man page repositories to find the manual pages you
request. On Linux systems, you can find out the current default search path with the manpath
command. This path (from Ubuntu) is typical:

If necessary, you can set your MANPATH environment variable to override the default path:

Some systems let you set a custom system-wide default search path for man pages, which can be
useful if you need to maintain a parallel tree of man pages such as those generated by OpenPKG.
To distribute local documentation in the form of man pages, however, it is simpler to use your
system’s standard packaging mechanism and to put man pages in the standard man directories.
See Chapter 6, Software Installation and Management, for more details.
1.8 OTHER AUTHORITATIVE DOCUMENTATION
Man pages are just a small part of the official documentation. Most of the rest, unfortunately, is
scattered about on the web.
System-specific guides
Major vendors have their own dedicated documentation projects. Many continue to produce
useful book-length manuals, including administration and installation guides. These are generally
available on-line and as downloadable PDF files. Table 1.4 shows where to look.

Table 1.4: Where to find OS vendors’ proprietary documentation

Although this documentation is helpful, it’s not the sort of thing you keep next to your bed for
light evening reading (though some vendors’ versions would make useful sleep aids). We
generally Google for answers before turning to vendor docs.
Package-specific documentation
Most of the important software packages in the UNIX and Linux world are maintained by
individuals or by third parties such as the Internet Systems Consortium and the Apache Software
Foundation. These groups write their own documentation. The quality runs the gamut from
embarrassing to spectacular, but jewels such as Pro Git from git-scm.com/book make the hunt
worthwhile.
Supplemental documents include white papers (technical reports), design rationales, and book- or
pamphlet-length treatments of particular topics. These supplemental materials are not limited to
describing just one command, so they can adopt a tutorial or procedural approach. Many pieces
of software have both a man page and a long-form article. For example, the man page for vim
tells you about the command-line arguments that vim understands, but you have to turn to an in-
depth treatment to learn how to actually edit a file.
Most software projects have user and developer mailing lists and IRC channels. This is the first
place to visit if you have questions about a specific configuration issue or if you encounter a bug.
Books
The O’Reilly books are favorites in the technology industry. The business began with UNIX in a
Nutshell and now includes a separate volume on just about every important UNIX and Linux
subsystem and command. O’Reilly also publishes books on network protocols, programming
languages, Microsoft Windows, and other non-UNIX tech topics. All the books are reasonably
priced, timely, and focused.
Many readers turn to O’Reilly’s Safari Books Online, a subscription service that offers unlimited
electronic access to books, videos, and other learning resources. Content from many publishers is
included—not just O’Reilly—and you can choose from an immense library of material.
RFC publications
Request for Comments documents describe the protocols and procedures used on the Internet.
Most of these are relatively detailed and technical, but some are written as overviews. The phrase
“reference implementation” applied to software usually translates to “implemented by a trusted
source according to the RFC specification.”
RFCs are absolutely authoritative, and many are quite useful for system administrators. See this
page for a more complete description of these documents. We refer to various RFCs throughout
this book.
1.9 OTHER SOURCES OF INFORMATION
The sources discussed in the previous section are peer reviewed and written by authoritative
sources, but they’re hardly the last word in UNIX and Linux administration. Countless blogs,
discussion forums, and news feeds are available on the Internet.
It should go without saying, but Google is a system administrator’s best friend. Unless you’re
looking up the details of a specific command or file format, Google or an equivalent search
engine should be the first resource you consult for any sysadmin question. Make it a habit; if
nothing else, you’ll avoid the delay and humiliation of having your questions in an on-line forum
answered with a link to Google (or worse yet, a link to Google through lmgtfy.com). When stuck,
search the web.
Keeping current
Operating systems and the tools and techniques that support them change rapidly. Read the sites
in Table 1.5 with your morning coffee to keep abreast of industry trends.

Table 1.5: Resources for keeping up to date

Social media are also useful. Twitter and reddit in particular have strong, engaged communities
with a lot to offer, though the signal-to-noise ratio can sometimes be quite bad. On reddit, join
the sysadmin, linux, linuxadmin, and netsec subreddits.
HowTos and reference sites
The sites listed in Table 1.6 contain guides, tutorials, and articles about how to accomplish
specific tasks on UNIX and Linux.

Table 1.6: Task-specific forums and reference sites

Stack Overflow and Server Fault, both listed in Table 1.6 (and both members of the Stack
Exchange group of sites), warrant a closer look. If you’re having a problem, chances are that
somebody else has already seen it and asked for help on one of these sites. The reputation-based
Q&A format used by the Stack Exchange sites has proved well suited to the kinds of problems
that sysadmins and programmers encounter. It’s worth creating an account and joining this large
community.
Conferences
Industry conferences are a great way to network with other professionals, keep tabs on
technology trends, take training classes, gain certifications, and learn about the latest services and
products. The number of conferences pertinent to administration has exploded in recent years.
Table 1.7 highlights some of the most prominent ones.

Table 1.7: Conferences relevant to system administrators

Meetups (meetup.com) are another way to network and engage with like-minded people. Most
urban areas in the United States and around the world have a Linux user group or DevOps
meetup that sponsors speakers, discussions, and hack days.
1.10 WAYS TO FIND AND INSTALL SOFTWARE
Chapter 6, Software Installation and Management, addresses software provisioning in detail. But
for the impatient, here’s a quick primer on how to find out what’s installed on your system and
how to obtain and install new software.
Modern operating systems divide their contents into packages that can be installed independently
of one another. The default installation includes a range of starter packages that you can expand
and contract according to your needs. When adding software, don your security hat and
remember that additional software creates additional attack surface. Only install what’s
necessary.

Add-on software is often provided in the form of precompiled packages as well, although the
degree to which this is a mainstream approach varies widely among systems. Most software is
developed by independent groups that release the software in the form of source code. Package
repositories then pick up the source code, compile it appropriately for the conventions in use on
the systems they serve, and package the resulting binaries. It’s usually easier to install a system-
specific binary package than to fetch and compile the original source code. However, packagers
are sometimes a release or two behind the current version.
The fact that two systems use the same package format doesn’t necessarily mean that packages
for the two systems are interchangeable. Red Hat and SUSE both use RPM, for example, but
their filesystem layouts are somewhat different. It’s best to use packages designed for your
particular system if they are available.
Our example systems provide excellent package management systems that include tools for
accessing and searching hosted software repositories. Distributors aggressively maintain these
repositories on behalf of the community, to facilitate patching and software updates. Life is good.
When the packaged format is insufficient, administrators must install software the old-fashioned
way: by downloading a tar archive of the source code and manually configuring, compiling, and
installing it. Depending on the software and the operating system, this process can range from
trivial to nightmarish.

In this book, we generally assume that optional software is already installed rather than torturing
you with boilerplate instructions for installing every package. If there’s a potential for confusion,
we sometimes mention the exact names of the packages needed to complete a particular project.
For the most part, however, we don’t repeat installation instructions since they tend to be similar
from one package to the next.
Determining if software is already installed
For a variety of reasons, it can be a bit tricky to determine which package contains the software
you actually need. Rather than starting at the package level, it’s easier to use the shell’s which
command to find out if a relevant binary is already in your search path. For example, the
following command reveals that the GNU C compiler has already been installed on this machine:

If which can’t find the command you’re looking for, try whereis; it searches a broader range of
system directories and is independent of your shell’s search path.

Another alternative is the incredibly useful locate command, which consults a precompiled index
of the filesystem to locate filenames that match a particular pattern.
FreeBSD includes locate as part of the base system. In Linux, the current implementation of
locate is in the mlocate package. On Red Hat and CentOS, install the mlocate package with
yum; see this page.
locate can find any type of file; it is not specific to commands or packages. For example, if you
weren’t sure where to find the signal.h include file, you could try

locate’s database is updated periodically by the updatedb command (in FreeBSD,
locate.updatedb), which runs periodically out of cron. Therefore, the results of a locate don’t
always reflect recent changes to the filesystem.

     See Chapter 6 for more information about package management.

If you know the name of the package you’re looking for, you can also use your system’s
packaging utilities to check directly for the package’s presence. For example, on a Red Hat
system, the following command checks for the presence (and installed version) of the Python
interpreter:

You can also find out which package a particular file belongs to:
Adding new software
If you do need to install additional software, you first need to determine the canonical name of
the relevant software package. For example, you’d need to translate “I want to install locate” to
“I need to install the mlocate package,” or translate “I need named” to “I have to install BIND.”
A variety of system-specific indexes on the web can help with this, but Google is usually just as
effective. For example, a search for “locate command” takes you directly to several relevant
discussions.
The following examples show the installation of the tcpdump command on each of our example
systems. tcpdump is a packet capture tool that lets you view the raw packets being sent to and
from the system on the network.
          Debian and Ubuntu use APT, the Debian Advanced Package Tool:

          The Red Hat and CentOS version is
The package manager for FreeBSD is pkg.
Building software from source code
As an illustration, here’s how you build a version of tcpdump from the source code.
The first chore is to identify the code. Software maintainers sometimes keep an index of releases
on the project’s web site that are downloadable as tarballs. For open source projects, you’re most
likely to find the code in a Git repository.
The tcpdump source is kept on GitHub. Clone the repository in the /tmp directory, create a
branch of the tagged version you want to build, then unpack, configure, build, and install it:

This configure/make/make install sequence is common to most software written in C and works
on all UNIX and Linux systems. It’s always a good idea to check the package’s INSTALL or
README file for specifics. You must have the development environment and any package-
specific prerequisites installed. (In the case of tcpdump, libpcap and its libraries are
prerequisites.)
You’ll often need to tweak the build configuration, so use ./configure --help to see the options
available for each particular package. Another useful configure option is --prefix=directory,
which lets you compile the software for installation somewhere other than /usr/local, which is
usually the default.
Installing from a web script
Cross-platform software bundles increasingly offer an expedited installation process that’s driven
by a shell script you download from the web with curl, fetch, or wget. These are all simple
HTTP clients that download the contents of a URL to a local file or, optionally, print the contents
to their standard output. For example, to set up a machine as a Salt client, you can run the
following commands:

The bootstrap script investigates the local environment, then downloads, installs, and configures
an appropriate version of the software. This type of installation is particularly common in cases
where the process itself is somewhat complex, but the vendor is highly motivated to make things
easy for users. (Another good example is RVM; see this page.)

     See Chapter 6 for more information about package installation.

This installation method is perfectly fine, but it raises a couple of issues that are worth
mentioning. To begin with, it leaves no proper record of the installation for future reference. If
your operating system offers a packagized version of the software, it’s usually preferable to
install the package instead of running a web installer. Packages are easy to track, upgrade, and
remove. (On the other hand, most OS-level packages are out of date. You probably won’t end up
with the most current version of the software.)

     See this page for details on HTTPS’s chain of trust.

Be very suspicious if the URL of the boot script is not secure (that is, it does not start with
https:). Unsecured HTTP is trivial to hijack, and installation URLs are of particular interest to
hackers because they know you’re likely to run, as root, whatever code comes back. By contrast,
HTTPS validates the identity of the server through a cryptographic chain of trust. Not foolproof,
but reliable enough.

A few vendors publicize an HTTP installation URL that automatically redirects to an HTTPS
version. This is dumb and is in fact no more secure than straight-up HTTP. There’s nothing to
prevent the initial HTTP exchange from being intercepted, so you might never reach the vendor’s
redirect. However, the existence of such redirects does mean it’s worth trying your own
substitution of https for http in insecure URLs. More often than not, it works just fine.
The shell accepts script text on its standard input, and this feature enables tidy, one-line
installation procedures such as the following:
However, there’s a potential issue with this construction in that the root shell still runs even if
curl outputs a partial script and then fails—say, because of a transient network glitch. The end
result is unpredictable and potentially not good.
We are not aware of any documented cases of problems attributable to this cause. Nevertheless, it
is a plausible failure mode. More to the point, piping the output of curl to a shell has entered the
collective sysadmin unconscious as a prototypical rookie blunder, so if you must do it, at least
keep it on the sly.
The fix is easy: just save the script to a temporary file, then run the script in a separate step after
the download successfully completes.
1.11 WHERE TO HOST
Operating systems and software can be hosted in private data centers, at co-location facilities, on
a cloud platform, or on some combination of these. Most burgeoning startups choose the cloud.
Established enterprises are likely to have existing data centers and may run a private cloud
internally.
The most practical choice, and our recommendation for new projects, is a public cloud provider.
These facilities offer numerous advantages over data centers:

      No capital expenses and low initial operating costs

      No need to install, secure, and manage hardware
      On-demand adjustment of storage, bandwidth, and compute capacity
      Ready-made solutions for common ancillary needs such as databases, load balancers,
      queues, monitoring, and more
      Cheaper and simpler implementation of highly available/redundant systems

Early cloud systems acquired a reputation for inferior security and performance, but these are no
longer major concerns. These days, most of our administration work is in the cloud. See Chapter
9 for a general introduction to this space.

Our preferred cloud platform is the leader in the space: Amazon Web Services (AWS). Gartner, a
leading technology research firm, found that AWS is ten times the size of all competitors
combined. AWS innovates rapidly and offers a much broader array of services than does any
other provider. It also has a reputation for excellent customer service and supports a large and
engaged community. AWS offers a free service tier to cut your teeth on, including a year’s use of
a low powered cloud server.
Google Cloud Platform (GCP) is aggressively improving and marketing its products. Some claim
that its technology is unmatched by other providers. GCP’s growth has been slow, in part due to
Google’s reputation for dropping support for popular offerings. However, its customer-friendly
pricing terms and unique features are appealing differentiators.
DigitalOcean is a simpler service with a stated goal of high performance. Its target market is
developers, whom it woos with a clean API, low pricing, and extremely fast boot times.
DigitalOcean is a strong proponent of open source software, and their tutorials and guides for
popular Internet technologies are some of the best available.
1.12 SPECIALIZATION AND ADJACENT DISCIPLINES
System administrators do not exist in a vacuum; a team of experts is required to build and
maintain a complex network. This section describes some of the roles with which system
administrators overlap in skills and scope. Some administrators choose to specialize in one or
more of these areas.
Your goal as a system administrator, or as a professional working in any of these related areas, is
to achieve the objectives of the organization. Avoid letting politics or hierarchy interfere with
progress. The best administrators solve problems and share information freely with others.
DevOps

    See this page for more comments on DevOps.

DevOps is not so much a specific function as a culture or operational philosophy. It aims to
improve the efficiency of building and delivering software, especially at large sites that have
many interrelated services and teams. Organizations with a DevOps practice promote integration
among engineering teams and may draw little or no distinction between development and
operations. Experts who work in this area seek out inefficient processes and replace them with
small shell scripts or large and unwieldy Chef repositories.
Site reliability engineers
Site reliability engineers value uptime and correctness above all else. Monitoring networks,
deploying production software, taking pager duty, planning future expansion, and debugging
outages all lie within the realm of these availability crusaders. Single points of failure are site
reliability engineers’ nemeses.
Security operations engineers
Security operations engineers focus on the practical, day-to-day side of an information security
program. These folks install and operate tools that search for vulnerabilities and monitor for
attacks on the network. They also participate in attack simulations to gauge the effectiveness of
their prevention and detection techniques.
Network administrators
Network administrators design, install, configure, and operate networks. Sites that operate data
centers are most likely to employ network administrators; that’s because these facilities have a
variety of physical switches, routers, firewalls, and other devices that need management. Cloud
platforms also offer a variety of networking options, but these usually don’t require a dedicated
administrator because most of the work is handled by the provider.
Database administrators
Database administrators (sometimes known as DBAs) are experts at installing and managing
database software. They manage database schemas, perform installations and upgrades, configure
clustering, tune settings for optimal performance, and help users formulate efficient queries.
DBAs are usually wizards with one or more query languages and have experience with both
relational and nonrelational (NoSQL) databases.
Network operations center (NOC) engineers
NOC engineers monitor the real-time health of large sites and track incidents and outages. They
troubleshoot tickets from users, perform routine upgrades, and coordinate actions among other
teams. They can most often be found watching a wall of monitors that show graphs and
measurements.
Data center technicians
Data center technicians work with hardware. They receive new equipment, track equipment
inventory and life cycles, install servers in racks, run cabling, maintain power and air
conditioning, and handle the daily operations of a data center. As a system administrator, it’s in
your best interest to befriend data center technicians and bribe them with coffee, caffeinated soft
drinks, and alcoholic beverages.
Architects
Systems architects have deep expertise in more than one area. They use their experience to
design distributed systems. Their job descriptions may include defining security zones and
segmentation, eliminating single points of failure, planning for future growth, ensuring
connectivity among multiple networks and third parties, and other site-wide decision making.
Good architects are technically proficient and generally prefer to implement and test their own
designs.
1.13 RECOMMENDED READING
ABBOTT, MARTIN L., AND MICHAEL T. FISHER. The Art of Scalability: Scalable Web Architecture,
Processes, and Organizations for the Modern Enterprise (2nd Edition). Addison-Wesley
Professional, 2015.
GANCARZ, MIKE. Linux and the Unix Philosophy. Boston: Digital Press, 2003.

LIMONCELLI, THOMAS A., AND PETER SALUS. The Complete April Fools’ Day RFCs. Peer-to-Peer
Communications LLC. 2007. Engineering humor. You can read this collection on-line for free at
rfc-humor.com.
RAYMOND, ERIC S. The Cathedral & The Bazaar: Musings on Linux and Open Source by an
Accidental Revolutionary. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2001.
SALUS, PETER H. The Daemon, the GNU & the Penguin: How Free and Open Software is
Changing the World. Reed Media Services, 2008. This fascinating history of the open source
movement by UNIX’s best-known historian is also available at groklaw.com under the Creative
Commons license. The URL for the book itself is quite long; look for a current link at
groklaw.com or try this compressed equivalent: tinyurl.com/d6u7j.
SIEVER, ELLEN, STEPHEN FIGGINS, ROBERT LOVE, AND ARNOLD ROBBINS. Linux in a Nutshell (6th
Edition). Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2009.
System administration and DevOps
KIM, GENE, KEVIN BEHR, AND GEORGE SPAFFORD. The Phoenix Project: A Novel about IT, DevOps,
and Helping Your Business Win. Portland, OR: IT Revolution Press, 2014. A guide to the
philosophy and mindset needed to run a modern IT organization, written as a narrative. An
instant classic.
KIM, GENE, JEZ HUMBLE, PATRICK DEBOIS, AND JOHN WILLIS. The DevOps Handbook: How to
Create World-Class Agility, Reliability, and Security in Technology Organizations. Portland,
OR: IT Revolution Press, 2016.
LIMONCELLI, THOMAS A., CHRISTINA J. HOGAN, AND STRATA R. CHALUP. The Practice of System and
Network Administration (2nd Edition). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2008. This is a good
book with particularly strong coverage of the policy and procedural aspects of system
administration. The authors maintain a system administration blog at everythingsysadmin.com.
LIMONCELLI, THOMAS A., CHRISTINA J. HOGAN, AND STRATA R. CHALUP. The Practice of Cloud
System Administration. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2014. From the same authors as the
previous title, now with a focus on distributed systems and cloud computing.
Essential tools
BLUM, RICHARD, AND CHRISTINE BRESNAHAN. Linux Command Line and Shell Scripting Bible (3rd
Edition). Wiley, 2015.
DOUGHERTY, DALE, AND ARNOLD ROBINS. Sed & Awk (2nd Edition). Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly
Media, 1997. Classic O’Reilly book on the powerful, indispensable text processors sed and awk.
KIM, PETER. The Hacker Playbook 2: Practical Guide To Penetration Testing. CreateSpace
Independent Publishing Platform, 2015.
NEIL, DREW. Practical Vim: Edit Text at the Speed of Thought. Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2012.

SHOTTS, WILLIAM E. The Linux Command Line: A Complete Introduction. San Francisco, CA: No
Starch Press, 2012.
SWEIGART, AL. Automate the Boring Stuff with Python: Practical Programming for Total
Beginners. San Francisco, CA: No Starch Press, 2015.
