2 Booting and System Management Daemons

“Booting” is the standard term for “starting up a computer.” It’s a shortened form of the word
“bootstrapping,” which derives from the notion that the computer has to “pull itself up by its own
bootstraps.”
The boot process consists of a few broadly defined tasks:

      Finding, loading, and running bootstrapping code
      Finding, loading, and running the OS kernel
      Running startup scripts and system daemons

      Maintaining process hygiene and managing system state transitions

The activities included in that last bullet point continue as long as the system remains up, so the
line between bootstrapping and normal operation is inherently a bit blurry.
2.1 BOOT PROCESS OVERVIEW
Startup procedures have changed a lot in recent years. The advent of modern (UEFI) BIOSs has
simplified the early stages of booting, at least from a conceptual standpoint. In later stages, most
Linux distributions now use a system manager daemon called systemd instead of the traditional
UNIX init. systemd streamlines the boot process by adding dependency management, support
for concurrent startup processes, and a comprehensive approach to logging, among other
features.
Boot management has also changed as systems have migrated into the cloud. The drift toward
virtualization, cloud instances, and containerization has reduced the need for administrators to
touch physical hardware. Instead, we now have image management, APIs, and control panels.

During bootstrapping, the kernel is loaded into memory and begins to execute. A variety of
initialization tasks are performed, and the system is then made available to users. The general
overview of this process is shown in Exhibit A.

Exhibit A: Linux & UNIX boot process

Administrators have little direct, interactive control over most of the steps required to boot a
system. Instead, admins can modify bootstrap configurations by editing config files for the
system startup scripts or by changing the arguments the boot loader passes to the kernel.
Before the system is fully booted, filesystems must be checked and mounted and system
daemons started. These procedures are managed by a series of shell scripts (sometimes called
“init scripts”) or unit files that are run in sequence by init or parsed by systemd. The exact
layout of the startup scripts and the manner in which they are executed varies among systems.
We cover the details later in this chapter.
2.2 SYSTEM FIRMWARE
When a machine is powered on, the CPU is hardwired to execute boot code stored in ROM. On
virtualized systems, this “ROM” may be imaginary, but the concept remains the same.
The system firmware typically knows about all the devices that live on the motherboard, such as
SATA controllers, network interfaces, USB controllers, and sensors for power and temperature.
(Virtual systems pretend to have this same set of devices.) In addition to allowing hardware-level
configuration of these devices, the firmware lets you either expose them to the operating system
or disable and hide them.

On physical (as opposed to virtualized) hardware, most firmware offers a user interface.
However, it’s generally crude and a bit tricky to access. You need control of the computer and
console, and must press a particular key immediately after powering on the system.
Unfortunately, the identity of the magic key varies by manufacturer; see if you can glimpse a
cryptic line of instructions at the instant the system first powers on. (You might find it helpful to
disable the monitor’s power management features temporarily.) Barring that, try Delete, Control,
F6, F8, F10, or F11. For the best chance of success, tap the key several times, then hold it down.
During normal bootstrapping, the system firmware probes for hardware and disks, runs a simple
set of health checks, and then looks for the next stage of bootstrapping code. The firmware UI
lets you designate a boot device, usually by prioritizing a list of available options (e.g., “try to
boot from the DVD drive, then a USB drive, then a hard disk”).
In most cases, the system’s disk drives populate a secondary priority list. To boot from a
particular drive, you must both set it as the highest-priority disk and make sure that “hard disk” is
enabled as a boot medium.
BIOS vs. UEFI
Traditional PC firmware was called the BIOS, for Basic Input/Output System. Over the last
decade, however, BIOS has been supplanted by a more formalized and modern standard, the
Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI). You’ll often see UEFI referred to as “UEFI
BIOS,” but for clarity, we’ll reserve the term BIOS for the legacy standard in this chapter. Most
systems that implement UEFI can fall back to a legacy BIOS implementation if the operating
system they’re booting doesn’t support UEFI.
UEFI is the current revision of an earlier standard, EFI. References to the name EFI persist in
some older documentation and even in some standard terms, such as “EFI system partition.” In
all but the most technically explicit situations, you can treat these terms as equivalent.
UEFI support is pretty much universal on new PC hardware these days, but plenty of BIOS
systems remain in the field. Moreover, virtualized environments often adopt BIOS as their
underlying boot mechanism, so the BIOS world isn’t in danger of extinction just yet.
As much as we’d prefer to ignore BIOS and just talk about UEFI, it’s likely that you’ll encounter
both types of systems for years to come. UEFI also builds-in several accommodations to the old
BIOS regime, so a working knowledge of BIOS can be quite helpful for deciphering the UEFI
documentation.
Legacy BIOS

     Partitioning is a way to subdivide physical disks. See this page for a more detailed
     discussion.

Traditional BIOS assumes that the boot device starts with a record called the MBR (Master Boot
Record). The MBR includes both a first-stage boot loader (aka “boot block”) and a primitive disk
partitioning table. The amount of space available for the boot loader is so small (less than 512
bytes) that it’s not able to do much other than load and run a second-stage boot loader.
Neither the boot block nor the BIOS is sophisticated enough to read any type of standard
filesystem, so the second-stage boot loader must be kept somewhere easy to find. In one typical
scenario, the boot block reads the partitioning information from the MBR and identifies the disk
partition marked as “active.” It then reads and executes the second-stage boot loader from the
beginning of that partition. This scheme is known as a volume boot record.
Alternatively, the second-stage boot loader can live in the dead zone that lies between the MBR
and the beginning of the first disk partition. For historical reasons, the first partition doesn’t start
until the 64th disk block, so this zone normally contains at least 32KB of storage: still not a lot,
but enough to store a filesystem driver. This storage scheme is commonly used by the GRUB
boot loader; see GRUB: the GRand Unified Boot loader.
To effect a successful boot, all components of the boot chain must be properly installed and
compatible with one another. The MBR boot block is OS-agnostic, but because it assumes a
particular location for the second stage, there may be multiple versions that can be installed. The
second-stage loader is generally knowledgeable about operating systems and filesystems (it may
support several of each), and usually has configuration options of its own.
UEFI

     See this page for more information about GPT partitions.

The UEFI specification includes a modern disk partitioning scheme known as GPT (GUID
Partition Table, where GUID stands for “globally unique identifier”). UEFI also understands
FAT (File Allocation Table) filesystems, a simple but functional layout that originated in MS-
DOS. These features combine to define the concept of an EFI System Partition (ESP). At boot
time, the firmware consults the GPT partition table to identify the ESP. It then reads the
configured target application directly from a file in the ESP and executes it.
Because the ESP is just a generic FAT filesystem, it can be mounted, read, written, and
maintained by any operating system. No “mystery meat” boot blocks are required anywhere on
the disk. (Truth be told, UEFI does maintain an MBR-compatible record at the beginning of each
disk to facilitate interoperability with BIOS systems. BIOS systems can’t see the full GPT-style
partition table, but they at least recognize the disk as having been formatted. Be careful not to run
MBR-specific administrative tools on GPT disks. They may think they understand the disk
layout, but they do not.)
In the UEFI system, no boot loader at all is technically required. The UEFI boot target can be a
UNIX or Linux kernel that has been configured for direct UEFI loading, thus effecting a loader-
less bootstrap. In practice, though, most systems still use a boot loader, partly because that makes
it easier to maintain compatibility with legacy BIOSes.
UEFI saves the pathname to load from the ESP as a configuration parameter. With no
configuration, it looks for a standard path, usually /efi/boot/bootx64.efi on modern Intel systems.
A more typical path on a configured system (this one for Ubuntu and the GRUB boot loader)
would be /efi/ubuntu/grubx64.efi. Other distributions follow a similar convention.

UEFI defines standard APIs for accessing the system’s hardware. In this respect, it’s something
of a miniature operating system in its own right. It even provides for UEFI-level add-on device
drivers, which are written in a processor-independent language and stored in the ESP. Operating
systems can use the UEFI interface, or they can take over direct control of the hardware.
Because UEFI has a formal API, you can examine and modify UEFI variables (including boot
menu entries) on a running system. For example, efibootmgr -v shows the following summary of
the boot configuration:
efibootmgr lets you change the boot order, select the next configured boot option, or even create
and destroy boot entries. For example, to set the boot order to try the system drive before trying
the network, and to ignore other boot options, we could use the command

Here, we’re specifying the options Boot0004 and Boot0002 from the output above.

The ability to modify the UEFI configuration from user space means that the firmware’s
configuration information is mounted read/write—a blessing and a curse. On systems (typically,
those with systemd) that allow write access by default, rm -rf / can be enough to permanently
destroy the system at the firmware level; in addition to removing files, rm also removes variables
and other UEFI information accessible through /sys. Yikes! Don’t try this at home! (See
goo.gl/QMSiSG, a link to a Phoronix article, for some additional details.)
2.3 BOOT LOADERS
Most bootstrapping procedures include the execution of a boot loader that is distinct from both
the BIOS/UEFI code and the OS kernel. It’s also separate from the initial boot block on a BIOS
system, if you’re counting steps.
The boot loader’s main job is to identify and load an appropriate operating system kernel. Most
boot loaders can also present a boot-time user interface that lets you select which of several
possible kernels or operating systems to invoke.

Another task that falls to the boot loader is the marshaling of configuration arguments for the
kernel. The kernel doesn’t have a command line per se, but its startup option handling will seem
eerily similar from the shell. For example, the argument single or -s usually tells the kernel to
enter single-user mode instead of completing the normal boot process.
Such options can be hard-wired into the boot loader’s configuration if you want them used on
every boot, or they can be provided on the fly through the boot loader’s UI.
In the next few sections, we discuss GRUB (the Linux world’s predominant boot loader) and the
boot loaders used with FreeBSD.
2.4 GRUB: THE GRAND UNIFIED BOOT LOADER
     GRUB, developed by the GNU Project, is the default boot loader on most Linux
     distributions. The GRUB lineage has two main branches: the original GRUB, now called
GRUB Legacy, and the newer, extra-crispy GRUB 2, which is the current standard. Make sure
you know which GRUB you’re dealing with, as the two versions are quite different.
GRUB 2 has been the default boot manager for Ubuntu since version 9.10, and it recently
became the default for RHEL 7. All our example Linux distributions use it as their default. In this
book we discuss only GRUB 2, and we refer to it simply as GRUB.

FreeBSD has its own boot loader (covered in more detail in The FreeBSD boot process).
However, GRUB is perfectly happy to boot FreeBSD, too. This might be an advantageous
configuration if you’re planning to boot multiple operating systems on a single computer.
Otherwise, the FreeBSD boot loader is more than adequate.
GRUB configuration

     See this page for more about operating modes.

GRUB lets you specify parameters such as the kernel to boot (specified as a GRUB “menu
entry”) and the operating mode to boot into.
Since this configuration information is needed at boot time, you might imagine that it would be
stored somewhere strange, such as the system’s NVRAM or the disk blocks reserved for the boot
loader. In fact, GRUB understands most of the filesystems in common use and can usually find
its way to the root filesystem on its own. This feat lets GRUB read its configuration from a
regular text file.
The config file is called grub.cfg, and it’s usually kept in /boot/grub (/boot/grub2 in Red Hat
and CentOS) along with a selection of other resources and code modules that GRUB might need
to access at boot time. Changing the boot configuration is a simple matter of updating the
grub.cfg file.
Although you can create the grub.cfg file yourself, it’s more common to generate it with the
grub-mkconfig utility, which is called grub2-mkconfig on Red Hat and CentOS and wrapped as
update-grub on Debian and Ubuntu. In fact, most distributions assume that grub.cfg can be
regenerated at will, and they do so automatically after updates. If you don’t take steps to prevent
this, your handcrafted grub.cfg file will get clobbered.

As with all things Linux, distributions configure grub-mkconfig in a variety of ways. Most
commonly, the configuration is specified in /etc/default/grub in the form of sh variable
assignments. Table 2.1 shows some of the commonly modified options.

Table 2.1: Common GRUB configuration options from /etc/default/grub

After editing /etc/default/grub, run update-grub or grub2-mkconfig to translate your
configuration into a proper grub.cfg file. As part of the configuration-building process, these
commands inventory the system’s bootable kernels, so they can be useful to run after you make
kernel changes even if you haven’t explicitly changed the GRUB configuration.
You may need to edit the /etc/grub.d/40_custom file to change the order in which kernels are
listed in the boot menu (after you create a custom kernel, for example), set a boot password, or
change the names of boot menu items. As usual, run update-grub or grub2-mkconfig after
making changes.

As an example, here’s a 40_custom file that invokes a custom kernel on an Ubuntu system:

    See this page for more information about mounting filesystems.

In this example, GRUB loads the kernel from /awesome_kernel. Kernel paths are relative to the
boot partition, which historically was mounted as /boot but with the advent of UEFI now is likely
an unmounted EFI System Partition. Use gpart show and mount to examine your disk and
determine the state of the boot partition.
The GRUB command line
GRUB supports a command-line interface for editing config file entries on the fly at boot time.
To enter command-line mode, type c at the GRUB boot screen.
From the command line, you can boot operating systems that aren’t listed in the grub.cfg file,
display system information, and perform rudimentary filesystem testing. Anything that can be
done through grub.cfg can also be done through the command line.
Press the <Tab> key to see a list of possible commands. Table 2.2 shows some of the more useful
ones.

Table 2.2: GRUB commands

For detailed information about GRUB and its command-line options, refer to the official manual
at gnu.org/software/grub/manual.
Linux kernel options

     See Chapter 11 for more about kernel parameters.

Kernel startup options typically modify the values of kernel parameters, instruct the kernel to
probe for particular devices, specify the path to the init or systemd process, or designate a
particular root device. Table 2.3 shows a few examples.

Table 2.3: Examples of kernel boot time options

When specified at boot time, kernel options are not persistent. Edit the appropriate kernel line in
/etc/grub.d/40_custom or /etc/defaults/grub (the variable named GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX) to make
the change permanent across reboots.
Security patches, bug fixes, and features are all regularly added to the Linux kernel. Unlike other
software packages, however, new kernel releases typically do not replace old ones. Instead, the
new kernels are installed side by side with the previous versions so that you can return to an
older kernel in the event of problems.

This convention helps administrators back out of an upgrade if a kernel patch breaks their
system, although it also means that the boot menu tends to get cluttered with old versions of the
kernel. Try choosing a different kernel if your system won’t boot after an update.
2.5 THE FREEBSD BOOT PROCESS
     FreeBSD’s boot system is a lot like GRUB in that the final-stage boot loader (called loader)
     uses a filesystem-based configuration file, supports menus, and offers an interactive,
command-line-like mode. loader is the final common pathway for both the BIOS and UEFI boot
paths.
The BIOS path: boot0
As with GRUB, the full loader environment is too large to fit in an MBR boot block, so a chain
of progressively more sophisticated preliminary boot loaders get loader up and running on a
BIOS system.
GRUB bundles all of these components under the umbrella name “GRUB,” but in FreeBSD, the
early boot loaders are part of a separate system called boot0 that’s used only on BIOS systems.
boot0 has options of its own, mostly because it stores later stages of the boot chain in a volume
boot record (see Legacy BIOS) rather than in front of the first disk partition.
For that reason, the MBR boot record needs a pointer to the partition it should use to continue the
boot process. Normally, all this is automatically set up for you as part of the FreeBSD installation
process, but if you should ever need to adjust the configuration, you can do so with the boot0cfg
command.
The UEFI path
On UEFI systems, FreeBSD creates an EFI system partition and installs boot code there under
the path /boot/bootx64.efi. This is the default path that UEFI systems check at boot time (at least
on modern PC platforms), so no firmware-level configuration should be needed other than
ensuring that device boot priorities are properly set.
Don’t confuse the /boot directory in the EFI system partition with the /boot directory in the
FreeBSD root filesystem. They are separate and serve different purposes, although of course both
are bootstrapping related.
By default, FreeBSD doesn’t keep the EFI system partition mounted after booting. You can
inspect the partition table with gpart to identify it:

     See this page for more information about mounting filesystems.

Although you can mount the ESP if you’re curious to see what’s in it (use mount’s -t msdos
option), the whole filesystem is actually just a copy of an image found in /boot/boot1.efifat on
the root disk. No user-serviceable parts inside.
If the ESP partition gets damaged or removed, you can re-create it by setting up the partition with
gpart and then copying in the filesystem image with dd:

Once the first-stage UEFI boot loader finds a partition of type freebsd-ufs, it loads a UEFI version
of the loader software from /boot/loader.efi. From there, booting proceeds as under BIOS, with
loader determining the kernel to load, the kernel parameters to set, and so on. (As of FreeBSD
10.1, it is possible to use ZFS as the root partition on a UEFI system as well.)
loader configuration
loader is actually a scripting environment, and the scripting language is Forth.This is a
remarkable and interesting fact if you’re a historian of programming languages, and unimportant
otherwise. There’s a bunch of Forth code stored under /boot that controls loader’s operations,
but it’s designed to be self-contained—you needn’t learn Forth.
The Forth scripts execute /boot/loader.conf to obtain the values of configuration variables, so
that’s where your customizations should go. Don’t confuse this file with
/boot/defaults/loader.conf, which contains the configuration defaults and isn’t intended for
modification. Fortunately, the variable assignments in loader.conf are syntactically similar to
standard sh assignments.
The man pages for loader and loader.conf give the dirt on all the boot loader options and the
configuration variables that control them. Some of the more interesting options include those for
protecting the boot menu with a password, changing the splash screen displayed at boot, and
passing kernel options.
loader commands
loader understands a variety of interactive commands. For example, to locate and boot an
alternate kernel, you’d use a sequence of commands like this:

Here, we listed the contents of the (default) root filesystem, unloaded the default kernel
(/boot/kernel/kernel), loaded an older kernel (/boot/kernel/kernel.old), and then continued the
boot process.

See man loader for complete documentation of the available commands.
2.6 SYSTEM MANAGEMENT DAEMONS
Once the kernel has been loaded and has completed its initialization process, it creates a
complement of “spontaneous” processes in user space. They’re called spontaneous processes
because the kernel starts them autonomously—in the normal course of events, new processes are
created only at the behest of existing processes.
Most of the spontaneous processes are really part of the kernel implementation. They don’t
necessarily correspond to programs in the filesystem. They’re not configurable, and they don’t
require administrative attention. You can recognize them in ps listings (see this page) by their
low PIDs and by the brackets around their names (for example, [pagedaemon] on FreeBSD or [kdump]
on Linux).

The exception to this pattern is the system management daemon. It has process ID 1 and usually
runs under the name init. The system gives init a couple of special privileges, but for the most
part it’s just a user-level program like any other daemon.
Responsibilities of init
init has multiple functions, but its overarching goal is to make sure the system runs the right
complement of services and daemons at any given time.
To serve this goal, init maintains a notion of the mode in which the system should be operating.
Some commonly defined modes:

      Single-user mode, in which only a minimal set of filesystems is mounted, no services
      are running, and a root shell is started on the console
      Multiuser mode, in which all customary filesystems are mounted and all configured
      network services have been started, along with a window system and graphical login
      manager for the console
      Server mode, similar to multiuser mode, but with no GUI running on the console

Don’t take these mode names or descriptions too literally; they’re just examples of common
operating modes that most systems define in one way or another.

Every mode is associated with a defined complement of system services, and the initialization
daemon starts or stops services as needed to bring the system’s actual state into line with the
currently active mode. Modes can also have associated milepost tasks that run whenever the
mode begins or ends.
As an example, init normally takes care of many different startup chores as a side effect of its
transition from bootstrapping to multiuser mode. These may include

      Setting the name of the computer
      Setting the time zone
      Checking disks with fsck
      Mounting filesystems
      Removing old files from the /tmp directory
      Configuring network interfaces
      Configuring packet filters
      Starting up other daemons and network services

init has very little built-in knowledge about these tasks. In simply runs a set of commands or
scripts that have been designated for execution in that particular context.
Implementations of init
Today, three very different flavors of system management processes are in widespread use:

      An init styled after the init from AT&T’s System V UNIX, which we refer to as
      “traditional init.” This was the predominant init used on Linux systems until the
      debut of systemd.
      An init variant that derives from BSD UNIX and is used on most BSD-based
      systems, including FreeBSD, OpenBSD, and NetBSD. This one is just as tried-and-
      true as the SysV init and has just as much claim to being called “traditional,” but for
      clarity we refer to it as “BSD init.” This variant is quite simple in comparison with
      SysV-style init. We discuss it separately starting on this page.
      A more recent contender called systemd which aims to be one-stop-shopping for all
      daemon- and state-related issues. As a consequence, systemd carves out a
      significantly larger territory than any historical version of init. That makes it
      somewhat controversial, as we discuss below. Nevertheless, all our example Linux
      distributions have now adopted systemd.

Although these implementations are the predominant ones today, they’re far from being the only
choices. Apple’s macOS, for example, uses a system called launchd. Until it adopted systemd,
Ubuntu used another modern init variant called Upstart.
      On Linux systems, you can theoretically replace your system’s default init with whichever
      variant you prefer. But in practice, init is so fundamental to the operation of the system that
a lot of add-on software is likely to break. If you can’t abide systemd, standardize on a
distribution that doesn’t use it.
Traditional init
In the traditional init world, system modes (e.g., single-user or multiuser) are known as “run
levels.” Most run levels are denoted by a single letter or digit.
Traditional init has been around since the early 80s, and grizzled folks in the anti-systemd camp
often cite the principle, “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.” That said, traditional init does have a
number of notable shortcomings.
To begin with, the traditional init on its own is not really powerful enough to handle the needs of
a modern system. Most systems that use it actually have a standard and fixed init configuration
that never changes. That configuration points to a second tier of shell scripts that do the actual
work of changing run levels and letting administrators make configuration changes.
The second layer of scripts maintains yet a third layer of daemon- and system-specific scripts,
which are cross-linked to run-level-specific directories that indicate what services are supposed
to be running at what run level. It’s all a bit hackish and unsightly.

More concretely, this system has no general model of dependencies among services, so it
requires that all startups and takedowns be run in a numeric order that’s maintained by the
administrator. Later actions can’t run until everything ahead of them has finished, so it’s
impossible to execute actions in parallel, and the system takes a long time to change states.
systemd vs. the world
Few issues in the Linux space have been more hotly debated than the migration from traditional
init to systemd. For the most part, complaints center on systemd’s seemingly ever-increasing
scope.
systemd takes all the init features formerly implemented with sticky tape, shell script hacks, and
the sweat of administrators and formalizes them into a unified field theory of how services
should be configured, accessed, and managed.

     See Chapter 6, Software Installation and Management, for more information about
     package management.

Much like a package management system, systemd defines a robust dependency model, not only
among services but also among “targets,” systemd’s term for the operational modes that
traditional init calls run levels. systemd not only manages processes in parallel, but also manages
network connections (networkd), kernel log entries (journald), and logins (logind).

The anti-systemd camp argues that the UNIX philosophy is to keep system components small,
simple, and modular. A component as fundamental as init, they say, should not have monolithic
control over so many of the OS’s other subsystems. systemd not only breeds complexity, but
also introduces potential security weaknesses and muddies the distinction between the OS
platform and the services that run on top of it.
systemd has also received criticism for imposing new standards and responsibilities on the Linux
kernel, for its code quality, for the purported unresponsiveness of its developers to bug reports,
for the functional design of its basic features, and for looking at people funny. We can’t fairly
address these issues here, but you may find it informative to peruse the Arguments against
systemd section at without-systemd.org, the Internet’s premier systemd hate site.
inits judged and assigned their proper punishments
The architectural objections to systemd outlined above are all reasonable points. systemd does
indeed display most of the telltale stigmata of an overengineered software project.
In practice, however, many administrators quite like systemd, and we fall squarely into this
camp. Ignore the controversy for a bit and give systemd a chance to win your love. Once you’ve
become accustomed to it, you will likely find yourself appreciating its many merits.
At the very least, keep in mind that the traditional init that systemd displaces was no national
treasure. If nothing else, systemd delivers some value just by eliminating a few of the
unnecessary differences among Linux distributions.
The debate really doesn’t matter anymore because the systemd coup is over. The argument was
effectively settled when Red Hat, Debian, and Ubuntu switched. Many other Linux distributions
are now adopting systemd, either by choice or by being dragged along, kicking and screaming,
by their upstream distributions.

Traditional init still has a role to play when a distribution either targets a small installation
footprint or doesn’t need systemd’s advanced process management functions. There’s also a
sizable population of revanchists who disdain systemd on principle, so some Linux distributions
are sure to keep traditional init alive indefinitely as a form of protest theater.
Nevertheless, we don’t think that traditional init has enough of a future to merit a detailed
discussion in this book. For Linux, we mostly limit ourselves to systemd. We also discuss the
mercifully simple system used by FreeBSD, starting on this page.
2.7 SYSTEMD IN DETAIL
The configuration and control of system services is an area in which Linux distributions have
traditionally differed the most from one another. systemd aims to standardize this aspect of
system administration, and to do so, it reaches further into the normal operations of the system
than any previous alternative.
systemd is not a single daemon but a collection of programs, daemons, libraries, technologies,
and kernel components. A post on the systemd blog at 0pointer.de/blog notes that a full build of
the project generates 69 different binaries. Think of it as a scrumptious buffet at which you are
forced to consume everything.

Since systemd depends heavily on features of the Linux kernel, it’s a Linux-only proposition.
You won’t see it ported to BSD or to any other variant of UNIX within the next five years.
Units and unit files
An entity that is managed by systemd is known generically as a unit. More specifically, a unit
can be “a service, a socket, a device, a mount point, an automount point, a swap file or partition,
a startup target, a watched filesystem path, a timer controlled and supervised by systemd, a
resource management slice, a group of externally created processes, or a wormhole into an
alternate universe.” OK, we made up the part about the alternate universe (the rest is from the
systemd.unit man page), but that still covers a lot of territory.
Within systemd, the behavior of each unit is defined and configured by a unit file. In the case of
a service, for example, the unit file specifies the location of the executable file for the daemon,
tells systemd how to start and stop the service, and identifies any other units that the service
depends on.
We explore the syntax of unit files in more detail soon, but here’s a simple example from an
Ubuntu system as an appetizer. This unit file is rsync.service; it handles startup of the rsync
daemon that mirrors filesystems.

     See this page for more information about rsync.

If you recognize this as the file format used by MS-DOS .ini files, you are well on your way to
understanding both systemd and the anguish of the systemd haters.
Unit files can live in several different places. /usr/lib/systemd/system is the main place where
packages deposit their unit files during installation; on some systems, the path is
/lib/systemd/system instead. The contents of this directory are considered stock, so you
shouldn’t modify them. Your local unit files and customizations can go in /etc/systemd/system.
There’s also a unit directory in /run/systemd/system that’s a scratch area for transient units.

systemd maintains a telescopic view of all these directories, so they’re pretty much equivalent. If
there’s any conflict, the files in /etc have the highest priority.
By convention, unit files are named with a suffix that varies according to the type of unit being
configured. For example, service units have a .service suffix and timers use .timer. Within the
unit file, some sections (e.g., [Unit]) apply generically to all kinds of units, but others (e.g., [Service])
can appear only in the context of a particular unit type.
systemctl: manage systemd
systemctl is an all-purpose command for investigating the status of systemd and making changes
to its configuration. As with Git and several other complex software suites, systemctl’s first
argument is typically a subcommand that sets the general agenda, and subsequent arguments are
specific to that particular subcommand. The subcommands could be top-level commands in their
own right, but for consistency and clarity, they’re bundled into the systemctl omnibus.

     See this page for more information about Git.

Running systemctl without any arguments invokes the default list-units subcommand, which
shows all loaded and active services, sockets, targets, mounts, and devices. To show only loaded
and active services, use the --type=service qualifier:

It’s also sometimes helpful to see all the installed unit files, regardless of whether or not they’re
active:

For subcommands that act on a particular unit (e.g., systemctl status) systemctl can usually
accept a unit name without a unit-type suffix (e.g., cups instead of cups.service). However, the
default unit type with which simple names are fleshed out varies by subcommand.
Table 2.4 shows the most common and useful systemctl subcommands. See the systemctl man
page for a complete list.

Table 2.4: Commonly used systemctl subcommands
Unit statuses
In the output of systemctl list-unit-files above, we can see that cups.service is disabled. We can
use systemctl status to find out more details:

Here, systemctl shows us that the service is currently inactive (dead) and tells us when the process
died. (Just a few seconds ago; we disabled it for this example.) It also shows (in the section
marked Loaded) that the service defaults to being enabled at startup, but that it is presently
disabled.

The last four lines are recent log entries. By default, the log entries are condensed so that each
entry takes only one line. This compression often makes entries unreadable, so we included the -l
option to request full entries. It makes no difference in this case, but it’s a useful habit to acquire.
Table 2.5 shows the statuses you’ll encounter most frequently when checking up on units.

Table 2.5: Unit file statuses

The enabled and disabled states apply only to unit files that live in one of systemd’s system
directories (that is, they are not linked in by a symbolic link) and that have an [Install] section in
their unit files. “Enabled” units should perhaps really be thought of as “installed,” meaning that
the directives in the [Install] section have been executed and that the unit is wired up to its normal
activation triggers. In most cases, this state causes the unit to be activated automatically once the
system is bootstrapped.
Likewise, the disabled state is something of a misnomer because the only thing that’s actually
disabled is the normal activation path. You can manually activate a unit that is disabled by running
systemctl start; systemd won’t complain.

Many units have no installation procedure, so they can’t truly be said to be enabled or disabled;
they’re just available. Such units’ status is listed as static. They only become active if activated by
hand (systemctl start) or named as a dependency of other active units.
Unit files that are linked were created with systemctl link. This command creates a symbolic link
from one of systemd’s system directories to a unit file that lives elsewhere in the filesystem.
Such unit files can be addressed by commands or named as dependencies, but they are not full
citizens of the ecosystem and have some notable quirks. For example, running systemctl disable
on a linked unit file deletes the link and all references to it.

Unfortunately, the exact behavior of linked unit files is not well documented. Although the idea
of keeping local unit files in a separate repository and linking them into systemd has a certain
appeal, it’s probably not the best approach at this point. Just make copies.
The masked status means “administratively blocked.” systemd knows about the unit, but has been
forbidden from activating it or acting on any of its configuration directives by systemctl mask.
As a rule of thumb, turn off units whose status is enabled or linked with systemctl disable and
reserve systemctl mask for static units.

Returning to our investigation of the cups service, we could use the following commands to
reenable and start it:
Targets
Unit files can declare their relationships to other units in a variety of ways. In the example on this
page, for example, the WantedBy clause says that if the system has a multi-user.target unit, that
unit should depend on this one (rsync.service) when this unit is enabled.
Because units directly support dependency management, no additional machinery is needed to
implement the equivalent of init’s run levels. For clarity, systemd does define a distinct class of
units (of type .target) to act as well-known markers for common operating modes. However,
targets have no real superpowers beyond the dependency management that’s available to any
other unit.
Traditional init defines at least seven numeric run levels, but many of those aren’t actually in
common use. In a perhaps-ill-advised gesture toward historical continuity, systemd defines
targets that are intended as direct analogs of the init run levels (runlevel0.target, etc.). It also
defines mnemonic targets for day-to-day use such as poweroff.target and graphical.target.
Table 2.6 shows the mapping between init run levels and systemd targets.

Table 2.6: Mapping between init run levels and systemd targets

The only targets to really be aware of are multi-user.target and graphical.target for day-to-day
use, and rescue.target for accessing single-user mode. To change the system’s current operating
mode, use the systemctl isolate command:

The isolate subcommand is so-named because it activates the stated target and its dependencies
but deactivates all other units.
Under traditional init, you use the telinit command to change run levels once the system is
booted. Some distributions now define telinit as a symlink to the systemctl command, which
recognizes how it’s being invoked and behaves appropriately.
To see the target the system boots into by default, run the get-default subcommand:

Most Linux distributions boot to graphical.target by default, which isn’t appropriate for servers
that don’t need a GUI. But that’s easily changed:

To see all the system’s available targets, run systemctl list-units:
Dependencies among units
Linux software packages generally come with their own unit files, so administrators don’t need a
detailed knowledge of the entire configuration language. However, they do need a working
knowledge of systemd’s dependency system to diagnose and fix dependency problems.
To begin with, not all dependencies are explicit. systemd takes over the functions of the old
inetd and also extends this idea into the domain of the D-Bus interprocess communication
system. In other words, systemd knows which network ports or IPC connection points a given
service will be hosting, and it can listen for requests on those channels without actually starting
the service. If a client does materialize, systemd simply starts the actual service and passes off
the connection. The service runs if it’s actually used and remains dormant otherwise.
Second, systemd makes some assumptions about the normal behavior of most kinds of units. The
exact assumptions vary by unit type. For example, systemd assumes that the average service is
an add-on that shouldn’t be running during the early phases of system initialization. Individual
units can turn off these assumptions with the line

in the [Unit] section of their unit file; the default is true. See the man page for systemd.unit-type to
see the exact assumptions that apply to each type of unit (e.g., man systemd.service).
A third class of dependencies are those explicitly declared in the [Unit] sections of unit files. Table
2.7 shows the available options.

Table 2.7: Explicit dependencies in the [Unit] section of unit files

With the exception of Conflicts, all the options in Table 2.7 express the basic idea that the unit
being configured depends on some set of other units. The exact distinctions among these options
are subtle and primarily of interest to service developers. The least restrictive variant, Wants, is
preferred when possible.
You can extend a unit’s Wants or Requires cohorts by creating a unit-file.wants or unit-file.requires
directory in /etc/systemd/system and adding symlinks there to other unit files. Better yet, just let
systemctl do it for you. For example, the command

adds a dependency on my.local.service to the standard multiuser target, ensuring that the service
will be started whenever the system enters multiuser mode.
In most cases, such ad hoc dependencies are automatically taken care of for you, courtesy of the
[Install] sections of unit files. This section includes WantedBy and RequiredBy options that are read only
when a unit is enabled with systemctl enable or disabled with systemctl disable. On
enablement, they make systemctl perform the equivalent of an add-wants for every WantedBy or
an add-requires for every RequiredBy.

The [Install] clauses themselves have no effect in normal operation, so if a unit doesn’t seem to be
started when it should be, make sure that it has been properly enabled and symlinked.
Execution order
You might reasonably guess that if unit A Requires unit B, then unit B will be started or configured
before unit A. But in fact that is not the case. In systemd, the order in which units are activated
(or deactivated) is an entirely separate question from that of which units to activate.
When the system transitions to a new state, systemd first traces the various sources of
dependency information outlined in the previous section to identify the units that will be affected.
It then uses Before and After clauses from the unit files to sort the work list appropriately. To the
extent that units have no Before or After constraints, they are free to be adjusted in parallel.

Although potentially surprising, this is actually a praiseworthy design feature. One of the major
design goals of systemd was to facilitate parallelism, so it makes sense that units do not acquire
serialization dependencies unless they explicitly ask for them.
In practice, After clauses are typically used more frequently than Wants or Requires. Target definitions
(and in particular, the reverse dependencies encoded in WantedBy and RequiredBy clauses) establish
the general outlines of the services running in each operating mode, and individual packages
worry only about their immediate and direct dependencies.
A more complex unit file example
Now for a closer look at a few of the directives used in unit files. Here’s a unit file for the
NGINX web server, nginx.service:

This service is of type forking, which means that the startup command is expected to terminate
even though the actual daemon continues running in the background. Since systemd won’t have
directly started the daemon, the daemon records its PID (process ID) in the stated PIDFile so that
systemd can determine which process is the daemon’s primary instance.

The Exec lines are commands to be run in various circumstances. ExecStartPre commands are run
before the actual service is started; the ones shown here validate the syntax of NGINX’s
configuration file and ensure that any preexisting PID file is removed. ExecStart is the command
that actually starts the service. ExecReload tells systemd how to make the service reread its
configuration file. (systemd automatically sets the environment variable MAINPID to the
appropriate value.)

     See this page for more information about signals.

Termination for this service is handled through KillMode and KillSignal, which tell systemd that the
service daemon interprets a QUIT signal as an instruction to clean up and exit. The line

would have essentially the same effect. If the daemon doesn’t terminate within TimeoutStopSec
seconds, systemd will force the issue by pelting it with a TERM signal and then an uncatchable
KILL signal.
The PrivateTmp setting is an attempt at increasing security. It puts the service’s /tmp directory
somewhere other than the actual /tmp, which is shared by all the system’s processes and users.
Local services and customizations
As you can see from the previous examples, it’s relatively trivial to create a unit file for a home-
grown service. Browse the examples in /usr/lib/systemd/system and adapt one that’s close to
what you want. See the man page for systemd.service for a complete list of configuration
options for services. For options common to all types of units, see the page for systemd.unit.
Put your new unit file in /etc/systemd/system. You can then run

to activate the dependencies listed in the service file’s [Install] section.

As a general rule, you should never edit a unit file you didn’t write. Instead, create a
configuration directory in /etc/systemd/system/unit-file.d and add one or more configuration
files there called xxx.conf. The xxx part doesn’t matter; just make sure the file has a .conf suffix
and is in the right location. override.conf is the standard name.
.conf files have the same format as unit files, and in fact systemd smooshes them all together
with the original unit file. However, override files have priority over the original unit file should
both sources try to set the value of a particular option.
One point to keep in mind is that many systemd options are allowed to appear more than once in
a unit file. In these cases, the multiple values form a list and are all active simultaneously. If you
assign a value in your override.conf file, that value joins the list but does not replace the existing
entries. This may or may not be what you want. To remove the existing entries from a list, just
assign the option an empty value before adding your own.

Let’s look at an example. Suppose that your site keeps its NGINX configuration file in a
nonstandard place, say, /usr/local/www/nginx.conf. You need to run the nginx daemon with a -c
/usr/local/www/nginx.conf option so that it can find the proper configuration file.
You can’t just add this option to /usr/lib/systemd/system/nginx.service because that file will be
replaced whenever the NGINX package is updated or refreshed. Instead, you can use the
following command sequence:
The > and !$ are shell metacharacters. The > redirects output to a file, and the !$ expands to the last
component of the previous command line so that you don’t have to retype it. All shells
understand this notation. See Shell basics for some other handy features.
The first ExecStart= removes the current entry, and the second sets an alternative start command.
systemctl daemon-reload makes systemd re-parse unit files. However, it does not restart
daemons automatically, so you’ll also need an explicit systemctl restart to make the change take
effect immediately.

This command sequence is such a common idiom that systemctl now implements it directly:

As shown, you must still do the restart by hand.

One last thing to know about override files is that they can’t modify the [Install] section of a unit
file. Any changes you make are silently ignored. Just add dependencies directly with systemctl
add-wants or systemctl add-requires.
Service and startup control caveats
systemd has many architectural implications, and adopting it is not a simple task for the teams
that build Linux distributions. Current releases are mostly Frankenstein systems that adopt much
of systemd but also retain a few links to the past. Sometimes the holdovers just haven’t yet been
fully converted. In other cases, various forms of glue have been left behind to facilitate
compatibility.
Though systemctl can and should be used for managing services and daemons, don’t be
surprised when you run into traditional init scripts or their associated helper commands. If you
attempt to use systemctl to disable the network on a CentOS or Red Hat system, for example,
you’ll receive the following output:

     See this page for more information about Apache.

Traditional init scripts often continue to function on a systemd system. For example, an init
script /etc/rc.d/init.d/my-old-service might be automatically mapped to a unit file such as my-
old-service.service during system initialization or when systemctl daemon-reload is run.
Apache 2 on Ubuntu 17.04 is a case in point: attempting to disable the apache2.service results in
the following output:

The end result is what you wanted, but it goes through a rather circuitous route.

           Red Hat, and by extension CentOS, still run the /etc/rc.d/rc.local script at boot time if
           you configure it to be executable. In theory, you can use this script to hack in site-
specific tweaks or post-boot tasks if desired. (At this point, though, you should really skip the
hacks and do things systemd’s way by creating an appropriate set of unit files.)
Some Red Hat and CentOS boot chores continue to use config files found in the /etc/sysconfig
directory. Table 2.8 summarizes these.

Table 2.8: Files and subdirectories of Red Hat’s /etc/sysconfig directory
A couple of the items in Table 2.8 merit additional comment:

      The network-scripts directory contains additional material related to network
      configuration. The only things you might need to change here are the files named
      ifcfg-interface. For example, network-scripts/ifcfg-eth0 contains the configuration
      parameters for the interface eth0. It sets the interface’s IP address and networking
      options. See Red Hat and CentOS network configuration for more information about
      configuring network interfaces.
      The iptables-config file doesn’t actually allow you to modify the iptables (firewall)
      rules themselves. It just provides a way to load additional modules such as those for
      network address translation (NAT) if you’re going to be forwarding packets or using
      the system as a router. See this page for more information about configuring iptables.
systemd logging
Capturing the log messages produced by the kernel has always been something of a challenge. It
became even more important with the advent of virtual and cloud-based systems, since it isn’t
possible to simply stand in front of these systems’ consoles and watch what happens. Frequently,
crucial diagnostic information was lost to the ether.
systemd alleviates this problem with a universal logging framework that includes all kernel and
service messages from early boot to final shutdown. This facility, called the journal, is managed
by the journald daemon.
System messages captured by journald are stored in the /run directory. rsyslog can process
these messages and store them in traditional log files or forward them to a remote syslog server.
You can also access the logs directly with the journalctl command.
Without arguments, journalctl displays all log entries (oldest first):

You can configure journald to retain messages from prior boots. To do this, edit
/etc/systemd/journald.conf and configure the Storage attribute:

Once you’ve configured journald, you can obtain a list of prior boots with
You can then access messages from a prior boot by referring to its index or by naming its long-
form ID:

To restrict the logs to those associated with a specific unit, use the -u flag:

System logging is covered in more detail in Chapter 10, Logging.
2.8 FREEBSD INIT AND STARTUP SCRIPTS
FreeBSD uses a BSD-style init, which does not support the concept of run levels. To bring the
system to its fully booted state, FreeBSD’s init just runs /etc/rc. This program is a shell script,
but it should not be directly modified. Instead, the rc system implements a couple of standardized
ways for administrators and software packages to extend the startup system and make
configuration changes.

     See Chapter 7 for more information about shell scripting.

/etc/rc is primarily a wrapper that runs other startup scripts, most of which live in
/usr/local/etc/rc.d. and /etc/rc.d. Before it runs any of those scripts, however, rc executes three
files that hold configuration information for the system:

      /etc/defaults/config
      /etc/rc.conf
      /etc/rc.conf.local

These files are themselves scripts, but they typically contain only definitions for the values of
shell variables. The startup scripts then check these variables to determine how to behave.
(/etc/rc uses some shell magic to ensure that the variables defined in these files are visible
everywhere.)
/etc/defaults/rc.conf lists all the configuration parameters and their default settings. Never edit
this file, lest the startup script bogeyman hunt you down and overwrite your changes the next
time the system is updated. Instead, just override the default values by setting them again in
/etc/rc.conf or /etc/rc.conf.local. The rc.conf man page has an extensive list of the variables you
can specify.
In theory, the rc.conf files can also specify other directories in which to look for startup scripts
by your setting the value of the local_startup variable. The default value is /usr/local/etc/rc.d, and
we recommend leaving it that way. For local customizations, you have the option of either
creating standard rc.d-style scripts that go in /usr/local/etc/rc.d or editing the system-wide
/etc/rc.local script. The former is preferred.
As you can see from peeking at /etc/rc.d, there are many different startup scripts, more than 150
on a standard installation. /etc/rc runs these scripts in the order calculated by the rcorder
command, which reads the scripts and looks for dependency information that’s been encoded in a
standard way.
FreeBSD’s startup scripts for garden-variety services are fairly straightforward. For example, the
top of the sshd startup script is as follows:
The rcvar variable contains the name of a variable that’s expected to be defined in one of the
rc.conf scripts, in this case, sshd_enable. If you want sshd (the real daemon, not the startup script;
both are named sshd) to run automatically at boot time, put the line

into /etc/rc.conf. If this variable is set to "NO" or commented out, the sshd script will not start the
daemon or check to see whether it should be stopped when the system is shut down.
The service command provides a real-time interface into FreeBSD’s rc.d system. To stop the
sshd service manually, for example, you could run the command

Note that this technique works only if the service is enabled in the /etc/rc.conf files. If it is not,
use the subcommand onestop, onestart, or onerestart, depending on what you want to do.
(service is generally forgiving and will remind you if need be, however.)
2.9 REBOOT AND SHUTDOWN PROCEDURES
Historically, UNIX and Linux machines were touchy about how they were shut down. Modern
systems have become less sensitive, especially when a robust filesystem is used, but it’s always a
good idea to shut down a machine nicely when possible.
Consumer operating systems of yesteryear trained many sysadmins to reboot the system as the
first step in debugging any problem. It was an adaptive habit back then, but these days it more
commonly wastes time and interrupts service. Focus on identifying the root cause of problems,
and you’ll probably find yourself rebooting less often.

That said, it’s a good idea to reboot after modifying a startup script or making significant
configuration changes. This check ensures that the system can boot successfully. If you’ve
introduced a problem but don’t discover it until several weeks later, you’re unlikely to remember
the details of your most recent changes.
Shutting down physical systems
The halt command performs the essential duties required for shutting down the system. halt logs
the shutdown, kills nonessential processes, flushes cached filesystem blocks to disk, and then
halts the kernel. On most systems, halt -p powers down the system as a final flourish.
reboot is essentially identical to halt, but it causes the machine to reboot instead of halting.
The shutdown command is a layer over halt and reboot that provides for scheduled shutdowns
and ominous warnings to logged-in users. It dates back to the days of time-sharing systems and is
now largely obsolete. shutdown does nothing of technical value beyond halt or reboot, so feel
free to ignore it if you don’t have multiuser systems.
Shutting down cloud systems
You can halt or restart a cloud system either from within the server (with halt or reboot, as
described in the previous section) or from the cloud provider’s web console (or its equivalent
API).
Generally speaking, powering down from the cloud console is akin to turning off the power. It’s
better if the virtual server manages its own shutdown, but feel free to kill a virtual server from the
console if it becomes unresponsive. What else can you do?
Either way, make sure you understand what a shutdown means from the perspective of the cloud
provider. It would be a shame to destroy your system when all you meant to do was reboot it.
In the AWS universe, the Stop and Reboot operations do what you’d expect. “Terminate”
decommissions the instance and removes it from your inventory. If the underlying storage device
is set to “delete on termination,” not only will your instance be destroyed, but the data on the root
disk will also be lost. That’s perfectly fine, as long as it’s what you expect. You can enable
“termination protection” if you consider this a bad thing.
2.10 STRATAGEMS FOR A NONBOOTING SYSTEM
A variety of problems can prevent a system from booting, ranging from faulty devices to kernel
upgrades gone wrong. There are three basic approaches to this situation, listed here in rough
order of desirability:

      Don’t debug; just restore the system to a known-good state.
      Bring the system up just enough to run a shell, and debug interactively.

      Boot a separate system image, mount the sick system’s filesystems, and investigate
      from there.

The first option is the one most commonly used in the cloud, but it can be helpful on physical
servers, too, as long as you have access to a recent image of the entire boot disk. If your site does
backups by filesystem, a whole-system restore may be more trouble than it’s worth. We discuss
the whole-system restore option in Recovery of cloud systems.
The remaining two approaches focus on giving you a way to access the system, identify the
underlying issue, and make whatever fix is needed. Booting the ailing system to a shell is by far
the preferable option, but problems that occur very early in the boot sequence may stymie this
approach.
The “boot to a shell” mode is known generically as single-user mode or rescue mode. Systems
that use systemd have an even more primitive option available in the form of emergency mode;
it’s conceptually similar to single-user mode, but does an absolute minimum of preparation
before starting a shell.
Because single-user, rescue, and emergency modes don’t configure the network or start network-
related services, you’ll generally need physical access to the console to make use of them. As a
result, single-user mode normally isn’t available for cloud-hosted systems. We review some
options for reviving broken cloud images starting on this page.
Single-user mode
In single-user mode, also known as rescue.target on systems that use systemd, only a minimal
set of processes, daemons, and services are started. The root filesystem is mounted (as is /usr, in
most cases), but the network remains uninitialized.
At boot time, you request single-user mode by passing an argument to the kernel, usually single
or -s. You can do this through the boot loader’s command-line interface. In some cases, it may be
set up for you automatically as a boot menu option.
If the system is already running, you can bring it down to single-user mode with a shutdown
(FreeBSD), telinit (traditional init), or systemctl (systemd) command.

     See Chapter 3, for more information about the root account.

Sane systems prompt for the root password before starting the single-user root shell.
Unfortunately, this means that it’s virtually impossible to reset a forgotten root password through
single-user mode. If you need to reset the password, you’ll have to access the disk by way of
separate boot media.

     See Chapter 5 for more information about filesystems and mounting.

From the single-user shell, you can execute commands in much the same way as when logged in
on a fully booted system. However, sometimes only the root partition is mounted; you must
mount other filesystems manually to use programs that don’t live in /bin, /sbin, or /etc.
You can often find pointers to the available filesystems by looking in /etc/fstab. Under Linux,
you can run fdisk -l (lowercase L option) to see a list of the local system’s disk partitions. The
analogous procedure on FreeBSD is to run camcontrol devlist to identify disk devices and then
run fdisk -s device for each disk.

In many single-user environments, the filesystem root directory starts off being mounted read-
only. If /etc is part of the root filesystem (the usual case), it will be impossible to edit many
important configuration files. To fix this problem, you’ll have to begin your single-user session
by remounting / in read/write mode. Under Linux, the command

usually does the trick. On FreeBSD systems, the remount option is implicit when you repeat an
existing mount, but you’ll need to explicitly specify the source device. For example,
          Single-user mode in Red Hat and CentOS is a bit more aggressive than normal. By the
          time you reach the shell prompt, these systems have tried to mount all local
filesystems. Although this default is usually helpful, it can be problematic if you have a sick
filesystem. In that case, you can boot to emergency mode by adding
systemd.unit=emergency.target to the kernel arguments from within the boot loader (usually
GRUB). In this mode, no local filesystems are mounted and only a few essential services are
started.
The fsck command is run during a normal boot to check and repair filesystems. Depending on
what filesystem you’re using for the root, you may need to run fsck manually when you bring the
system up in single-user or emergency mode. See this page for more details about fsck.

Single-user mode is just a waypoint on the normal booting path, so you can terminate the single-
user shell with exit or <Control-D> to continue with booting. You can also type <Control-D> at
the password prompt to bypass single-user mode entirely.
Single-user mode on FreeBSD
     FreeBSD includes a single-user option in its boot menu:

One nice feature of FreeBSD’s single-user mode is that it asks you what program to use as the
shell. Just press <Enter> for /bin/sh.
If you choose option 3, “Escape to loader prompt,” you’ll drop into a boot-level command-line
environment implemented by FreeBSD’s final-common-stage boot loader, loader.
Single-user mode with GRUB
     On systems that use systemd, you can boot into rescue mode by appending
     systemd.unit=rescue.target to the end of the existing Linux kernel line. At the GRUB
splash screen, highlight your desired kernel and press the “e” key to edit its boot options.
Similarly, for emergency mode, use systemd.unit=emergency.target.
Here’s an example of a typical configuration:

Type <Control-X> to start the system after you’ve made your changes.
Recovery of cloud systems

     See Chapter 9 for a broader introduction to cloud computing.

It’s inherent in the nature of cloud systems that you can’t hook up a monitor or USB stick when
boot problems occur. Cloud providers do what they can to facilitate problem solving, but basic
limitations remain.
Backups are important for all systems, but cloud servers are particularly easy to snapshot.
Providers charge extra for backups, but they’re inexpensive. Be liberal with your snapshots and
you’ll always have a reasonable system image to fall back on at short notice.
From a philosophical perspective, you’re probably doing something wrong if your cloud servers
require boot-time debugging. Pets and physical servers receive veterinary care when they’re sick,
but cattle get euthanized. Your cloud servers are cattle; replace them with known-good copies
when they misbehave. Embracing this approach helps you not only avoid critical failures but also
facilitates scaling and system migration.
That said, you will inevitably need to attempt to recover cloud systems or drives, so we briefly
discuss that process below.

Within AWS, single-user and emergency modes are unavailable. However, EC2 filesystems can
be attached to other virtual servers if they’re backed by Elastic Block Storage (EBS) devices.
This is the default for most EC2 instances, so it’s likely that you can use this method if you need
to. Conceptually, it’s similar to booting from a USB drive so that you can poke around on a
physical system’s boot disk.
Here’s what to do:
   1. Launch a new instance in the same availability zone as the instance you’re having
      issues with. Ideally, this recovery instance should be launched from the same base
      image and should use the same instance type as the sick system.

   2. Stop the problem instance. (But be careful not to “terminate” it; that operation deletes
      the boot disk image.)
   3. With the AWS web console or CLI, detach the volume from the problem system and
      attach the volume to the recovery instance.
   4. Log in to the recovery system. Create a mount point and mount the volume, then do
      whatever’s necessary to fix the issue. Then unmount the volume. (Won’t unmount?
      Make sure you’re not cd’ed there.)
   5. In the AWS console, detach the volume from the recovery instance and reattach it to
      the problem instance. Start the problem instance and hope for the best.

DigitalOcean droplets offer a VNC-enabled console that you can access through the web,
although the web app’s behavior is a bit wonky on some browsers. DigitalOcean does not afford
a way to detach storage devices and migrate them to a recovery system the way Amazon does.
Instead, most system images let you boot from an alternate recovery kernel.

To access the recovery kernel, first power off the droplet and then mount the recovery kernel and
reboot. If all went well, the virtual terminal will give you access to a single-user-like mode. More
detailed instructions for this process are available at digitalocean.com.
The recovery kernel is not available on all modern distributions. If you’re running a recent
release and the recovery tab tells you that “The kernel for this Droplet is managed internally and
cannot be changed from the control panel” you’ll need to open a support ticket with DigitalOcean
to have them associate your instance with a recovery ISO, allowing you to continue your
recovery efforts.

Boot issues within a Google Compute Engine instance should first be investigated by
examination of the instance’s serial port information:

The same information is available through GCP web console.

A disk-shuffling process similar to that described above for the Amazon cloud is also available
on Google Compute Engine. You use the CLI to remove the disk from the defunct instance and
boot a new instance that mounts the disk as an add-on filesystem. You can then run filesystem
checks, modify boot parameters, and select a new kernel if necessary. This process is nicely
detailed in Google’s documentation at cloud.google.com/compute/docs/troubleshooting.
