3 Access Control and Rootly Powers

This chapter is about “access control,” as opposed to “security,” by which we mean that it
focuses on the mechanical details of how the kernel and its delegates make security-related
decisions. Chapter 27, Security, addresses the more general question of how to set up a system or
network to minimize the chance of unwelcome access by intruders.
Access control is an area of active research, and it has long been one of the major challenges of
operating system design. Over the last decade, UNIX and Linux have seen a Cambrian explosion
of new options in this domain. A primary driver of this surge has been the advent of kernel APIs
that allow third party modules to augment or replace the traditional UNIX access control system.
This modular approach creates a variety of new frontiers; access control is now just as open to
change and experimentation as any other aspect of UNIX.
Nevertheless, the traditional system remains the UNIX and Linux standard, and it’s adequate for
the majority of installations. Even for administrators who want to venture into the new frontier, a
thorough grounding in the basics is essential.
3.1 STANDARD UNIX ACCESS CONTROL
The standard UNIX access control model has remained largely unchanged for decades. With a
few enhancements, it continues to be the default for general-purpose OS distributions. The
scheme follows a few basic rules:

      Access control decisions depend on which user is attempting to perform an operation,
      or in some cases, on that user’s membership in a UNIX group.
      Objects (e.g., files and processes) have owners. Owners have broad (but not
      necessarily unrestricted) control over their objects.

      You own the objects you create.
      The special user account called “root” can act as the owner of any object.
      Only root can perform certain sensitive administrative operations.

Certain system calls (e.g., settimeofday) are restricted to root; the implementation simply checks
the identity of the current user and rejects the operation if the user is not root. Other system calls
(e.g., kill) implement different calculations that involve both ownership matching and special
provisions for root. Finally, filesystems have their own access control systems, which they
implement in cooperation with the kernel’s VFS layer. These are generally more elaborate than
the access controls found elsewhere in the kernel. For example, filesystems are much more likely
to make use of UNIX groups for access control.

     See this page for more information about device files.

Complicating this picture is that the kernel and the filesystem are intimately intertwined. For
example, you control and communicate with most devices through files that represent them in
/dev. Since device files are filesystem objects, they are subject to filesystem access control
semantics. The kernel uses that fact as its primary form of access control for devices.
Keep in mind that we are here describing the original design of the access control system. These
days, not all of the statements above remain literally true. For example, a Linux process that
bears appropriate capabilities (see this page) can now perform some operations that were
previously restricted to root.
Filesystem access control
In the standard model, every file has both an owner and a group, sometimes referred to as the
“group owner.” The owner can set the permissions of the file. In particular, the owner can set
them so restrictively that no one else can access it. We talk more about file permissions in
Chapter 5, The Filesystem (see this page).

     See this page for more information about groups.

Although the owner of a file is always a single person, many people can be group owners of the
file, as long as they are all part of a single group. Groups are traditionally defined in the
/etc/group file, but these days group information is often stored in a network database system
such as LDAP; see Chapter 17, Single Sign-On, for details.
The owner of a file gets to specify what the group owners can do with it. This scheme allows
files to be shared among members of the same project.

You can determine the ownerships of a file with ls -l:

This file is owned by user garth and group staff. The letters and dashes in the first column
symbolize the permissions on the file; see this page for details on how to decode the information.
In this case, the codes mean that garth can read or write the file and that members of the staff
group can read it.

     See Chapter 8 for more information about the passwd and group files.

Both the kernel and the filesystem track owners and groups as numbers rather than as text names.
In the most basic case, user identification numbers (UIDs for short) are mapped to usernames in
the /etc/passwd file, and group identification numbers (GIDs) are mapped to group names in
/etc/group. (See Chapter 17, Single Sign-On, for information about the more sophisticated
options.)
The text names that correspond to UIDs and GIDs are defined only for the convenience of the
system’s human users. When commands such as ls should display ownership information in a
human-readable format, they must look up each name in the appropriate file or database.
Process ownership
The owner of a process can send the process signals (see this page) and can also reduce (degrade)
the process’s scheduling priority. Processes actually have multiple identities associated with
them: a real, effective, and saved UID; a real, effective, and saved GID; and under Linux, a
“filesystem UID” that is used only to determine file access permissions. Broadly speaking, the
real numbers are used for accounting (now largely vestigial), and the effective numbers are used
for the determination of access permissions. The real and effective numbers are normally the
same.
The saved UID and GID are parking spots for IDs that are not currently in use but that remain
available for the process to invoke. The saved IDs allow a program to repeatedly enter and leave
a privileged mode of operation; this precaution reduces the risk of unintended misbehavior.

    See Chapter 21 for more about NFS.

The filesystem UID is generally explained as an implementation detail of NFS, the Network File
System. It is usually the same as the effective UID.
The root account
The root account is UNIX’s omnipotent administrative user. It’s also known as the superuser
account, although the actual username is “root”.
The defining characteristic of the root account is its UID of 0. Nothing prevents you from
changing the username on this account or from creating additional accounts whose UIDs are 0;
however, these are both bad ideas. (Jennine Townsend, one of our stalwart technical reviewers,
commented, “Such bad ideas that I fear even mentioning them might encourage someone!”)
Changes like these have a tendency to create inadvertent breaches of system security. They also
create confusion when other people have to deal with the strange way you’ve configured your
system.
Traditional UNIX allows the superuser (that is, any process for which the effective UID is 0) to
perform any valid operation on any file or process. “Valid” is the operative word here; certain
operations (such as executing a file on which the execute permission bit is not set) are forbidden
even to the superuser.
Some examples of restricted operations are

      Creating device files

      Setting the system clock
      Raising resource usage limits and process priorities
      Setting the system’s hostname
      Configuring network interfaces

      Opening privileged network ports (those numbered below 1,024)
      Shutting down the system

An example of superuser powers is the ability of a process owned by root to change its UID and
GID. The login program and its GUI equivalents are a case in point; the process that prompts you
for your password when you log in to the system initially runs as root. If the password and
username that you enter are legitimate, the login program changes its UID and GID to your UID
and GID and starts up your shell or GUI environment. Once a root process has changed its
ownerships to become a normal user process, it can’t recover its former privileged state.
Setuid and setgid execution
Traditional UNIX access control is complemented by an identity substitution system that’s
implemented by the kernel and the filesystem in collaboration. This scheme allows specially
marked executable files to run with elevated permissions, usually those of root. It lets developers
and administrators set up structured ways for unprivileged users to perform privileged operations.
When the kernel runs an executable file that has its “setuid” or “setgid” permission bits set, it
changes the effective UID or GID of the resulting process to the UID or GID of the file
containing the program image rather than the UID and GID of the user that ran the command.
The user’s privileges are thus promoted for the execution of that specific command only.
For example, users must be able to change their passwords. But since passwords are
(traditionally) stored in the protected /etc/master.passwd or /etc/shadow file, users need a setuid
passwd command to mediate their access. The passwd command checks to see who’s running it
and customizes its behavior accordingly: users can change only their own passwords, but root
can change any password.
Programs that run setuid, especially ones that run setuid to root, are prone to security problems.
The setuid commands distributed with the system are theoretically secure; however, security
holes have been discovered in the past and will undoubtedly be discovered in the future.

The surest way to minimize the number of setuid problems is to minimize the number of setuid
programs. Think twice before installing software that needs to run setuid, and avoid using the
setuid facility in your own home-grown software. Never use setuid execution on programs that
were not explicitly written with setuid execution in mind.

     See this page for more information about filesystem mount options.

You can disable setuid and setgid execution on individual filesystems by specifying the nosuid
option to mount. It’s a good idea to use this option on filesystems that contain users’ home
directories or that are mounted from less trustworthy administrative domains.
3.2 MANAGEMENT OF THE ROOT ACCOUNT
Root access is required for system administration, and it’s also a pivot point for system security.
Proper husbandry of the root account is a crucial skill.
Root account login
Since root is just another user, most systems let you log in directly to the root account. However,
this turns out to be a bad idea, which is why Ubuntu forbids it by default.
To begin with, root logins leave no record of what operations were performed as root. That’s bad
enough when you realize that you broke something last night at 3:00 a.m. and can’t remember
what you changed; it’s even worse when an access was unauthorized and you are trying to figure
out what an intruder has done to your system. Another disadvantage is that the log-in-as-root
scenario leaves no record of who was actually doing the work. If several people have access to
the root account, you won’t be able to tell who used it and when.
For these reasons, most systems allow root logins to be disabled on terminals, through window
systems, and across the network—everywhere but on the system console. We suggest that you
use these features. See PAM: cooking spray or authentication wonder? to see how to implement
this policy on your particular system.
If root does have a password (that is, the root account is not disabled; see this page), that
password must be of high quality. See this page for some additional comments regarding
password selection.
su: substitute user identity
A marginally better way to access the root account is to use the su command. If invoked without
arguments, su prompts for the root password and then starts up a root shell. Root privileges
remain in effect until you terminate the shell by typing <Control-D> or the exit command. su
doesn’t record the commands executed as root, but it does create a log entry that states who
became root and when.
The su command can also substitute identities other than root. Sometimes, the only way to
reproduce or debug a user’s problem is to su to their account so that you reproduce the
environment in which the problem occurs.
If you know someone’s password, you can access that person’s account directly by executing su
- username. As with an su to root, you are prompted for the password for username. The - (dash)
option makes su spawn the shell in login mode.
The exact implications of login mode vary by shell, but login mode normally changes the number
or identity of the files that the shell reads when it starts up. For example, bash reads
~/.bash_profile in login mode and ~/.bashrc in nonlogin mode. When diagnosing other users’
problems, it helps to reproduce their login environments as closely as possible by running in
login mode.

On some systems, the root password allows an su or login to any account. On others, you must
first su explicitly to root before suing to another account; root can su to any account without
entering a password.
Get in the habit of typing the full pathname to su (e.g., /bin/su or /usr/bin/su) rather than relying
on the shell to find the command for you. This precaution gives you some protection against
arbitrary programs called su that might have been sneaked into your search path with the
intention of harvesting passwords. (For the same reason, do not include “.”, the current directory,
in your shell’s search path. Although convenient, including “.” makes it easy to inadvertently run
“special” versions of system commands that an intruder has left lying around as a trap. Naturally,
this advice goes double for root.)
On most systems, you must be a member of the group “wheel” to use su.
We consider su to have been largely superseded by sudo, described in the next section. su is best
reserved for emergencies. It’s also helpful for fixing situations in which sudo has been broken or
misconfigured.
sudo: limited su
Without one of the advanced access control systems outlined starting on this page, it’s hard to
enable someone to do one task (backups, for example) without giving that person free run of the
system. And if the root account is used by several administrators, you really have only a vague
idea of who’s using it or what they’ve done.
The most widely used solution to these problems is a program called sudo that is currently
maintained by Todd Miller. It runs on all our example systems and is also available in source
code form from sudo.ws. We recommend it as the primary method of access to the root account.
sudo takes as its argument a command line to be executed as root (or as another restricted user).
sudo consults the file /etc/sudoers (/usr/local/etc/sudoers on FreeBSD), which lists the people
who are authorized to use sudo and the commands they are allowed to run on each host. If the
proposed command is permitted, sudo prompts for the user’s own password and executes the
command.
Additional sudo commands can be executed without the “doer” having to type a password until a
five-minute period (configurable) has elapsed with no further sudo activity. This timeout serves
as a modest protection against users with sudo privileges who leave terminals unattended.

     See Chapter 10 for more information about syslog.

sudo keeps a log of the command lines that were executed, the hosts on which they were run, the
people who ran them, the directories from which they were run, and the times at which they were
invoked. This information can be logged by syslog or placed in the file of your choice. We
recommend using syslog to forward the log entries to a secure central host.
A log entry for randy’s executing sudo /bin/cat /etc/sudoers might look like this:

Example configuration
The sudoers file is designed so that a single version can be used on many different hosts at once.
Here’s a typical example:
The first two sets of lines define groups of hosts and commands that are referred to in the
permission specifications later in the file. The lists could be included literally in the
specifications, but aliases make the sudoers file easier to read and understand; they also make
the file easier to update in the future. It’s also possible to define aliases for sets of users and for
sets of users as whom commands may be run.
Each permission specification line includes information about

       The users to whom the line applies
       The hosts on which the line should be heeded
       The commands that the specified users can run

       The users as whom the commands can be executed

The first permission line applies to the users mark and ed on the machines in the PHYSICS group
(eprince, pprince, and icarus). The built-in command alias ALL allows them to run any command.
Since no list of users is specified in parentheses, sudo will run commands as root.
The second permission line allows herb to run tcpdump on CS machines and dump-related
commands on PHYSICS machines. However, the dump commands can be run only as operator, not
as root. The actual command line that herb would type would be something like

The user lynda can run commands as any user on any machine, except that she can’t run several
common shells. Does this mean that lynda really can’t get a root shell? Of course not:
Generally speaking, any attempt to allow “all commands except …” is doomed to failure, at least
in a technical sense. However, it might still be worthwhile to set up the sudoers file this way as a
reminder that root shells are strongly discouraged.
The final line allows users in group wheel to run the local watchdog command as root on all
machines except eprince, pprince, and icarus. Furthermore, no password is required to run the
command.

Note that commands in the sudoers file are specified with full pathnames to prevent people from
executing their own programs and scripts as root. Though no examples are shown above, it is
possible to specify the arguments that are permissible for each command as well.
To manually modify the sudoers file, use the visudo command, which checks to be sure no one
else is editing the file, invokes an editor on it (vi, or whichever editor you specify in your
EDITOR environment variable), and then verifies the syntax of the edited file before installing it.
This last step is particularly important because an invalid sudoers file might prevent you from
sudoing again to fix it.

sudo pros and cons
The use of sudo has the following advantages:

      Accountability is much improved because of command logging.

      Users can do specific chores without having unlimited root privileges.
      The real root password can be known to only one or two people.
      Using sudo is faster than using su or logging in as root.
      Privileges can be revoked without the need to change the root password.

      A canonical list of all users with root privileges is maintained.
      The chance of a root shell being left unattended is lessened.
      A single file can control access for an entire network.

sudo has a couple of disadvantages as well. The worst of these is that any breach in the security
of a sudoer’s personal account can be equivalent to breaching the root account itself. You can’t
do much to counter this threat other than caution your sudoers to protect their own accounts as
they would the root account. You can also run a password cracker regularly on sudoers’
passwords to ensure that they are making good password selections. All the comments on
password selection from this page apply here as well.
sudo’s command logging can easily be subverted by tricks such as shell escapes from within an
allowed program, or by sudo sh and sudo su. (Such commands do show up in the logs, so you’ll
at least know they’ve been run.)
sudo vs. advanced access control
If you think of sudo as a way of subdividing the privileges of the root account, it is superior in
some ways to many of the drop-in access control systems outlined starting on this page:

      You decide exactly how privileges will be subdivided. Your division can be coarser
      or finer than the privileges defined for you by an off-the-shelf system.
      Simple configurations—the most common—are simple to set up, maintain, and
      understand.
      sudo runs on all UNIX and Linux systems. You do need not worry about managing
      different solutions on different platforms.
      You can share a single configuration file throughout your site.

      You get consistent, high-quality logging for free.

Because the system is vulnerable to catastrophic compromise if the root account is penetrated, a
major drawback of sudo-based access control is that the potential attack surface expands to
include the accounts of all administrators.
sudo works well as a tool for well-intentioned administrators who need general access to root
privileges. It’s also great for allowing non-administrators to perform a few specific operations.
Despite a configuration syntax that suggests otherwise, it is unfortunately not a safe way to
define limited domains of autonomy or to place certain operations out of bounds.
Don’t even attempt these configurations. If you need this functionality, you are much better off
enabling one of the drop-in access control systems described starting on this page.

Typical setup
sudo’s configuration system has accumulated a lot of features over the years. It has also
expanded to accommodate a variety of unusual situations and edge cases. As a result, the current
documentation conveys an impression of complexity that isn’t necessarily warranted.
Since it’s important that sudo be reliable and secure, it’s natural to wonder if you might be
exposing your systems to additional risk if you don’t make use of sudo’s advanced features and
set exactly the right values for all options. The answer is no. 90% of sudoers files look
something like this:

This is a perfectly respectable configuration, and in many cases there’s no need to complicate it
further. We’ve mentioned a few extras you can play with in the sections below, but they’re all
problem-solving tools that are helpful for specific situations. Nothing more is required for
general robustness.

Environment management
Many commands consult the values of environment variables and modify their behavior
depending on what they find. In the case of commands run as root, this mechanism can be both a
useful convenience and a potential route of attack.
For example, several commands run the program specified in your EDITOR environment
variable to spawn a text editor. If this variable points to a hacker’s malicious program instead of
an editor, it’s likely that you’ll eventually end up running that program as root. (Just to be clear,
the scenario in this case is that your account has been compromised, but the attacker does not
know your actual password and so cannot run sudo directly. Unfortunately, this is a common
situation—all it takes is a terminal window left momentarily unattended.)
To minimize this risk, sudo’s default behavior is to pass only a minimal, sanitized environment
to the commands that it runs. If your site needs additional environment variables to be passed,
you can whitelist them by adding them to the sudoers file’s env_keep list. For example, the lines

preserve several environment variables used by X Windows and by SSH key forwarding.
It’s possible to set different env_keep lists for different users or groups, but the configuration
rapidly becomes complicated. We suggest sticking to a single, universal list and being relatively
conservative with the exceptions you enshrine in the sudoers file.
If you need to preserve an environment variable that isn’t listed in the sudoers file, you can set it
explicitly on the sudo command line. For example, the command

edits the system password file with emacs. This feature has some potential restrictions, but
they’re waived for users who can run ALL commands.

sudo without passwords
It’s distressingly common to see sudo set up to allow command execution as root without the
need to enter a password. Just for reference, that configuration is achieved with the NOPASSWD
keyword in the sudoers file. For example:
     See Chapter 23 for more information about Ansible.

Sometimes this is done out of laziness, but more typically, the underlying need is to allow some
type of unattended sudo execution. The most common cases are when performing remote
configuration through a system such as Ansible, or when running commands out of cron.
Needless to say, this configuration is dangerous, so avoid it if you can. At the very least, restrict
passwordless execution to a specific set of commands if you can.

     See this page for more information about PAM configuration.

Another option that works well in the context of remote execution is to replace manually entered
passwords with authentication through ssh-agent and forwarded SSH keys. You can configure
this method of authentication through PAM on the server where sudo will actually run.
Most systems don’t include the PAM module that implements SSH-based authentication by
default, but it is readily available. Look for a pam_ssh_agent_auth package.

SSH key forwarding has its own set of security concerns, but it’s certainly an improvement over
no authentication at all.

Precedence
A given invocation of sudo might potentially be addressed by several entries in the sudoers file.
For example, consider the following configuration:

Here, administrators can run the logrotate command as any user without supplying a password.
MySQL administrators can run any command as mysql without a password. Anyone in the wheel
group can run any command under any UID, but must authenticate with a password first.
If user alice is in the wheel group, she is potentially covered by each of the last three lines. How
do you know which one will determine sudo’s behavior?

The rule is that sudo always obeys the last matching line, with matching being determined by the
entire 4-tuple of user, host, target user, and command. Each of those elements must match the
configuration line, or the line is simply ignored.
Therefore, NOPASSWD exceptions must follow their more general counterparts, as shown above. If
the order of the last three lines were reversed, poor alice would have to type a password no
matter what sudo command she attempted to run.

sudo without a control terminal
In addition to raising the issue of passwordless authentication, unattended execution of sudo
(e.g., from cron) often occurs without a normal control terminal. There’s nothing inherently
wrong with that, but it’s an odd situation that sudo can check for and reject if the requiretty option
is turned on in the sudoers file.
This option is not the default from sudo’s perspective, but some OS distributions include it in
their default sudoers files, so it’s worth checking for and removing. Look for a line of the form

and invert its value:

The requiretty option does offer a small amount of symbolic protection against certain attack
scenarios. However, it’s easy to work around and so offers little real security benefit. In our
opinion, requiretty should be disabled as a matter of course because it is a common source of
problems.

Site-wide sudo configuration
Because the sudoers file includes the current host as a matching criterion for configuration lines,
you can use one master sudoers file throughout an administrative domain (that is, a region of
your site in which hostnames and user accounts are guaranteed to be name-equivalent). This
approach makes the initial sudoers setup a bit more complicated, but it’s a great idea, for
multiple reasons. You should do it.
The main advantage of this approach is that there’s no mystery about who has what permissions
on what hosts. Everything is recorded in one authoritative file. When an administrator leaves
your organization, for example, there’s no need to track down all the hosts on which that user
might have had sudo permissions. When changes are needed, you simply modify the master
sudoers file and redistribute it.
A natural corollary of this approach is that sudo permissions might be better expressed in terms
of user accounts rather than UNIX groups. For example,

has some intuitive appeal, but it defers the enumeration of privileged users to each local machine.
You can’t look at this line and determine who’s covered by it without an excursion to the
machine in question. Since the idea is to keep all relevant information in one place, it’s best to
avoid this type of grouping option when sharing a sudoers file on a network. Of course, if your
group memberships are tightly coordinated site-wide, it’s fine to use groups.
Distribution of the sudoers file is best achieved through a broader system of configuration
management, as described in Chapter 23. But if you haven’t yet reached that level of
organization, you can easily roll your own. Be careful, though: installing a bogus sudoers file is
a quick route to disaster. This is also a good file to keep an eye on with a file integrity monitoring
solution of some kind; see this page.

In the absence of a configuration management system, it’s best to use a “pull” script that runs out
of cron on each host. Use scp to copy the current sudoers file from a known central repository,
then validate it with visudo -c -f newsudoers before installation to verify that the format is
acceptable to the local sudo. scp checks the remote server’s host key for you, ensuring that the
sudoers file is coming from the host you intended and not from a spoofed server.
Hostname specifications can be a bit subtle when sharing the sudoers file. By default, sudo uses
the output of the hostname command as the text to be matched. Depending on the conventions in
use at your site, this name may or may not include a domain portion (e.g., anchor vs.
anchor.cs.colorado.edu). In either case, the hostnames specified in the sudoers file must match
the hostnames as they are returned on each host. (You can turn on the fqdn option in the sudoers
file to attempt to normalize local hostnames to their fully qualified forms.)
Hostname matching gets even stickier in the cloud, where instance names often default to
algorithmically generated patterns. sudo understands simple pattern-matching characters
(globbing) in hostnames, so consider adopting a naming scheme that incorporates some
indication of each host’s security classification from sudo’s perspective.
Alternatively, you can use your cloud provider’s virtual networking features to segregate hosts
by IP address, and then match on IP addresses instead of hostnames from within the sudoers file.
Disabling the root account
If your site standardizes on the use of sudo, you’ll have surprisingly little use for actual root
passwords. Most of your administrative team will never have occasion to use them.
That fact raises the question of whether a root password is necessary at all. If you decide that it
isn’t, you can disable root logins entirely by setting root’s encrypted password to * or to some
other fixed, arbitrary string. On Linux, passwd -l “locks” an account by prepending a ! to the
encrypted password, with equivalent results.
The * and the ! are just conventions; no software checks for them explicitly. Their effect derives
from their not being valid password hashes. As a result, attempts to verify root’s password
simply fail.
The main effect of locking the root account is that root cannot log in, even on the console.
Neither can any user successfully run su, because that requires a root password check as well.
However, the root account continues to exist, and all the software that usually runs as root
continues to do so. In particular, sudo works normally.

The main advantage of disabling the root account is that you needn’t record and manage root’s
password. You’re also eliminating the possibility of the root password being compromised, but
that’s more a pleasant side effect than a compelling reason to go passwordless. Rarely used
passwords are already at low risk of violation.
It’s particularly helpful to have a real root password on physical computers (as opposed to cloud
or virtual instances; see Chapters 9 and 24). Real computers are apt to require rescuing when
hardware or configuration problems interfere with sudo or the boot process. In these cases, it’s
nice to have the traditional root account available as an emergency fallback.
     Ubuntu ships with the root account locked, and all administrative access is funneled through
     sudo or a GUI equivalent. If you prefer, it’s fine to set a root password on Ubuntu and then
unlock the account with sudo passwd -u root.
System accounts other than root
Root is generally the only user that has special status in the eyes of the kernel, but several other
pseudo-users are defined by most systems. You can identify these sham accounts by their low
UIDs, usually less than 100. Most often, UIDs under 10 are system accounts, and UIDs between
10 and 100 are pseudo-users associated with specific pieces of software.

     See this page for more information about shadow and master.passwd.

It’s customary to replace the encrypted password field of these special users in the shadow or
master.passwd file with a star so that their accounts cannot be logged in to. Their shells should
be set to /bin/false or /bin/nologin as well, to protect against remote login exploits that use
password alternatives such as SSH key files.
As with user accounts, most systems define a variety of system-related groups that have similarly
low GIDs.

Files and processes that are part of the operating system but that need not be owned by root are
sometimes assigned to the users bin or daemon. The theory was that this convention would help
avoid the security hazards associated with ownership by root. It’s not a compelling argument,
however, and current systems often just use the root account instead.
The main advantage of defining pseudo-accounts and pseudo-groups is that they can be used
more safely than the root account to provide access to defined groups of resources. For example,
databases often implement elaborate access control systems of their own. From the perspective of
the kernel, they run as a pseudo-user such as “mysql” that owns all database-related resources.

     See this page for more information about the nobody account.

The Network File System (NFS) uses an account called “nobody” to represent root users on other
systems. For remote roots to be stripped of their rootly powers, the remote UID 0 has to be
mapped to something other than the local UID 0. The nobody account acts as a generic alter ego
for these remote roots. In NFSv4, the nobody account can be applied to remote users that
correspond to no valid local account as well.

Since the nobody account is supposed to represent a generic and relatively powerless user, it
shouldn’t own any files. If nobody does own files, remote roots can take control of them.
3.3 EXTENSIONS TO THE STANDARD ACCESS CONTROL MODEL
The preceding sections outline the major concepts of the traditional access control model. Even
though this model can be summarized in a couple of pages, it has stood the test of time because
it’s simple, predictable, and capable of handling the requirements of the average site. All UNIX
and Linux variants continue to support this model, and it remains the default approach and the
one that’s most widely used today.
As actually implemented and shipped on modern operating systems, the model includes a
number of important refinements. Three layers of software contribute to the current status quo:

      The standard model as described to this point

      Extensions that generalize and fine-tune this basic model
      Kernel extensions that implement alternative approaches

These categories are not architectural layers so much as historical artifacts. Early UNIX
derivatives all used the standard model, but its deficiencies were widely recognized even then.
Over time, the community began to develop workarounds for a few of the more pressing issues.
In the interest of maintaining compatibility and encouraging widespread adoption, changes were
usually structured as refinements of the traditional system. Some of these tweaks (e.g., PAM) are
now considered UNIX standards.
Over the last decade, great strides have been made toward modularization of access control
systems. This evolution enables even more radical changes to access control. We review some of
the more common pluggable options for Linux and FreeBSD in Modern access control.
For now, we look at some of the more prosaic extensions that are bundled with most systems.
First, we consider the problems those extensions attempt to address.
Drawbacks of the standard model
Despite its elegance, the standard model has some obvious shortcomings.

      To begin with, the root account represents a potential single point of failure. If it’s
      compromised, the integrity of the entire system is violated, and there is essentially no
      limit to the damage an attacker can inflict.
      The only way to subdivide the privileges of the root account is to write setuid
      programs. Unfortunately, as the steady flow of security-related software updates
      demonstrates, it’s difficult to write secure software. Every setuid program is a
      potential target.
      The standard model has little to say about security on a network. No computer to
      which an unprivileged user has physical access can be trusted to accurately represent
      the ownerships of the processes it’s running. Who’s to say that someone hasn’t
      reformatted the disk and installed their own operating system, with UIDs of their
      choosing?
      In the standard model, group definition is a privileged operation. For example, there’s
      no way for a generic user to express the intent that only alice and bob should have
      access to a particular file.

      Because many access control rules are embedded in the code of individual commands
      and daemons (the classic example being the passwd program), you cannot redefine
      the system’s behavior without modifying the source code and recompiling. In the real
      world, that’s impractical and error prone.
      The standard model also has little or no support for auditing or logging. You can see
      which UNIX groups a user belongs to, but you can’t necessarily determine what
      those group memberships permit a user to do. In addition, there’s no real way to track
      the use of elevated privileges or to see what operations they have performed.
PAM: Pluggable Authentication Modules

     See this page for more information about the shadow and master.passwd files.

User accounts are traditionally secured by passwords stored (in encrypted form) in the
/etc/shadow or /etc/master.passwd file or an equivalent network database. Many programs may
need to validate accounts, including login, sudo, su, and any program that accepts logins on a
GUI workstation.
These programs really shouldn’t have hard-coded expectations about how passwords are to be
encrypted or verified. Ideally, they shouldn’t even assume that passwords are in use at all. What
if you want to use biometric identification, a network identity system, or some kind of two-factor
authentication? Pluggable Authentication Modules to the rescue!
PAM is a wrapper for a variety of method-specific authentication libraries. Administrators
specify the authentication methods they want the system to use, along with the appropriate
contexts for each one. Programs that require user authentication simply call the PAM system
rather than implement their own forms of authentication. PAM in turn calls the authentication
library specified by the system administrator.
Strictly speaking, PAM is an authentication technology, not an access control technology. That
is, instead of addressing the question “Does user X have permission to perform operation Y?”, it
helps answer the precursor question, “How do I know this is really user X?”

PAM is an important component of the access control chain on most systems, and PAM
configuration is a common administrative task. You can find more details on PAM in the Single
Sign-On chapter starting on this page.
Kerberos: network cryptographic authentication
Like PAM, Kerberos deals with authentication rather than access control per se. But whereas
PAM is an authentication framework, Kerberos is a specific authentication method. At sites that
use Kerberos, PAM and Kerberos generally work together, PAM being the wrapper and Kerberos
the actual implementation.
Kerberos uses a trusted third party (a server) to perform authentication for an entire network.
You don’t authenticate yourself to the machine you are using, but provide your credentials to the
Kerberos service. Kerberos then issues cryptographic credentials that you can present to other
services as evidence of your identity.
Kerberos is a mature technology that has been in widespread use for decades. It’s the standard
authentication system used by Windows, and is part of Microsoft’s Active Directory system.
Read more about Kerberos here.
Filesystem access control lists
Since filesystem access control is so central to UNIX and Linux, it was an early target for
elaboration. The most common addition has been support for access control lists (ACLs), a
generalization of the traditional user/group/other permission model that permits permissions to be
set for multiple users and groups at once.
ACLs are part of the filesystem implementation, so they have to be explicitly supported by
whatever filesystem you are using. However, all major UNIX and Linux filesystems now support
ACLs in one form or another.

     See Chapter 21, The Network File System, for more information about NFS.

ACL support generally comes in one of two forms: an early POSIX draft standard that never
quite made its way to formal adoption but was widely implemented anyway, and the system
standardized by NFSv4, which adapts Microsoft Windows ACLs. Both ACL standards are
described in more detail in the filesystem chapter, starting on this page.
Linux capabilities
     Capability systems divide the powers of the root account into a handful (~30) of separate
     permissions.
The Linux version of capabilities derives from the defunct POSIX 1003.1e draft, which totters on
despite never having been formally approved as a standard. In addition to bearing this zombie
stigma, Linux capabilities raise the hackles of theorists because of nonconformance to the
academic conception of a capability system. No matter; they’re here, and Linux calls them
capabilities, so we will too.
Capabilities can be inherited from a parent process. They can also be enabled or disabled by
attributes set on an executable file, in a process reminiscent of setuid execution. Processes can
renounce capabilities that they don’t plan to use.
The traditional powers of root are simply the union of all possible capabilities, so there’s a fairly
direct mapping between the traditional model and the capability model. The capability model is
just more granular.

As an example, the Linux capability called CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE controls a process’s
ability to bind to privileged network ports (those numbered under 1,024). Some daemons that
traditionally run as root need only this one particular superpower. In the capability world, such a
daemon can theoretically run as an unprivileged user and pick up the port-binding capability
from its executable file. As long as the daemon does not explicitly check to be sure that it’s
running as root, it needn’t even be capability aware.
Is all this actually done in the real world? Well, no. As it happens, capabilities have evolved to
become more an enabling technology than a user-facing system. They’re widely employed by
higher-level systems such as AppArmor (see this page) and Docker (see Chapter 25) but are
rarely used on their own.
For administrators, it’s helpful to review the capabilities(7) man page just to get a sense of
what’s included in each of the capability buckets.
Linux namespaces
      Linux can segregate processes into hierarchical partitions (“namespaces”) from which they
      see only a subset of the system’s files, network ports, and processes. Among other effects,
this scheme acts as a form of preemptive access control. Instead of having to base access control
decisions on potentially subtle criteria, the kernel simply denies the existence of objects that are
not visible from inside a given box.
Inside a partition, normal access control rules apply, and in most cases jailed processes are not
even aware that they have been confined. Because confinement is irreversible, processes can run
as root within a partition without fear that they might endanger other parts of the system.
This clever trick is one of the foundations of software containerization and its best-known
implementation, Docker. The full system is a lot more sophisticated and includes extensions such
as copy-on-write filesystem access. We have quite a bit more to say about containers in Chapter
25.
As a form of access control, namespacing is a relatively coarse approach. The construction of
properly configured nests for processes to live in is also somewhat tricky. Currently, this
technology is applied primarily to add-on services as opposed to intrinsic components of the
operating system.
3.4 MODERN ACCESS CONTROL
Given the world’s wide range of computing environments and the mixed success of efforts to
advance the standard model, kernel maintainers have been reluctant to act as mediators in the
larger debate over access control. In the Linux world, the situation came to a head in 2001, when
the U.S. National Security Agency proposed to integrate its Security-Enhanced Linux (SELinux)
system into the kernel as a standard facility.
For several reasons, the kernel maintainers resisted this merge. Instead of adopting SELinux or
another, alternative system, they developed the Linux Security Modules API, a kernel-level
interface that allows access control systems to integrate themselves as loadable kernel modules.

LSM-based systems have no effect unless users load them and turn them on. This fact lowers the
barriers for inclusion in the standard kernel, and Linux now ships with SELinux and four other
systems (AppArmor, Smack, TOMOYO, and Yama) ready to go.
Developments on the BSD side have roughly paralleled those of Linux, thanks largely to Robert
Watson’s work on TrustedBSD. This code has been included in FreeBSD since version 5. It also
provides the application sandboxing technology used in Apple’s macOS and iOS.
When multiple access control modules are active simultaneously, an operation must be approved
by all of them to be permitted. Unfortunately, the LSM system requires explicit cooperation
among active modules, and none of the current modules include this feature. For now, Linux
systems are effectively limited to a choice of one LSM add-on module.
Separate ecosystems
Access control is inherently a kernel-level concern. With the exception of filesystem access
control lists (see this page), there is essentially no standardization among systems with regard to
alternative access control mechanisms. As a result, every kernel has its own array of available
implementations, and none of them are cross-platform.
       Because Linux distributions share a common kernel lineage, all Linux distributions are
       theoretically compatible with all the various Linux security offerings. But in practical terms,
they’re not: these systems all need user-level support in the form of additional commands,
modifications to user-level components, and securement profiles for daemons and services. Ergo,
every distribution has only one or two access control mechanisms that it actively supports (if
that).
Mandatory access control
The standard UNIX model is considered a form of “discretionary access control” because it
allows the owners of access-controlled entities to set the permissions on them. For example, you
might allow other users to view the contents of your home directory, or you might write a setuid
program that lets other people send signals to your processes.
Discretionary access control provides no particular guarantee of security for user-level data. The
downside of letting users set permissions is that users can set permissions; there’s no telling what
they might do with their own files. And even with the best intentions and training, users can
make mistakes.
Mandatory access control (aka MAC) systems let administrators write access control policies that
override or supplement the discretionary permissions of the traditional model. For example, you
might establish the rule that users’ home directories are accessible only by their owners. It then
doesn’t matter if a user makes a private copy of a sensitive document and is careless with the
document’s permissions; nobody else can see into that user’s home directory anyway.
MAC capabilities are an enabling technology for implementing security models such as the
Department of Defense’s “multilevel security” system. In this model, security policies control
access according to the perceived sensitivity of the resources being controlled. Users are assigned
a security classification from a structured hierarchy. They can read and write items at the same
classification level or lower but cannot access items at a higher classification. For example, a
user with “secret” access can read and write “secret” objects but cannot read objects that are
classified as “top secret.”

Unless you’re handling sensitive data for a government entity, it is unlikely that you will ever
encounter or need to deploy such comprehensive “foreign” security models. More commonly,
MAC is used to protect individual services, and it otherwise stays out of users’ way.
A well-implemented MAC policy relies on the principle of least privilege (allowing access only
when necessary), much as a properly designed firewall allows only specifically recognized
services and clients to pass. MAC can prevent software with code execution vulnerabilities (e.g.,
buffer overflows) from compromising the system by limiting the scope of the breach to the few
specific resources required by that software.
MAC has unfortunately become something of a buzzword synonymous with “advanced access
control.” Even FreeBSD’s generic security API is called the MAC interface, despite the fact that
some plug-ins offer no actual MAC features.
Available MAC systems range from wholesale replacements for the standard model to
lightweight extensions that address specific domains and use cases. The common thread among
MAC implementations is that they generally add centralized, administrator-written (or vendor-
supplied) policies into the access control system along with the usual mix of file permissions,
access controls lists, and process attributes.
Regardless of scope, MAC represents a potentially significant departure from the standard
system, and it’s one that programs expecting to deal with the standard UNIX security model may
find surprising. Before committing to a full-scale MAC deployment, make sure you understand
the module’s logging conventions and know how to identify and troubleshoot MAC-related
problems.
Role-based access control
Another feature commonly name-checked by access control systems is role-based access control
(aka RBAC), a theoretical model formalized in 1992 by David Ferraiolo and Rick Kuhn. The
basic idea is to add a layer of indirection to access control calculations. Permissions, instead of
being assigned directly to users, are assigned to intermediate constructs known as “roles,” and
roles in turn are assigned to users. To make an access control decision, the system enumerates the
roles of the current user and checks to see if any of those roles have the appropriate permissions.
Roles are similar in concept to UNIX groups, but they’re more general because they can be used
outside the context of the filesystem. Roles can also have a hierarchical relationship to one
another, a fact that greatly simplifies administration. For example, you might define a “senior
administrator” role that has all the permissions of an “administrator” plus the additional
permissions X, Y, and Z.
Many UNIX variants, including Solaris, HP-UX, and AIX, include some form of built-in RBAC
system. Linux and FreeBSD have no distinct, native RBAC facility. However, it is built into
several of the more comprehensive MAC options.
SELinux: Security-Enhanced Linux
SELinux is one of the oldest Linux MAC implementations and is a product of the U.S. National
Security Agency. Depending on one’s perspective, that might be a source of either comfort or
suspicion. (If your tastes incline toward suspicion, it’s worth noting that as part of the Linux
kernel distribution, the SELinux code base is open to inspection.)
SELinux takes a maximalist approach, and it implements pretty much every flavor of MAC and
RBAC one might envision. Although it has gained footholds in a few distributions, it is
notoriously difficult to administer and troubleshoot. This unattributed quote from a former
version of the SELinux Wikipedia page vents the frustration felt by many sysadmins:

      Intriguingly, although the stated raison d’être of SELinux is to facilitate the creation
      of individualized access control policies specifically attuned to organizational data
      custodianship practices and rules, the supportive software tools are so sparse and
      unfriendly that the vendors survive chiefly on “consulting,’ which typically takes the
      form of incremental modifications to boilerplate security policies.

Despite its administrative complexity, SELinux adoption has been slowly growing, particularly
in environments such as government, finance, and health care that enforce strong and specific
security requirements. It’s also a standard part of the Android platform.
Our general opinion regarding SELinux is that it’s capable of delivering more harm than benefit.
Unfortunately, that harm can manifest not only as wasted time and aggravation for system
administrators, but also, ironically, as security lapses. Complex models are hard to reason about,
and SELinux isn’t really a level playing field; hackers that focus on it understand the system far
more thoroughly than the average sysadmin.
In particular, SELinux policy development is a complicated endeavor. To protect a new daemon,
for example, a policy must carefully enumerate all the files, directories, and other objects to
which the process needs access. For complicated software like sendmail or httpd, this task can
be quite complex. At least one company offers a three-day class on policy development.

Fortunately, many general policies are available on-line, and most SELinux-enabled distributions
come with reasonable defaults. These can easily be installed and configured for your particular
environment. A full-blown policy editor that aims to ease policy application can be found at
seedit.sourceforge.net.
          SELinux is well supported by both Red Hat (and hence, CentOS) and Fedora. Red Hat
          enables it by default.
     Debian and SUSE Linux also have some available support for SELinux, but you must
     install additional packages, and the system is less aggressive in its default configuration.
Ubuntu inherits some SELinux support from Debian, but over the last few releases, Ubuntu’s
focus has been on AppArmor (see this page). Some vestigial SELinux-related packages are still
available, but they are generally not up to date.
/etc/selinux/config is the top-level control for SELinux. The interesting lines are

The first line has three possible values: enforcing, permissive, or disabled. The enforcing setting ensures
that the loaded policy is applied and prohibits violations. permissive allows violations to occur but
logs them through syslog, which is valuable for debugging and policy development. disabled turns
off SELinux entirely.
SELINUXTYPE refers to the name of the policy database to be applied. This is essentially the name
of a subdirectory within /etc/selinux. Only one policy can be active at a time, and the available
policy sets vary by system.

          Red Hat’s default policy is targeted, which defines additional security for a few daemons
          that Red Hat has explicitly protected but leaves the rest of the system alone. There
used to be a separate policy called strict that applied MAC to the entire system, but that policy has
now been merged into targeted. Remove the unconfined and unconfineduser modules with semodule -d to
achieve full-system MAC.
Red Hat also defines an mls policy that implements DoD-style multilevel security. You must
install it separately with yum install selinux-policy-mls.
If you’re interested in developing your own SELinux policies, check out the audit2allow utility.
It builds policy definitions from logs of violations. The idea is to permissively protect a
subsystem so that its violations are logged but not enforced. You can then put the subsystem
through its paces and build a policy that allows everything the subsystem actually did.
Unfortunately, it’s hard to guarantee complete coverage of all code paths with this sort of ad hoc
approach, so the autogenerated profiles are unlikely to be perfect.
AppArmor
      AppArmor is a product of Canonical, Ltd., releasers of the Ubuntu distribution. It’s
      supported by Debian and Ubuntu, but has also been adopted as a standard by SUSE
distributions. Ubuntu and SUSE enable it on default installs, although the complement of
protected services is not extensive.
AppArmor implements a form of MAC and is intended as a supplement to the traditional UNIX
access control system. Although any configuration is possible, AppArmor is not designed to be a
user-facing system. Its main goal is service securement; that is, limiting the damage that
individual programs can do if they should be compromised or run amok.
Protected programs continue to be subject to all the limitations imposed by the standard model,
but in addition, the kernel filters their activities through a designated and task-specific AppArmor
profile. By default, AppArmor denies all requests, so the profile must explicitly name everything
the process is allowed to do. Programs without profiles, such as user shells, have no special
restrictions and run as if AppArmor were not installed.
This service securement role is essentially the same configuration that’s implemented by
SELinux in Red Hat’s targeted environment. However, AppArmor is designed more specifically
for service securement, so it sidesteps some of the more puzzling nuances of SELinux.

AppArmor profiles are stored in /etc/apparmor.d, and they’re relatively readable even without
detailed knowledge of the system. For example, here’s the profile for the cups-browsed daemon,
part of the printing system on Ubuntu:

Most of this code is modular boilerplate. For example, this daemon needs to perform hostname
lookups, so the profile interpolates abstractions/nameservice, which gives access to name
resolution libraries, /etc/nsswitch.conf, /etc/hosts, the network ports used with LDAP, and so on.
The profiling information that’s specific to this daemon consists (in this case) of a list of files the
daemon can access, along with the permissions allowed on each file. The pattern matching
syntax is a bit idiosyncratic: ** can match multiple pathname components, and {var/,} matches
whether var/ appears at that location or not.

Even this simple profile is quite complex under the hood. With all the #include instructions
expanded, the profile is nearly 750 lines long. (And we chose this example for its brevity. Yikes!)
AppArmor refers to files and programs by pathname, which makes profiles readable and
independent of any particular filesystem implementation. This approach is something of a
compromise, however. For example, AppArmor doesn’t recognize hard links as pointing to the
same underlying entity.
3.5 RECOMMENDED READING
FERRAIOLO, DAVID F., D. RICHARD KUHN, AND RAMASWAMY CHANDRAMOULI. Role-Based Access
Control (2nd Edition). Boston, MA: Artech House, 2007.
HAINES, RICHARD. The SELinux Notebook (4th Edition). 2014. This compendium of SELinux-
related information is the closest thing to official documentation. It’s available for download
from freecomputerbooks.com.

VERMEULEN, SVEN. SELinux Cookbook. Birmingham, UK: Packt Publishing, 2014. This book
includes a variety of practical tips for dealing with SELinux. It covers both service securement
and user-facing security models.
