4 Process Control

A process represents a running program. It’s the abstraction through which memory, processor
time, and I/O resources can be managed and monitored.
It is an axiom of the UNIX philosophy that as much work as possible be done within the context
of processes rather than being handled specially by the kernel. System and user processes follow
the same rules, so you can use a single set of tools to control them both.
4.1 COMPONENTS OF A PROCESS
A process consists of an address space and a set of data structures within the kernel. The address
space is a set of memory pages that the kernel has marked for the process’s use. (Pages are the
units in which memory is managed. They are usually 4KiB or 8KiB in size.) These pages contain
the code and libraries that the process is executing, the process’s variables, its stacks, and various
extra information needed by the kernel while the process is running. The process’s virtual
address space is laid out randomly in physical memory and tracked by the kernel’s page tables.
The kernel’s internal data structures record various pieces of information about each process.
Here are some of the more important of these:

      The process’s address space map

      The current status of the process (sleeping, stopped, runnable, etc.)
      The execution priority of the process
      Information about the resources the process has used (CPU, memory, etc.)
      Information about the files and network ports the process has opened

      The process’s signal mask (a record of which signals are blocked)
      The owner of the process

A “thread” is an execution context within a process. Every process has at least one thread, but
some processes have many. Each thread has its own stack and CPU context but operates within
the address space of its enclosing process.
Modern computer hardware includes multiple CPUs and multiple cores per CPU. A process’s
threads can run simultaneously on different cores. Multithreaded applications such as BIND and
Apache benefit quite a bit from this architecture because it lets them farm out requests to
individual threads.
Many of the parameters associated with a process directly affect its execution: the amount of
processor time it gets, the files it can access, and so on. In the following sections, we discuss the
meaning and significance of the parameters that are most interesting from a system
administrator’s point of view. These attributes are common to all versions of UNIX and Linux.
PID: process ID number
The kernel assigns a unique ID number to every process. Most commands and system calls that
manipulate processes require you to specify a PID to identify the target of the operation. PIDs are
assigned in order as processes are created.
     Linux now defines the concept of process “namespaces,” which further restrict processes’
     ability to see and affect each other. Container implementations use this feature to keep
processes segregated. One side effect is that a process might appear to have different PIDs
depending on the namespace of the observer. It’s kind of like Einsteinian relativity for process
IDs. Refer to Chapter 25, Containers, for more information.
PPID: parent PID
Neither UNIX nor Linux has a system call that initiates a new process running a particular
program. Instead, it’s done in two separate steps. First, an existing process must clone itself to
create a new process. The clone can then exchange the program it’s running for a different one.
When a process is cloned, the original process is referred to as the parent, and the copy is called
the child. The PPID attribute of a process is the PID of the parent from which it was cloned, at
least initially. (If the original parent dies, init or systemd becomes the new parent. See this
page.)
The parent PID is a useful piece of information when you’re confronted with an unrecognized
(and possibly misbehaving) process. Tracing the process back to its origin (whether that is a shell
or some other program) may give you a better idea of its purpose and significance.
UID and EUID: real and effective user ID

     See this page for more information about UIDs.

A process’s UID is the user identification number of the person who created it, or more
accurately, it is a copy of the UID value of the parent process. Usually, only the creator (aka, the
owner) and the superuser can manipulate a process.

     See this page for more information about setuid execution.

The EUID is the “effective” user ID, an extra UID that determines what resources and files a
process has permission to access at any given moment. For most processes, the UID and EUID
are the same, the usual exception being programs that are setuid.
Why have both a UID and an EUID? Simply because it’s useful to maintain a distinction
between identity and permission, and because a setuid program might not wish to operate with
expanded permissions all the time. On most systems, the effective UID can be set and reset to
enable or restrict the additional permissions it grants.

Most systems also keep track of a “saved UID,” which is a copy of the process’s EUID at the
point at which the process first begins to execute. Unless the process takes steps to obliterate this
saved UID, it remains available for use as the real or effective UID. A conservatively written
setuid program can therefore renounce its special privileges for the majority of its execution and
access them only at the points where extra privileges are needed.
     Linux also defines a nonstandard FSUID process parameter that controls the determination
     of filesystem permissions. It is infrequently used outside the kernel and is not portable to
other UNIX systems.
GID and EGID: real and effective group ID

    See this page for more information about groups.

The GID is the group identification number of a process. The EGID is related to the GID in the
same way that the EUID is related to the UID in that it can be “upgraded” by the execution of a
setgid program. As with the saved UID, the kernel maintains a saved GID for each process.
The GID attribute of a process is largely vestigial. For purposes of access determination, a
process can be a member of many groups at once. The complete group list is stored separately
from the distinguished GID and EGID. Determinations of access permissions normally take into
account the EGID and the supplemental group list, but not the GID itself.
The only time at which the GID is actually significant is when a process creates new files.
Depending on how the filesystem permissions have been set, new files might default to adopting
the GID of the creating process. See this page for details.
Niceness
A process’s scheduling priority determines how much CPU time it receives. The kernel computes
priorities with a dynamic algorithm that takes into account the amount of CPU time that a
process has recently consumed and the length of time it has been waiting to run. The kernel also
pays attention to an administratively set value that’s usually called the “nice value” or
“niceness,” so called because it specifies how nice you are planning to be to other users of the
system. We discuss niceness in detail here.
Control terminal

     See this page for more information about the standard communication channels.

Most nondaemon processes have an associated control terminal. The control terminal determines
the default linkages for the standard input, standard output, and standard error channels. It also
distributes signals to processes in response to keyboard events such as <Control-C>; see the
discussion starting here.
Of course, actual terminals are rare outside of computer museums these days. Nevertheless, they
live on in the form of pseudo-terminals, which are still widely used throughout UNIX and Linux
systems. When you start a command from the shell, for example, your terminal window typically
becomes the process’s control terminal.
4.2 THE LIFE CYCLE OF A PROCESS
To create a new process, a process copies itself with the fork system call. fork creates a copy of
the original process, and that copy is largely identical to the parent. The new process has a
distinct PID and has its own accounting information. (Technically, Linux systems use clone, a
superset of fork that handles threads and includes additional features. fork remains in the kernel
for backward compatibility but calls clone behind the scenes.)
fork has the unique property of returning two different values. From the child’s point of view, it
returns zero. The parent receives the PID of the newly created child. Since the two processes are
otherwise identical, they must both examine the return value to figure out which role they are
supposed to play.

After a fork, the child process often uses one of the exec family of routines to begin the
execution of a new program. These calls change the program that the process is executing and
reset the memory segments to a predefined initial state. The various forms of exec differ only in
the ways in which they specify the command-line arguments and environment to be given to the
new program.
When the system boots, the kernel autonomously creates and installs several processes. The most
notable of these is init or systemd, which is always process number 1. This process executes the
system’s startup scripts, although the exact manner in which this is done differs slightly between
UNIX and Linux. All processes other than the ones the kernel creates are descendants of this
primordial process. See Chapter 2, Booting and System Management Daemons, for more
information about booting and the various flavors of init daemon.
init (or systemd) also plays another important role in process management. When a process
completes, it calls a routine named _exit to notify the kernel that it is ready to die. It supplies an
exit code (an integer) that tells why it’s exiting. By convention, zero indicates a normal or
“successful” termination.
Before a dead process can be allowed to disappear completely, the kernel requires that its death
be acknowledged by the process’s parent, which the parent does with a call to wait. The parent
receives a copy of the child’s exit code (or if the child did not exit voluntarily, an indication of
why it was killed) and can also obtain a summary of the child’s resource use if it wishes.

This scheme works fine if parents outlive their children and are conscientious about calling wait
so that dead processes can be disposed of. If a parent dies before its children, however, the kernel
recognizes that no wait is forthcoming. The kernel adjusts the orphan processes to make them
children of init or systemd, which politely performs the wait needed to get rid of them when
they die.
Signals
Signals are process-level interrupt requests. About thirty different kinds are defined, and they’re
used in a variety of ways:

      They can be sent among processes as a means of communication.
      They can be sent by the terminal driver to kill, interrupt, or suspend processes when
      keys such as <Control-C> and <Control-Z> are pressed.
      They can be sent by an administrator (with kill) to achieve various ends.
      They can be sent by the kernel when a process commits an infraction such as division
      by zero.

      They can be sent by the kernel to notify a process of an “interesting” condition such
      as the death of a child process or the availability of data on an I/O channel.

When a signal is received, one of two things can happen. If the receiving process has designated
a handler routine for that particular signal, the handler is called with information about the
context in which the signal was delivered. Otherwise, the kernel takes some default action on
behalf of the process. The default action varies from signal to signal. Many signals terminate the
process; some also generate core dumps (if core dumps have not been disabled; a core dump is a
copy of a process’s memory image, which is sometimes useful for debugging).
Specifying a handler routine for a signal is referred to as catching the signal. When the handler
completes, execution restarts from the point at which the signal was received.
To prevent signals from arriving, programs can request that they be either ignored or blocked. A
signal that is ignored is simply discarded and has no effect on the process. A blocked signal is
queued for delivery, but the kernel doesn’t require the process to act on it until the signal has
been explicitly unblocked. The handler for a newly unblocked signal is called only once, even if
the signal was received several times while reception was blocked.
Table 4.1 lists some signals that administrators should be familiar with. The uppercase
convention for the names derives from C language tradition. You might also see signal names
written with a SIG prefix (e.g., SIGHUP) for similar reasons.

Table 4.1: Signals every administrator should know
Other signals, not shown in Table 4.1, mostly report obscure errors such as “illegal instruction.”
The default handling for such signals is to terminate with a core dump. Catching and blocking are
generally allowed because some programs are smart enough to try to clean up whatever problem
caused the error before continuing.
The BUS and SEGV signals are also error signals. We’ve included them in the table because
they’re so common: when a program crashes, it’s usually one of these two signals that finally
brings it down. By themselves, the signals are of no specific diagnostic value. Both of them
indicate an attempt to use or access memory improperly.
The signals named KILL and STOP cannot be caught, blocked, or ignored. The KILL signal
destroys the receiving process, and STOP suspends its execution until a CONT signal is received.
CONT can be caught or ignored, but not blocked.
TSTP is a “soft” version of STOP that might be best described as a request to stop. It’s the signal
generated by the terminal driver when <Control-Z> is typed on the keyboard. Programs that
catch this signal usually clean up their state, then send themselves a STOP signal to complete the
stop operation. Alternatively, programs can ignore TSTP to prevent themselves from being
stopped from the keyboard.
The signals KILL, INT, TERM, HUP, and QUIT all sound as if they mean approximately the
same thing, but their uses are actually quite different. It’s unfortunate that such vague
terminology was selected for them. Here’s a decoding guide:

      KILL is unblockable and terminates a process at the kernel level. A process can never
      actually receive or handle this signal.
      INT is sent by the terminal driver when the user presses <Control-C>. It’s a request
      to terminate the current operation. Simple programs should quit (if they catch the
      signal) or simply allow themselves to be killed, which is the default if the signal is
      not caught. Programs that have interactive command lines (such as shells) should stop
      what they’re doing, clean up, and wait for user input again.
      TERM is a request to terminate execution completely. It’s expected that the receiving
      process will clean up its state and exit.

      HUP has two common interpretations. First, it’s understood as a reset request by
      many daemons. If a daemon is capable of rereading its configuration file and
      adjusting to changes without restarting, a HUP can generally trigger this behavior.

      Second, HUP signals are sometimes generated by the terminal driver in an attempt to
      “clean up” (i.e., kill) the processes attached to a particular terminal. This behavior is
      largely a holdover from the days of wired terminals and modem connections, hence
      the name “hangup.”
      Shells in the C shell family (tcsh et al.) usually make background processes immune
      to HUP signals so that they can continue to run after the user logs out. Users of
      Bourne-ish shells (ksh, bash, etc.) can emulate this behavior with the nohup
      command.

      QUIT is similar to TERM, except that it defaults to producing a core dump if not
      caught. A few programs cannibalize this signal and interpret it to mean something
      else.

The signals USR1 and USR2 have no set meaning. They’re available for programs to use in
whatever way they’d like. For example, the Apache web server interprets a HUP signal as a
request for an immediate restart. A USR1 signal initiates a more graceful transition in which
existing client conversations are allowed to finish.
kill: send signals
As its name implies, the kill command is most often used to terminate a process. kill can send
any signal, but by default it sends a TERM. kill can be used by normal users on their own
processes or by root on any process. The syntax is

where signal is the number or symbolic name of the signal to be sent (as shown in Table 4.1) and
pid is the process identification number of the target process.

A kill without a signal number does not guarantee that the process will die, because the TERM
signal can be caught, blocked, or ignored. The command

“guarantees” that the process will die because signal 9, KILL, cannot be caught. Use kill -9 only
if a polite request fails. We put quotes around “guarantees” because processes can on occasion
become so wedged that even KILL does not affect them, usually because of some degenerate I/O
vapor lock such as waiting for a volume that has disappeared. Rebooting is usually the only way
to get rid of these processes.
killall kills processes by name. For example, the following command kills all Apache web server
processes:

The pkill command searches for processes by name (or other attributes, such as EUID) and sends
the specified signal. For example, the following command sends a TERM signal to all processes
running as the user ben:
Process and thread states
As you saw in the previous section, a process can be suspended with a STOP signal and returned
to active duty with a CONT signal. The state of being suspended or runnable applies to the
process as a whole and is inherited by all the process’s threads. (Individual threads can in fact be
managed similarly. However, those facilities are primarily of interest to developers; system
administrators needn’t concern themselves.)
Even when nominally runnable, threads must often wait for the kernel to complete some
background work for them before they can continue execution. For example, when a thread reads
data from a file, the kernel must request the appropriate disk blocks and then arrange for their
contents to be delivered into the requesting process’s address space. During this time, the
requesting thread enters a short-term sleep state in which it is ineligible to execute. Other threads
in the same process can continue to run, however.
You’ll sometimes see entire processes described as “sleeping” (for example, in ps output—see
the next section). Since sleeping is a thread-level attribute, this convention is a bit deceptive. A
process is generally reported as “sleeping” when all its threads are asleep. Of course, the
distinction is moot in the case of single-threaded processes, which remain the most common
case.
Interactive shells and system daemons spend most of their time sleeping, waiting for terminal
input or network connections. Since a sleeping thread is effectively blocked until its request has
been satisfied, its process generally receives no CPU time unless it receives a signal or a response
to one of its I/O requests.

     See this page for more information about hard-mounting NFS filesystems.

Some operations can cause processes or threads to enter an uninterruptible sleep state. This state
is usually transient and is not observed in ps output (denoted by a D in the STAT column; see
Table 4.2). However, a few degenerate situations can cause it to persist. The most common cause
involves server problems on an NFS filesystem mounted with the hard option. Since processes in
the uninterruptible sleep state cannot be roused even to service a signal, they cannot be killed. To
get rid of them, you must fix the underlying problem or reboot.
In the wild, you might occasionally see “zombie” processes that have finished execution but that
have not yet had their status collected by their parent process (or by init or systemd). If you see
zombies hanging around, check their PPIDs with ps to find out where they’re coming from.
4.3 PS: MONITOR PROCESSES
The ps command is the system administrator’s main tool for monitoring processes. Although
versions of ps differ in their arguments and display, they all deliver essentially the same
information. Part of the enormous variation among versions of ps can be traced back to
differences in the development history of UNIX. However, ps is also a command that vendors
tend to customize for other reasons. It’s closely tied to the kernel’s handling of processes, so it
tends to reflect all a vendor’s underlying kernel changes.
ps can show the PID, UID, priority, and control terminal of processes. It also informs you how
much memory a process is using, how much CPU time it has consumed, and what its current
status is (running, stopped, sleeping, etc.). Zombies show up in a ps listing as <exiting> or
<defunct>.

Implementations of ps have become hopelessly complex over the years. Several vendors have
abandoned the attempt to define meaningful displays and made their pses completely
configurable. With a little customization work, almost any desired output can be produced.
      As a case in point, the ps used by Linux is a highly polymorphous version that understands
      option sets from multiple historical lineages. Almost uniquely among UNIX commands,
Linux’s ps accepts command-line flags with or without dashes but might assign different
interpretations to those forms. For example, ps -a is not the same as ps a.
Do not be alarmed by all this complexity: it’s there mainly for developers, not for system
administrators. Although you will use ps frequently, you only need to know a few specific
incantations.
You can obtain a useful overview of all the processes running on the system with ps aux. The a
option says show all processes, and x says show even processes that don’t have a control
terminal; u selects the “user oriented” output format. Here’s an example of ps aux output on a
machine running Red Hat:
Command names in brackets are not really commands at all but rather kernel threads scheduled
as processes. The meaning of each field is shown in Table 4.2.

Table 4.2: Explanation of ps aux output
Another useful set of arguments is lax, which gives more technical information. The a and x
options are as above (show every process), and l selects the “long” output format. ps lax might
be slightly faster to run than ps aux because it doesn’t have to translate every UID to a username
—efficiency can be important if the system is already bogged down.
Shown here in an abbreviated example, ps lax includes fields such as the parent process ID
(PPID), niceness (NI), and the type of resource on which the process is waiting (WCHAN, short
for “wait channel”).
Commands with long argument lists may have the command-line output cut off. Add w to the list
of flags to display more columns in the output. Add w twice for unlimited column width, handy
for those processes that have exceptionally long command-line arguments, such as some java
applications.
Administrators frequently need to identify the PID of a process. You can find the PID by
grepping the output of ps:

Note that the ps output includes the grep command itself, since the grep was active in the
process list at the time ps was running. You can remove this line from the output with grep -v:

You can also determine the PID of a process with the pidof command:

Or with the pgrep utility:

pidof and pgrep show all processes that match the passed string. We often find a simple grep to
offer the most flexibility, though it can be a bit more verbose.
4.4 INTERACTIVE MONITORING WITH TOP
Commands like ps show you a snapshot of the system as it was at the time. Often, that limited
sample is insufficient to convey the big picture of what’s really going on. top is a sort of real-
time version of ps that gives a regularly updated, interactive summary of processes and their
resource usage. For example:

By default, the display updates every 1–2 seconds, depending on the system. The most CPU-
consumptive processes appear at the top. top also accepts input from the keyboard to send
signals and renice processes (see the next section). You can then observe how your actions affect
the overall condition of the machine.

     Learn how to interpret the CPU, memory, and load details in Chapter 29.

The summary information in the first few lines of top output is one of the first places to look at
to analyze the health of the system. It shows a condensed view of the system load, memory
usage, number of processes, and a breakdown of how the CPU is being used.
On multicore systems, CPU usage is an average of all the cores in the system. Under Linux, press
1 (numeral one) while top is open to switch to a display of the individual cores. On FreeBSD,
run top -P to achieve the same effect.
On FreeBSD systems, you can set the TOP environment variable to pass additional arguments to
top. We recommend -H to show all threads for multithreaded processes rather than just a
summary, plus -P to display all CPU cores. Add export TOP=”-HP” to your shell initialization file to
make these changes persistent between shell sessions.
Root can run top with the -q option to goose it up to the highest possible priority. This option can
be useful when you are trying to track down a process that has already brought the system to its
knees.

We also like htop, an open source, cross-platform, interactive process viewer that offers more
features and has a nicer interface than that of top. It is not yet available as a package for our
example systems, but you can download a binary or source version from the developer’s web site
at hisham.hm/htop.
4.5 NICE AND RENICE: INFLUENCE SCHEDULING PRIORITY
The “niceness” of a process is a numeric hint to the kernel about how the process should be
treated in relation to other processes contending for the CPU. The strange name is derived from
the fact that it determines how nice you are going to be to other users of the system. A high
niceness means a low priority for your process: you are going to be nice. A low or negative value
means high priority: you are not very nice.
It’s highly unusual to set priorities by hand these days. On the puny systems where UNIX
originated, performance was significantly affected by which process was on the CPU. Today,
with more than adequate CPU power on every desktop, the scheduler does a good job of
managing most workloads. The addition of scheduling classes gives developers additional
control when fast response is essential.

The range of allowable niceness values varies among systems. In Linux the range is -20 to +19,
and in FreeBSD it’s -20 to +20.
Unless the user takes special action, a newly created process inherits the niceness of its parent
process. The owner of the process can increase its niceness but cannot lower it, even to return the
process to the default niceness. This restriction prevents processes running at low priority from
bearing high-priority children. However, the superuser can set nice values arbitrarily.
I/O performance has not kept up with increasingly fast CPUs. Even with today’s high-
performance SSDs, disk bandwidth remains the primary bottleneck on most systems.
Unfortunately, a process’s niceness has no effect on the kernel’s management of its memory or
I/O; high-nice processes can still monopolize a disproportionate share of these resources.
A process’s niceness can be set at the time of creation with the nice command and adjusted later
with the renice command. nice takes a command line as an argument, and renice takes a PID or
(sometimes) a username.

Some examples:

Unfortunately, there is little agreement among systems about how the desired priorities should be
specified; in fact, even nice and renice from the same system usually don’t agree. To complicate
things, a version of nice is built into the C shell and some other common shells (but not bash). If
you don’t type the full path to nice, you’ll get the shell’s version rather than the operating
system’s. To sidestep this ambiguity, we suggest using the fully qualified path to the system’s
version, found at /usr/bin/nice.
Table 4.3 summarizes the variations. A prio is an absolute niceness, while an incr is relative to
the niceness of the shell from which nice or renice is run. Only the shell nice understands plus
signs (in fact, it requires them); leave them out in all other circumstances.

Table 4.3: How to express priorities for nice and renice
4.6 THE /PROC FILESYSTEM
     The Linux versions of ps and top read their process status information from the /proc
     directory, a pseudo-filesystem in which the kernel exposes a variety of interesting
information about the system’s state.
Despite the name /proc (and the name of the underlying filesystem type, “proc”), the information
is not limited to process information—a variety of status information and statistics generated by
the kernel are represented here. You can even modify some parameters by writing to the
appropriate /proc file. See this page for some examples.

Although a lot of the information is easiest to access through front-end commands such as
vmstat and ps, some of the more obscure nuggets must be read directly from /proc. It’s worth
poking around in this directory to familiarize yourself with everything that’s there. man proc has
a comprehensive explanation of its contents.
Because the kernel creates the contents of /proc files on the fly (as they are read), most appear to
be empty, 0-byte files when listed with ls -l. You’ll have to cat or less the contents to see what
they actually contain. But be cautious—a few files contain or link to binary data that can confuse
your terminal emulator if viewed directly.
Process-specific information is divided into subdirectories named by PID. For example, /proc/1
is always the directory that contains information about init. Table 4.4 lists the most useful per-
process files.

Table 4.4: Process information files in Linux /proc (numbered subdirectories)
The individual components contained within the cmdline and environ files are separated by null
characters rather than newlines. You can filter their contents through tr "\000" "\n" to make
them more readable.
The fd subdirectory represents open files in the form of symbolic links. File descriptors that are
connected to pipes or network sockets don’t have an associated filename. The kernel supplies a
generic description as the link target instead.

The maps file can be useful for determining what libraries a program is linked to or depends on.
     FreeBSD includes a similar-but-different implementation of /proc. However, its use has
     been deprecated because of neglect in the code base and a history of security issues. It’s still
available for compatibility but is not mounted by default. To mount it, use the command

(To automatically mount the /proc filesystem at boot time, append the line proc /proc procfs rw 0 0 to
/etc/fstab.)
The filesystem layout is similar—but not identical—to the Linux version of procfs. The
information for a process includes its status, a symbolic link to the file being executed, details
about the process’s virtual memory, and other low-level information. See also man procfs.
4.7 STRACE AND TRUSS: TRACE SIGNALS AND SYSTEM CALLS
It’s often difficult to figure out what a process is actually doing. The first step is generally to
make an educated guess based on indirect data collected from the filesystem, logs, and tools such
as ps.
If those sources of information prove insufficient, you can snoop on the process at a lower level
with the strace (Linux; usually an optional package) or truss (FreeBSD) command. These
commands display every system call that a process makes and every signal it receives. You can
attach strace or truss to a running process, snoop for a while, and then detach from the process
without disturbing it. (Well, usually. strace can interrupt system calls. The monitored process
must then be prepared to restart them. This is a standard rule of UNIX software hygiene, but it’s
not always observed.)

Although system calls occur at a relatively low level of abstraction, you can usually tell quite a
bit about a process’s activity from the call trace. For example, the following log was produced by
strace run against an active copy of top (which was running as PID 5810):

Not only does strace show you the name of every system call made by the process, but it also
decodes the arguments and shows the result code that the kernel returns.
In the example above, top starts by checking the current time. It then opens and stats the /proc
directory and reads the directory’s contents, thereby obtaining a list of running processes. top
goes on to stat the directory representing the init process and then opens /proc/1/stat to read
init’s status information.
System call output can often reveal errors that are not reported by the process itself. For example,
filesystem permission errors or socket conflicts are usually quite obvious in the output of strace
or truss. Look for system calls that return error indications, and check for nonzero values.
strace is packed with goodies, most of which are documented in the man page. For example, the
-f flag follows forked processes. This feature is useful for tracing daemons (such as httpd) that
spawn many children. The -e trace=file option displays only file-related operations. This feature
is especially handy for discovering the location of evasive configuration files.
Here’s a similar example from FreeBSD that uses truss. In this case, we trace how cp copies a
file:

After allocating memory and opening library dependencies (not shown), cp uses the lstat system
call to check the current status of the /etc/passwd file. It then runs stat on the path of the
prospective copy, /tmp/pw. That file does not yet exist, so the stat fails and truss decodes the
error for you as “No such file or directory.”
cp then invokes the openat system call (with the O_RDONLY option) to read the contents of
/etc/passwd, followed by an openat of /tmp/pw with O_WRONLY to create the new destination
file. It then maps the contents of /etc/passwd into memory (with mmap) and writes out the data
with write. Finally, cp cleans up after itself by closing both file handles.

System call tracing is a powerful debugging tool for administrators. Turn to these tools after
more traditional routes such as examining log files and configuring a process for verbose output
have been exhausted. Do not be intimidated by the dense output; it’s usually sufficient to focus
on the human-readable portions.
4.8 RUNAWAY PROCESSES
“Runaway” processes are those that soak up significantly more of the system’s CPU, disk, or
network resources than their usual role or behavior would lead you to expect. Sometimes, such
programs have their own bugs that have led to degenerate behavior. In other cases, they fail to
deal appropriately with upstream failures and get stuck in maladaptive loops. For example, a
process might reattempt the same failing operation over and over again, flooring the CPU. In yet
another category of cases, there is no bug per se, but the software is simply inefficient in its
implementation and greedy with the system’s resources.
All these situations merit investigation by a system administrator, not only because the runaway
process is most likely malfunctioning but also because it typically interferes with the operation of
other processes that are running on the system.

The line between pathological behavior and normal behavior under heavy workload is vague.
Often, the first step in diagnosis is to figure out which of these phenomena you are actually
observing. Generally, system processes should always behave reasonably, so obvious
misbehavior on the part of one of these processes is automatically suspicious. User processes
such as web servers and databases might simply be overloaded.
You can identify processes that are using excessive CPU time by looking at the output of ps or
top. Also check the system load averages as reported by the uptime command. Traditionally,
these values quantify the average number of processes that have been runnable over the previous
1-, 5-, and, 15-minute intervals. Under Linux, the load average also takes account of busyness
caused by disk traffic and other forms of I/O.
For CPU bound systems, the load averages should be less than the total number of CPU cores
available on your system. If they are not, the system is overloaded. Under Linux, check total
CPU utilization with top or ps to determine whether high load averages relate to CPU load or to
I/O. If CPU utilization is near 100%, that is probably the bottleneck.
Processes that use excessive memory relative to the system’s physical RAM can cause serious
performance problems. You can check the memory size of processes by running top. The VIRT
column shows the total amount of virtual memory allocated by each process, and the RES
column shows the portion of that memory currently mapped to specific memory pages (the
“resident set”).

Both of these numbers can include shared resources such as libraries and thus are potentially
misleading. A more direct measure of process-specific memory consumption is found in the
DATA column, which is not shown by default. To add this column to top’s display, type the f
key once top is running and select DATA from the list by pressing the space bar. The DATA
value indicates the amount of memory in each process’s data and stack segments, so it’s
relatively specific to individual processes (modulo shared memory segments). Look for growth
over time as well as absolute size. On FreeBSD, SIZE is the equivalent column and is shown by
default.
Make a concerted effort to understand what’s going on before you terminate a seemingly
runaway process. The best route to debugging the issue and preventing a recurrence is to have a
live example you can investigate. Once you kill a misbehaving process, most of the available
evidence disappears.

Keep the possibility of hacking in mind as well. Malicious software is typically not tested for
correctness in a variety of environments, so it’s more likely than average to enter some kind of
degenerate state. If you suspect misfeasance, obtain a system call trace with strace or truss to get
a sense of what the process is doing (e.g., cracking passwords) and where its data is stored.
Runaway processes that produce output can fill up an entire filesystem, causing numerous
problems. When a filesystem fills up, lots of messages will be logged to the console and attempts
to write to the filesystem will produce error messages.
The first thing to do in this situation is to determine which filesystem is full and which file is
filling it up. The df -h command shows filesystem disk use in human-readable units. Look for a
filesystem that’s 100% or more full. (Most filesystem implementations reserve ~5% of the
storage space for “breathing room,” but processes running as root can encroach on this space,
resulting in a reported usage that is greater than 100%.) Use the du -h command on the identified
filesystem to determine which directory is using the most space. Rinse and repeat with du until
the large files are discovered.
df and du report disk usage in subtly different manners. df reports the disk space used by a
mounted filesystem according to disk block totals in the filesystem’s metadata. du sums the sizes
of all files in a given directory. If a file is unlinked (deleted) from the filesystem but is still
referenced by some running process, df reports the space but du does not. This disparity persists
until the open file descriptor is closed or the file is truncated. If you can’t determine which
process is using a file, try running the fuser and lsof commands (covered in detail here) to get
more information.
4.9 PERIODIC PROCESSES
It’s often useful to have a script or command executed without any human intervention. Common
use cases include scheduled backups, database maintenance activities, or the execution of nightly
batch jobs. As is typical of UNIX and Linux, there’s more than one way to achieve this goal.
cron: schedule commands
The cron daemon is the traditional tool for running commands on a predetermined schedule. It
starts when the system boots and runs as long as the system is up. There are multiple
implementations of cron, but fortunately for administrators, the syntax and functionality of the
various versions is nearly identical.
          For reasons that are unclear, cron has been renamed crond on Red Hat. But it is still
          the same cron we all know and love.
cron reads configuration files containing lists of command lines and times at which they are to
be invoked. The command lines are executed by sh, so almost anything you can do by hand from
the shell can also be done with cron. If you prefer, you can even configure cron to use a different
shell.
A cron configuration file is called a “crontab,” short for “cron table.” Crontabs for individual
users are stored under /var/spool/cron (Linux) or /var/cron/tabs (FreeBSD). There is at most
one crontab file per user. Crontab files are plain text files named with the login names of the
users to whom they belong. cron uses these filenames (and the file ownership) to figure out
which UID to use when running the commands contained in each file. The crontab command
transfers crontab files to and from this directory.

cron tries to minimize the time it spends reparsing configuration files and making time
calculations. The crontab command helps maintain cron’s efficiency by notifying cron when
crontab files change. Ergo, you shouldn’t edit crontab files directly, because this approach might
result in cron not noticing your changes. If you do get into a situation where cron doesn’t seem
to acknowledge a modified crontab, a HUP signal sent to the cron process forces it to reload on
most systems.

     See Chapter 10 for more information about syslog.

cron normally does its work silently, but most versions can keep a log file (usually
/var/log/cron) that lists the commands that were executed and the times at which they ran.
Glance at the cron log file if you’re having problems with a cron job and can’t figure out why.

The format of crontab files
All the crontab files on a system share a similar format. Comments are introduced with a pound
sign (#) in the first column of a line. Each non-comment line contains six fields and represents
one command:
The first five fields tell cron when to run the command. They’re separated by whitespace, but
within the command field, whitespace is passed along to the shell. The fields in the time
specification are interpreted as shown in Table 4.5. An entry in a crontab is colloquially known
as a “cron job.”

Table 4.5: Crontab time specifications

Each of the time-related fields can contain

      A star, which matches everything
      A single integer, which matches exactly
      Two integers separated by a dash, matching a range of values
      A range followed by a slash and a step value, e.g., 1-10/2

      A comma-separated list of integers or ranges, matching any value

For example, the time specification

means “10:45 a.m., Monday through Friday.” A hint: never use stars in every field unless you
want the command to be run every minute, which is useful only in testing scenarios. One minute
is the finest granularity available to cron jobs.
Time ranges in crontabs can include a step value. For example, the series 0,3,6,9,12,15,18 can be
written more concisely as 0-18/3. You can also use three-letter text mnemonics for the names of
months and days, but not in combination with ranges. As far as we know, this feature works only
with English names.
There is a potential ambiguity to watch out for with the weekday and dom fields. Every day is
both a day of the week and a day of the month. If both weekday and dom are specified, a day
need satisfy only one of the two conditions to be selected.
For example,
means “every half-hour on Friday, and every half-hour on the 13th of the month,” not “every half-
hour on Friday the 13th.”
The command is the sh command line to be executed. It can be any valid shell command and
should not be quoted. The command is considered to continue to the end of the line and can
contain blanks or tabs.
Percent signs (%) indicate newlines within the command field. Only the text up to the first
percent sign is included in the actual command. The remaining lines are given to the command as
standard input. Use a backslash (\) as an escape character in commands that have a meaningful
percent sign, for example, date +\%s.

Although sh is involved in executing the command, the shell does not act as a login shell and
does not read the contents of ~/.profile or ~/.bash_profile. As a result, the command’s
environment variables might be set up somewhat differently from what you expect. If a
command seems to work fine when executed from the shell but fails when introduced into a
crontab file, the environment is the likely culprit. If need be, you can always wrap your command
with a script that sets up the appropriate environment variables.

We also suggest using the fully qualified path to the command, ensuring that the job will work
properly even if the PATH is not set as expected. For example, the following command logs the
date and uptime to a file in the user’s home directory every minute:

Alternatively, you can set environment variables explicitly at the top of the crontab:

Here are a few more examples of valid crontab entries:

This line emails the results of a connectivity check on port 2181 every 10 minutes on Mondays,
Wednesdays, and Fridays. Since cron executes command by way of sh, special shell characters
like pipes and redirects function as expected.

This entry runs the mysqlcheck maintenance program on Sundays at 4:00 a.m. Since the output
is not saved to a file or otherwise discarded, it will be emailed to the owner of the crontab.
This command runs at 1:20 each morning. It removes all files in the /tmp directory that have not
been modified in 7 days. The ';' at the end of the line marks the end of the subcommand
arguments to find.
cron does not try to compensate for commands that are missed while the system is down.
However, it is smart about time adjustments such as shifts into and out of daylight saving time.
If your cron job is a script, be sure to make it executable (with chmod +x) or cron won’t be able
to execute it. Alternatively, set the cron command to invoke a shell on your script directly (e.g.,
bash -c ~/bin/myscript.sh).

Crontab management
crontab filename installs filename as your crontab, replacing any previous version. crontab -e
checks out a copy of your crontab, invokes your editor on it (as specified by the EDITOR
environment variable), and then resubmits it to the crontab directory. crontab -l lists the contents
of your crontab to standard output, and crontab -r removes it, leaving you with no crontab file at
all.
Root can supply a username argument to edit or view other users’ crontabs. For example,
crontab -r jsmith erases the crontab belonging to the user jsmith, and crontab -e jsmith edits it.
Linux allows both a username and a filename argument in the same command, so the username
must be prefixed with -u to disambiguate (e.g., crontab -u jsmith crontab.new).
Without command-line arguments, most versions of crontab try to read a crontab from standard
input. If you enter this mode by accident, don’t try to exit with <Control-D>; doing so erases
your entire crontab. Use <Control-C> instead. FreeBSD requires you to supply a dash as the
filename argument to make crontab pay attention to its standard input. Smart.
Many sites have experienced subtle but recurrent network glitches that occur because
administrators have configured cron to run the same command on hundreds of machines at
exactly the same time, causing delays or excessive load. Clock synchronization with NTP
exacerbates the problem. This issue is easy to fix with a random delay script.

cron logs its activities through syslog using the facility “cron,” with most messages submitted at
level “info.” Default syslog configurations generally send cron log data to its own file.

Other crontabs
In addition to looking for user-specific crontabs, cron also obeys system crontab entries found in
/etc/crontab and in the /etc/cron.d directory. These files have a slightly different format from
the per-user crontab files: they allow commands to be run as an arbitrary user. An extra username
field comes before the command name. The username field is not present in garden-variety
crontab files because the crontab’s filename supplies this same information.
In general, /etc/crontab is a file for system administrators to maintain by hand, whereas
/etc/cron.d is a sort of depot into which software packages can install any crontab entries they
might need. Files in /etc/cron.d are by convention named after the packages that install them, but
cron doesn’t care about or enforce this convention.
     Linux distributions also pre-install crontab entries that run the scripts in a set of well-known
     directories, thereby providing another way for software packages to install periodic jobs
without any editing of a crontab file. For example, scripts in /etc/cron.hourly, /etc/cron.daily,
and /etc/cron.weekly are run hourly, daily, and weekly, respectively.

cron access control
Two config files specify which users may submit crontab files. For Linux, the files are /etc/cron.
{allow,deny}, and on FreeBSD they are /var/cron/{allow,deny}. Many security standards
require that crontabs be available only to service accounts or to users with a legitimate business
need. The allow and deny files facilitate compliance with these requirements.
If the cron.allow file exists, then it contains a list of all users that may submit crontabs, one per
line. No unlisted person can invoke the crontab command. If the cron.allow file doesn’t exist,
then the cron.deny file is checked. It, too, is just a list of users, but the meaning is reversed:
everyone except the listed users is allowed access.
If neither the cron.allow file nor the cron.deny file exists, systems default (apparently at
random, there being no dominant convention) either to allowing all users to submit crontabs or to
limiting crontab access to root. In practice, a starter configuration is typically included in the
default OS installation, so the question of how crontab might behave without configuration files
is moot. Most default configurations allow all users to access cron by default.

It’s important to note that on most systems, access control is implemented by crontab, not by
cron. If a user is able to sneak a crontab file into the appropriate directory by other means, cron
will blindly execute the commands it contains. Therefore it is vital to maintain root ownership of
/var/spool/cron and /var/cron/tabs. OS distributions always set the permissions correctly by
default.
systemd timers

     See Chapter 2, for an introduction to systemd and units.

In accordance with its mission to duplicate the functions of all other Linux subsystems, systemd
includes the concept of timers, which activate a given systemd service on a predefined schedule.
Timers are more powerful than crontab entries, but they are also more complicated to set up and
manage. Some Linux distributions (e.g., CoreOS) have abandoned cron entirely in favor of
systemd timers, but our example systems all continue to include cron and to run it by default.
We have no useful advice regarding the choice between systemd timers and crontab entries. Use
whichever you prefer for any given task. Unfortunately, you do not really have the option to
standardize on one system or the other, because software packages add their jobs to a random
system of their own choice. You’ll always have to check both systems when you are trying to
figure out how a particular job gets run.

Structure of systemd timers
A systemd timer comprises two files:

      A timer unit that describes the schedule and the unit to activate

      A service unit that specifies the details of what to run

In contrast to crontab entries, systemd timers can be described both in absolute calendar terms
(“Wednesdays at 10:00 a.m.”) and in terms that are relative to other events (“30 seconds after
system boot”). The options combine to allow powerful expressions that don’t suffer the same
constraints as cron jobs. Table 4.6 describes the time expression options.

Table 4.6: systemd timer types

As their names suggest, values for these timer options are given in seconds. For example,
OnActiveSec=30 is 30 seconds after the timer activates. The value can actually be any valid systemd
time expression, as discussed in more detail starting here.
systemd timer example
Red Hat and CentOS include a preconfigured systemd timer that cleans up the system’s
temporary files once a day. Below, we take a more detailed look at an example. First, we
enumerate all the defined timers with the systemctl command. (We rotated the output table
below to make it readable. Normally, each timer produces one long line of output.)

The output lists both the name of the timer unit and the name of the service unit it activates.
Since this is a default system timer, the unit file lives in the standard systemd unit directory,
/usr/lib/systemd/system. Here’s the timer unit file:

The timer first activates 15 minutes after boot and then fires once a day thereafter. Note that
some kind of trigger for the initial activation (here, OnBootSec) is always necessary. There is no
single specification that achieves an “every X minutes” effect on its own.

Astute observers will notice that the timer does not actually specify which unit to run. By default,
systemd looks for a service unit that has the same name as the timer. You can specify a target
unit explicitly with the Unit option.

In this case, the associated service unit holds no surprises:
You can run the target service directly (that is, independently of the timer) with systemctl start
systemd-tmpfiles-clean, just like any other service. This fact greatly facilitates the debugging of
scheduled tasks, which can be a source of much administrative anguish when you are using cron.
To create your own timer, drop .timer and .service files in /etc/systemd/system. If you want the
timer to run at boot, add

to the end of the timer’s unit file. Don’t forget to enable the timer at boot time with systemctl
enable. (You can also start the timer immediately with systemctl start.)
A timer’s AccuracySec option delays its activation by a random amount of time within the specified
time window. This feature is handy when a timer runs on a large group of networked machines
and you want to avoid having all the timers fire at exactly the same moment. (Recall that with
cron, you need to use a random delay script to achieve this feat.)

AccuracySec defaults to 60 seconds. If you want your timer to execute at exactly the scheduled time,
use AccuracySec=1ns. (A nanosecond is probably close enough. Note that you won’t actually obtain
nanosecond accuracy.)

systemd time expressions
Timers allow for flexible specification of dates, times, and intervals. The systemd.time man page
is the authoritative reference for the specification grammar.
You can use interval-valued expressions instead of seconds for relative timings such as those
used as the values of OnActiveSec and OnBootSec. For example, the following forms are all valid:

Spaces are optional in time expressions. The minimum granularity is nanoseconds, but if your
timer fires too frequently (more than once every two seconds) systemd temporarily disables it.

In addition to triggering at periodic intervals, timers can be scheduled to activate at specific times
by including the OnCalendar option. This feature offers the closest match to the syntax of a
traditional cron job, but its syntax is more expressive and flexible. Table 4.7 shows some
examples of time specifications that could be used as the value of OnCalendar.

Table 4.7: systemd time and date encoding examples
Time specification    Meaning

2017-07-04            July 4th, 2017 at 00:00:00 (midnight)
Fri-Mon *-7-4            July 4th each year, but only if it falls on Fri–Mon
Mon-Wed *-*-* 12:00:00   Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays at noon
Mon 17:00:00             Mondays at 5:00 p.m.
weekly                   Mondays at 00:00:00 (midnight)
monthly                  The 1st day of the month at 00:00:00 (midnight)
*:0/10                   Every 10 minutes, starting at the 0th minute
*-*-* 11/12:10:0         At 11:10 and 23:10 every day

In time expressions, stars are placeholders that match any plausible value. As in crontab files,
slashes introduce an increment value. The exact syntax is a bit different from that used in
crontabs, however: crontabs want the incremented object to be a range (e.g., 9-17/2, “every two
hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.”), but systemd time expressions take only a start value
(e.g., 9/2, “every two hours starting at 9:00 a.m.”).

Transient timers
You can use the systemd-run command to schedule the execution of a command according to
any of the normal systemd timer types, but without creating task-specific timer and service unit
files. For example, to pull a Git repository every ten minutes:

systemd returns a transient unit identifier that you can list with systemctl. (Once again, we
futzed with the output format below...)

To cancel and remove a transient timer, just stop it by running systemctl stop:

systemd-run functions by creating timer and unit files for you in subdirectories of
/run/systemd/system. However, transient timers do not persist after a reboot. To make them
permanent, you can fish them out of /run, tweak them as necessary, and install them in
/etc/systemd/system. Be sure to stop the transient timer before starting or enabling the
permanent version.
Common uses for scheduled tasks
In this section, we look at a couple of common chores that are often automated through cron or
systemd.

Sending mail
The following crontab entry implements a simple email reminder. You can use an entry like this
to automatically email the output of a daily report or the results of a command execution. (Lines
have been folded to fit the page. In reality, this is one long line.)

Note the use of the % character both to separate the command from the input text and to mark line
endings within the input. This entry sends email at 4:30 a.m. on the 25th day of each month.

Cleaning up a filesystem
When a program crashes, the kernel may write out a file (usually named core.pid, core, or
program.core) that contains an image of the program’s address space. Core files are useful for
developers, but for administrators they are usually a waste of space. Users often don’t know
about core files, so they tend not to disable their creation or delete them on their own. You can
use a cron job to clean up these core files or other vestiges left behind by misbehaving and
crashed processes.

Rotating a log file
Systems vary in the quality of their default log file management, and you will probably need to
adjust the defaults to conform to your local policies. To “rotate” a log file means to divide it into
segments by size or by date, keeping several older versions of the log available at all times. Since
log rotation is a recurrent and regularly occurring event, it’s an ideal task to be scheduled. See
Management and rotation of log files, for more details.

Running batch jobs
Some long-running calculations are best run as batch jobs. For example, messages can
accumulate in a queue or database. You can use a cron job to process all the queued messages at
once as an ETL (extract, transform, and load) to another location, such as a data warehouse.
Some databases benefit from routine maintenance. For example, the open source distributed
database Cassandra has a repair function that keeps the nodes in a cluster in sync. These
maintenance tasks are good candidates for execution through cron or systemd.
Backing up and mirroring
You can use a scheduled task to automatically back up a directory to a remote system. We
suggest running a full backup once a week, with incremental differences each night. Run backups
late at night when the load on the system is likely to be low.
Mirrors are byte-for-byte copies of filesystems or directories that are hosted on another system.
They can be used as a form of backup or as a way to make files available at more than one
location. Web sites and software repositories are often mirrored to offer better redundancy and to
offer faster access for users that are physically distant from the primary site. Use periodic
execution of the rsync command to maintain mirrors and keep them up to date.
