5 The Filesystem

Quick: which of the following would you expect to find in a “filesystem”?

      Processes
      Audio devices
      Kernel data structures and tuning parameters
      Interprocess communication channels

If the system is UNIX or Linux, the answer is “all the above, and more!” And yes, you might
find some files in there, too. (It’s perhaps more accurate to say that these entities are represented
within the filesystem. In most cases, the filesystem is used as a rendezvous point to connect
clients with the drivers they are seeking.)
The basic purpose of a filesystem is to represent and organize the system’s storage resources.
However, programmers have been eager to avoid reinventing the wheel when it comes to
managing other types of objects. It has often proved convenient to map these objects into the
filesystem namespace. This unification has some advantages (consistent programming interface,
easy access from the shell) and some disadvantages (filesystem implementations suggestive of
Frankenstein’s monster), but like it or not, this is the UNIX (and hence, the Linux) way.
The filesystem can be thought of as comprising four main components:

      A namespace – a way to name things and organize them in a hierarchy
      An API – a set of system calls for navigating and manipulating objects
      Security models – schemes for protecting, hiding, and sharing things
      An implementation – software to tie the logical model to the hardware

Modern kernels define an abstract interface that accommodates many different back-end
filesystems. Some portions of the file tree are handled by traditional disk-based implementations.
Others are fielded by separate drivers within the kernel. For example, network filesystems are
handled by a driver that forwards the requested operations to a server on another computer.

Unfortunately, the architectural boundaries are not clearly drawn, and quite a few special cases
exist. For example, “device files” define a way for programs to communicate with drivers inside
the kernel. Device files are not really data files, but they’re handled through the filesystem and
their characteristics are stored on disk.
Another complicating factor is that the kernel supports more than one type of disk-based
filesystem. The predominant standards are the ext4, XFS, and UFS filesystems, along with
Oracle’s ZFS and Btrfs. However, many others are available, including, Veritas’s VxFS and JFS
from IBM.
“Foreign” filesystems are also widely supported, including the FAT and NTFS filesystems used
by Microsoft Windows and the ISO 9660 filesystem used on older CD-ROMs.
The filesystem is a rich topic that we approach from several different angles. This chapter tells
where to find things on your system and describes the characteristics of files, the meanings of
permission bits, and the use of some basic commands that view and set attributes. Chapter 20,
Storage, is where you’ll find the more technical filesystem topics such as disk partitioning.

Chapter 21, The Network File System, describes NFS, a file sharing system that is commonly
used for remote file access between UNIX and Linux systems. Chapter 22, SMB, describes an
analogous system from the Windows world.

     See the sections starting here for more information about specific filesystems.

With so many different filesystem implementations available, it may seem strange that this
chapter reads as if there were only a single filesystem. We can be vague about the underlying
code because most modern filesystems either try to implement the traditional filesystem
functionality in a faster and more reliable manner, or they add extra features as a layer on top of
the standard filesystem semantics. Some filesystems do both. For better or worse, too much
existing software depends on the model described in this chapter for that model to be discarded.
5.1 PATHNAMES
The filesystem is presented as a single unified hierarchy that starts at the directory / and
continues downward through an arbitrary number of subdirectories. / is also called the root
directory. This single-hierarchy system differs from the one used by Windows, which retains the
concept of partition-specific namespaces.
Graphical user interfaces often refer to directories as “folders,” even on Linux systems. Folders
and directories are exactly the same thing; “folder” is just linguistic leakage from the worlds of
Windows and macOS. Nevertheless, it’s worth noting that the word “folder” tends to raise the
hackles of some techies. Don’t use it in technical contexts unless you’re prepared to receive
funny looks.

The list of directories that must be traversed to locate a particular file plus that file’s filename
form a pathname. Pathnames can be either absolute (e.g., /tmp/foo) or relative (e.g.,
book4/filesystem). Relative pathnames are interpreted starting at the current directory. You
might be accustomed to thinking of the current directory as a feature of the shell, but every
process has one.
The terms filename, pathname, and path are more or less interchangeable—or at least, we use
them interchangeably in this book. Filename and path can be used for both absolute and relative
paths; pathname usually suggests an absolute path.
The filesystem can be arbitrarily deep. However, each component of a pathname (that is, each
directory) must have a name no more than 255 characters long. There’s also a limit on the total
path length you can pass into the kernel as a system call argument (4,095 bytes on Linux, 1,024
bytes on BSD). To access a file with a pathname longer than this, you must cd to an intermediate
directory and use a relative pathname.
5.2 FILESYSTEM MOUNTING AND UNMOUNTING
The filesystem is composed of smaller chunks—also called filesystems—each of which consists
of one directory and its subdirectories and files. It’s normally apparent from context which type
of “filesystem” is being discussed, but for clarity in the following discussion, we use the term
“file tree” to refer to the overall layout and reserve the word “filesystem” for the branches
attached to the tree.
Some filesystems live on disk partitions or on logical volumes backed by physical disks, but as
mentioned earlier, filesystems can be anything that obeys the proper API: a network file server, a
kernel component, a memory-based disk emulator, etc. Most kernels have a nifty “loop”
filesystem that lets you mount individual files as if they were distinct devices. It’s useful for
mounting DVD-ROM images stored on disk or for developing filesystem images without having
to worry about repartitioning. Linux systems can even treat existing portions of the file tree as
filesystems. This trick lets you duplicate, move, or hide portions of the file tree.

In most situations, filesystems are attached to the tree with the mount command. mount maps a
directory within the existing file tree, called the mount point, to the root of the newly attached
filesystem. The previous contents of the mount point become temporarily inaccessible as long as
another filesystem is mounted there. Mount points are usually empty directories, however.
For example,

installs the filesystem stored on the disk partition represented by /dev/sda4 under the path /users.
You could then use ls /users to see that filesystem’s contents.
On some systems, mount is a just a wrapper that calls filesystem-specific commands such as
mount.ntfs or mount_smbfs. You’re free to call these helper commands directly if you need to;
they sometimes offer additional options that the mount wrapper does not understand. On the
other hand, the generic mount command suffices for day-to-day use.
You can run the mount command without any arguments to see all the filesystems that are
currently mounted. On Linux systems, there might be 30 or more, most of which represent
various interfaces to the kernel.

The /etc/fstab file lists filesystems that are normally mounted on the system. The information in
this file allows filesystems to be automatically checked (with fsck) and mounted (with mount) at
boot time, with options you specify. The fstab file also serves as documentation for the layout of
the filesystems on disk and enables short commands such as mount /usr. See this page for a
discussion of fstab.
You detach filesystems with the umount command. umount complains if you try to unmount a
filesystem that’s in use. The filesystem to be detached must not have open files or processes
whose current directories are located there, and if the filesystem contains executable programs,
none of them can be running.
Linux has a “lazy” unmount option (umount -l) that removes a filesystem from the naming
hierarchy but does not truly unmount it until all existing file references have been closed. It’s
debatable whether this is a useful option. To begin with, there’s no guarantee that existing
references will ever close on their own. In addition, the “semi-unmounted” state can present
inconsistent filesystem semantics to the programs that are using it; they can read and write
through existing file handles but cannot open new files or perform other filesystem operations.

     umount -f force-unmounts a busy filesystem and is supported on all our example systems.
     However, it’s almost always a bad idea to use it on non-NFS mounts, and it may not work
on certain types of filesystems (e.g., those that keep journals, such as XFS or ext4).
Instead of reaching for umount -f when a filesystem you’re trying to unmount turns out to be
busy, run the fuser command to find out which processes hold references to that filesystem.
fuser -c mountpoint prints the PID of every process that’s using a file or directory on that
filesystem, plus a series of letter codes that show the nature of the activity. For example,

The exact letter codes vary from system to system. In this example from a FreeBSD system, c
indicates that a process has its current working directory on the filesystem and x indicates a
program being executed. However, the details are usually unimportant—the PIDs are what you
want.
To investigate the offending processes, just run ps with the list of PIDs returned by fuser. For
example,

Here, the quotation marks force the shell to pass the list of PIDs to ps as a single argument.
    On Linux systems, you can avoid the need to launder PIDs through ps by running fuser
    with the -v flag. This option produces a more readable display that includes the command
name.
The letter codes in the ACCESS column are the same ones used in fuser’s nonverbose output.
A more elaborate alternative to fuser is the lsof utility. lsof is a more complex and sophisticated
program than fuser, and its output is correspondingly verbose. lsof comes installed by default on
all our example Linux systems and is available as a package on FreeBSD.
     Under Linux, scripts in search of specific information about processes’ use of filesystems
     can also read the files in /proc directly. However, lsof -F, which formats lsof’s output for
easy parsing, is an easier and more portable solution. Use additional command-line flags to
request just the information you need.
5.3 ORGANIZATION OF THE FILE TREE
UNIX systems have never been well organized. Various incompatible naming conventions are
used simultaneously, and different types of files are scattered randomly around the namespace. In
many cases, files are divided by function and not by how likely they are to change, making it
difficult to upgrade the operating system. The /etc directory, for example, contains some files
that are never customized and some that are entirely local. How do you know which files to
preserve during an upgrade? Well, you just have to know…or trust the installation software to
make the right decisions.
As a logically minded sysadmin, you may be tempted to improve the default organization.
Unfortunately, the file tree has many hidden dependencies, so such efforts usually end up
creating problems. Just let everything stay where the OS installation and the system packages put
it. When offered a choice of locations, always accept the default unless you have a specific and
compelling reason to do otherwise.

     See Chapter 11 for more information about configuring the kernel.

The root filesystem includes at least the root directory and a minimal set of files and
subdirectories. The file that contains the OS kernel usually lives under /boot, but its exact name
and location can vary. Under BSD and some other UNIX systems, the kernel is not really a single
file so much as a set of components.
Also part of the root filesystem are /etc for critical system and configuration files, /sbin and /bin
for important utilities, and sometimes /tmp for temporary files. The /dev directory was
traditionally part of the root filesystem, but these days it’s a virtual filesystem that’s mounted
separately. (See this page for more information.)
Some systems keep shared library files and a few other oddments, such as the C preprocessor, in
the /lib or /lib64 directory. Others have moved these items into /usr/lib, sometimes leaving /lib
as a symbolic link.

The directories /usr and /var are also of great importance. /usr is where most standard-but-not-
system-critical programs are kept, along with various other booty such as on-line manuals and
most libraries. FreeBSD stores quite a bit of local configuration under /usr/local. /var houses
spool directories, log files, accounting information, and various other items that grow or change
rapidly and that vary on each host. Both /usr and /var must be available to enable the system to
come up all the way to multiuser mode.

     See this page for some reasons why partitioning might be desirable and some rules of
     thumb to guide it.
In the past, it was standard practice to partition the system disk and to put some parts of the file
tree on their own partitions, most commonly /usr, /var, and /tmp. That’s not uncommon even
now, but the secular trend is toward having one big root filesystem. Large hard disks and
increasingly sophisticated filesystem implementations have reduced the value of partitioning.
In cases where partitioning is used, it’s most frequently an attempt to prevent one part of the file
tree from consuming all available space and bringing the entire system to a halt. Accordingly,
/var (which contains log files that are apt to grow in times of trouble), /tmp, and user home
directories are some of the most common candidates for having their own partitions. Dedicated
filesystems can also store bulky items such as source code libraries and databases.

Table 5.1 lists some of the more important standard directories. (Alternate rows have been
shaded to improve readability.)

Table 5.1: Standard directories and their contents
On most systems, a hier man page outlines some general guidelines for the layout of the
filesystem. Don’t expect the actual system to conform to the master plan in every respect,
however.
    For      Linux     systems,     the     Filesystem       Hierarchy      Standard      (see
    wiki.linuxfoundation.org/en/FHS) attempts to codify, rationalize, and explain the standard
directories. It’s an excellent resource to consult when you confront an unusual situation and need
to figure out where to put something. Despite its status as a “standard,” it’s more a reflection of
real-world practice than a prescriptive document. It also hasn’t undergone much updating
recently, so it doesn’t describe the exact filesystem layout found on current distributions.
5.4 FILE TYPES
Most filesystem implementations define seven types of files. Even when developers add
something new and wonderful to the file tree (such as the process information under /proc), it
must still be made to look like one of these seven types:

      Regular files
      Directories
      Character device files
      Block device files
      Local domain sockets
      Named pipes (FIFOs)
      Symbolic links

You can determine the type of an existing file with the file command. Not only does file know
about the standard types of files, but it also knows a thing or two about common formats used
within regular files.

All that hoo-hah about /bin/sh means “it’s an executable command.”
Another option for investigating files is ls -ld. The -l flag shows detailed information, and the -d
flag forces ls to show the information for a directory rather than showing the directory’s contents.

The first character of the ls output encodes the type. For example, the circled d in the following
output demonstrates that /usr/include is a directory:

Table 5.2 shows the codes ls uses to represent the various types of files.

Table 5.2: File-type encoding used by ls
As Table 5.2 shows, rm is the universal tool for deleting files. But how would you delete a file
named, say, -f? It’s a legitimate filename under most filesystems, but rm -f doesn’t work because
rm interprets the -f as a flag. The answer is either to refer to the file by a pathname that doesn’t
start with a dash (such as ./-f) or to use rm’s -- argument to tell it that everything that follows is a
filename and not an option (i.e., rm -- -f).
Filenames that contain control or Unicode characters present a similar problem since reproducing
these names from the keyboard can be difficult or impossible. In this situation, you can use shell
globbing (pattern matching) to identify the files to delete. When you use pattern matching, it’s a
good idea to get in the habit of using rm’s -i option to make rm confirm the deletion of each file.
This feature protects you against deleting any “good” files that your pattern inadvertently
matches. To delete the file named foo<Control-D>bar in the following example, you could use

Note that ls shows the control character as a question mark, which can be a bit deceptive. If you
don’t remember that ? is a shell pattern-matching character and try to rm foo?bar, you might
potentially remove more than one file (although not in this example). -i is your friend!
ls -b shows control characters as octal numbers, which can be helpful if you need to identify
them specifically. <Control-A> is 1 (\001 in octal), <Control-B> is 2, and so on, in alphabetical
order. man ascii and the Wikipedia page for ASCII both include a nice table of control
characters and their octal equivalents.
To delete the most horribly named files, you might need to resort to rm -i *.

Another option for removing files with squirrelly names is to use an alternative interface to the
filesystem such as emacs’s dired mode or a visual tool such as Nautilus.
Regular files
Regular files consist of a series of bytes; filesystems impose no structure on their contents. Text
files, data files, executable programs, and shared libraries are all stored as regular files. Both
sequential access and random access are allowed.
Directories
A directory contains named references to other files. You can create directories with mkdir and
delete them with rmdir if they are empty. You can recursively delete nonempty directories—
including all their contents—with rm -r.
The special entries “.” and “..” refer to the directory itself and to its parent directory; they cannot
be removed. Since the root directory has no real parent directory, the path “/..” is equivalent to
the path “/.” (and both are equivalent to /).
Hard links
A file’s name is stored within its parent directory, not with the file itself. In fact, more than one
directory (or more than one entry in a single directory) can refer to a file at one time, and the
references can have different names. Such an arrangement creates the illusion that a file exists in
more than one place at the same time.
These additional references (“links,” or “hard links” to distinguish them from symbolic links,
discussed below) are synonymous with the original file; as far as the filesystem is concerned, all
links to the file are equivalent. The filesystem maintains a count of the number of links that point
to each file and does not release the file’s data blocks until its last link has been deleted. Hard
links cannot cross filesystem boundaries.
You create hard links with ln and remove them with rm. It’s easy to remember the syntax of ln if
you keep in mind that it mirrors the syntax of cp. The command cp oldfile newfile creates a copy
of oldfile called newfile, and ln oldfile newfile makes the name newfile an additional reference
to oldfile.
In most filesystem implementations, it is technically possible to make hard links to directories as
well as to flat files. However, directory links often lead to degenerate conditions such as
filesystem loops and directories that don’t have a single, unambiguous parent. In most cases, a
symbolic link (see this page) is a better option.

You can use ls -l to see how many links to a given file exist. See the ls example output here for
some additional details. Also note the comments regarding ls -i on this page, as this option is
particularly helpful for identifying hard links.
Hard links are not a distinct type of file. Instead of defining a separate “thing” called a hard link,
the filesystem simply allows more than one directory entry to point to the same file. In addition
to the file’s contents, the underlying attributes of the file (such as ownerships and permissions)
are also shared.
Character and block device files

     See Chapter 11 for more information about devices and drivers.

Device files let programs communicate with the system’s hardware and peripherals. The kernel
includes (or loads) driver software for each of the system’s devices. This software takes care of
the messy details of managing each device so that the kernel itself can remain relatively abstract
and hardware-independent.
Device drivers present a standard communication interface that looks like a regular file. When
the filesystem is given a request that refers to a character or block device file, it simply passes the
request to the appropriate device driver. It’s important to distinguish device files from device
drivers, however. The files are just rendezvous points that communicate with drivers. They are
not drivers themselves.
The distinction between character and block devices is subtle and not worth reviewing in detail.
In the past, a few types of hardware were represented by both block and character device files,
but that configuration is rare today. As a matter of practice, FreeBSD has done away with block
devices entirely, though their spectral presence can still be glimpsed in man pages and header
files.
Device files are characterized by two numbers, called the major and minor device numbers. The
major device number tells the kernel which driver the file refers to, and the minor device number
typically tells the driver which physical unit to address. For example, major device number 4 on
a Linux system denotes the serial driver. The first serial port (/dev/tty0) would have major
device number 4 and minor device number 0.

Drivers can interpret the minor device numbers that are passed to them in whatever way they
please. For example, tape drivers use the minor device number to determine whether the tape
should be rewound when the device file is closed.
In the distant past, /dev was a generic directory and the device files within it were created with
mknod and removed with rm. Unfortunately, this crude system was ill-equipped to deal with the
endless sea of drivers and device types that have appeared over the last few decades. It also
facilitated all sorts of potential configuration mismatches: device files that referred to no actual
device, devices inaccessible because they had no device files, and so on.
These days, the /dev directory is normally mounted as a special filesystem type, and its contents
are automatically maintained by the kernel in concert with a user-level daemon. There are a
couple of different versions of this same basic system. See Chapter 11, Drivers and the Kernel,
for more information about each system’s approach to this task.
Local domain sockets
Sockets are connections between processes that allow them to communicate hygienically. UNIX
defines several kinds of sockets, most of which involve the network.

    See Chapter 10 for more information about syslog.

Local domain sockets are accessible only from the local host and are referred to through a
filesystem object rather than a network port. They are sometimes known as “UNIX domain
sockets.” Syslog and the X Window System are examples of standard facilities that use local
domain sockets, but there are many more, including many databases and app servers.
Local domain sockets are created with the socket system call and removed with the rm
command or the unlink system call once they have no more users.
Named pipes
Like local domain sockets, named pipes allow communication between two processes running on
the same host. They’re also known as “FIFO files” (As in financial accounting, FIFO is short for
the phrase “first in, first out”). You can create named pipes with mknod and remove them with
rm.
Named pipes and local domain sockets serve similar purposes, and the fact that both exist is
essentially a historical artifact. Most likely, neither of them would exist if UNIX and Linux were
designed today; network sockets would stand in for both.
Symbolic links
A symbolic or “soft” link points to a file by name. When the kernel comes upon a symbolic link
in the course of looking up a pathname, it redirects its attention to the pathname stored as the
contents of the link. The difference between hard links and symbolic links is that a hard link is a
direct reference, whereas a symbolic link is a reference by name. Symbolic links are distinct from
the files they point to.
You create symbolic links with ln -s and remove them with rm. Since symbolic links can contain
arbitrary paths, they can refer to files on other filesystems or to nonexistent files. A series of
symbolic links can also form a loop.
A symbolic link can contain either an absolute or a relative path. For example,

links /var/data/secure to /var/data/archived/secure with a relative path. It creates the symbolic
link /var/data/secure with a target of archived/secure, as demonstrated by this output from ls:

The entire /var/data directory could then be moved elsewhere without causing the symbolic link
to stop working.
The file permissions that ls shows for a symbolic link, lrwxrwxrwx, are dummy values. Permission
to create, remove, or follow the link is controlled by the containing directory, whereas read,
write, and execute permission on the link target are granted by the target’s own permissions.
Therefore, symbolic links do not need (and do not have) any permission information of their
own.
A common mistake is to think that the first argument to ln -s is interpreted relative to the current
working directory. However, that argument is not actually resolved as a filename by ln: it’s
simply a literal string that becomes the target of the symbolic link.
5.5 FILE ATTRIBUTES
Under the traditional UNIX and Linux filesystem model, every file has a set of nine permission
bits that control who can read, write, and execute the contents of the file. Together with three
other bits that primarily affect the operation of executable programs, these bits constitute the
file’s “mode.”
The twelve mode bits are stored along with four bits of file-type information. The four file-type
bits are set when the file is first created and cannot be changed, but the file’s owner and the
superuser can modify the twelve mode bits with the chmod (change mode) command. Use ls -l
(or ls -ld for a directory) to inspect the values of these bits. See this page for an example.
The permission bits
Nine permission bits determine what operations can be performed on a file and by whom.
Traditional UNIX does not allow permissions to be set per user (although all systems now
support access control lists of one sort or another; see this page). Instead, three sets of
permissions define access for the owner of the file, the group owners of the file, and everyone
else (in that order). Each set has three bits: a read bit, a write bit, and an execute bit (also in that
order).
If you think of the owner as “the user” and everyone else as “other,” you can remember the order
of the permission sets by thinking of the name Hugo. u, g, and o are also the letter codes used by
the mnemonic version of chmod.
It’s convenient to discuss file permissions in terms of octal (base 8) numbers because each digit
of an octal number represents three bits and each group of permission bits consists of three bits.
The topmost three bits (with octal values of 400, 200, and 100) control access for the owner. The
second three (40, 20, and 10) control access for the group. The last three (4, 2, and 1) control
access for everyone else (“the world”). In each triplet, the high bit is the read bit, the middle bit is
the write bit, and the low bit is the execute bit.
Although a user might fit into two of the three permission categories, only the most specific
permissions apply. For example, the owner of a file always has access determined by the owner
permission bits and never by the group permission bits. It is possible for the “other” and “group”
categories to have more access than the owner, although this configuration would be highly
unusual.

On a regular file, the read bit allows the file to be opened and read. The write bit allows the
contents of the file to be modified or truncated; however, the ability to delete or rename (or
delete and then re-create!) the file is controlled by the permissions on its parent directory, where
the name-to-dataspace mapping is actually stored.
The execute bit allows the file to be executed. Two types of executable files exist: binaries,
which the CPU runs directly, and scripts, which must be interpreted by a shell or some other
program. By convention, scripts begin with a line similar to

that specifies an appropriate interpreter. Nonbinary executable files that do not specify an
interpreter are assumed to be sh scripts.
The kernel understands the #! (“shebang”) syntax and acts on it directly. However, if the
interpreter is not specified completely and correctly, the kernel will refuse to execute the file. The
shell then makes a second attempt to execute the script by calling /bin/sh, which is usually a link
to the Almquist shell or to bash; see this page. Sven Mascheck maintains an excruciatingly
detailed page about the history, implementation, and cross-platform behavior of the shebang at
goo.gl/J7izhL.
For a directory, the execute bit (often called the “search” or “scan” bit in this context) allows the
directory to be entered or passed through as a pathname is evaluated, but not to have its contents
listed. The combination of read and execute bits allows the contents of the directory to be listed.
The combination of write and execute bits allows files to be created, deleted, and renamed within
the directory.

A variety of extensions such as access control lists (see this page), SELinux (see this page), and
“bonus” permission bits defined by individual filesystems (see this page) complicate or override
the traditional 9-bit permission model. If you’re having trouble explaining the system’s observed
behavior, check to see whether one of these factors might be interfering.
The setuid and setgid bits
The bits with octal values 4000 and 2000 are the setuid and setgid bits. When set on executable
files, these bits allow programs to access files and processes that would otherwise be off-limits to
the user that runs them. The setuid/setgid mechanism for executables is described here.
When set on a directory, the setgid bit causes newly created files within the directory to take on
the group ownership of the directory rather than the default group of the user that created the file.
This convention makes it easier to share a directory of files among several users, as long as they
belong to a common group. This interpretation of the setgid bit is unrelated to its meaning when
set on an executable file, but no ambiguity can exist as to which meaning is appropriate.
The sticky bit
The bit with octal value 1000 is called the sticky bit. It was of historical importance as a modifier
for executable files on early UNIX systems. However, that meaning of the sticky bit is now
obsolete and modern systems silently ignore the sticky bit when it’s set on regular files.
If the sticky bit is set on a directory, the filesystem won’t allow you to delete or rename a file
unless you are the owner of the directory, the owner of the file, or the superuser. Having write
permission on the directory is not enough. This convention helps make directories like /tmp a
little more private and secure.
ls: list and inspect files
The filesystem maintains about forty separate pieces of information for each file, but most of
them are useful only to the filesystem itself. As a system administrator, you will be concerned
mostly with the link count, owner, group, mode, size, last access time, last modification time, and
type. You can inspect all these with ls -l (or ls -ld for a directory; without the -d flag, ls lists the
directory’s contents).
An attribute change time is also maintained for each file. The conventional name for this time
(the “ctime,” short for “change time”) leads some people to believe that it is the file’s creation
time. Unfortunately, it is not; it just records the time at which the attributes of the file (owner,
mode, etc.) were last changed (as opposed to the time at which the file’s contents were modified).
Consider the following example:

The first field specifies the file’s type and mode. The first character is a dash, so the file is a
regular file. (See Table 5.2 for other codes.)
The next nine characters in this field are the three sets of permission bits. The order is owner-
group-other, and the order of bits within each set is read-write-execute. Although these bits have
only binary values, ls shows them symbolically with the letters r, w, and x for read, write, and
execute. In this case, the owner has all permissions on the file and everyone else has read and
execute permission.
If the setuid bit had been set, the x representing the owner’s execute permission would have been
replaced with an s, and if the setgid bit had been set, the x for the group would also have been
replaced with an s. The last character of the permissions (execute permission for “other”) is
shown as t if the sticky bit of the file is turned on. If either the setuid/setgid bit or the sticky bit is
set but the corresponding execute bit is not, these bits are shown as S or T.

The next field in the listing is the file’s link count. In this case it is 4, indicating that
/usr/bin/gzip is just one of four names for this file (the others on this system are gunzip, gzcat,
and zcat, all in /usr/bin). Each time a hard link is made to a file, the file’s link count is
incremented by 1. Symbolic links do not affect the link count.
All directories have at least two hard links: the link from the parent directory and the link from
the special file called . inside the directory itself.
The next two fields in the ls output are the owner and group owner of the file. In this example,
the file’s owner is root, and the file belongs to the group named wheel. The filesystem actually
stores these as the user and group ID numbers rather than as names. If the text versions (names)
can’t be determined, ls shows the fields as numbers. This might happen if the user or group that
owns the file has been deleted from the /etc/passwd or /etc/group file. It could also suggest a
problem with your LDAP database (if you use one); see Chapter 17.
The next field is the size of the file in bytes. This file is 37,432 bytes long. Next comes the date
of last modification: November 11, 2016. The last field in the listing is the name of the file,
/usr/bin/gzip.

ls output is slightly different for a device file. For example:

Most fields are the same, but instead of a size in bytes, ls shows the major and minor device
numbers. /dev/tty0 is the first virtual console on this (Red Hat) system and is controlled by
device driver 4 (the terminal driver). The dot at the end of the mode indicates the absence of an
access control list (ACL, discussed starting here). Some systems show this by default and some
don’t.
One ls option that’s useful for scoping out hard links is -i, which tells ls to show each file’s
“inode number.” Briefly, the inode number is an integer associated with the contents of a file.
Inodes are the “things” that are pointed to by directory entries; entries that are hard links to the
same file have the same inode number. To figure out a complex web of links, you need both ls -
li, to show link counts and inode numbers, and find, to search for matches. (Try find mountpoint
-xdev -inum inode -print.)
Some other ls options that are important to know are -a to show all entries in a directory (even
files whose names start with a dot), -t to sort files by modification time (or -tr to sort in reverse
chronological order), -F to show the names of files in a way that distinguishes directories and
executable files, -R to list recursively, and -h to show file sizes in human-readable form (e.g., 8K
or 53M).

Most versions of ls now default to color-coding files if your terminal program supports this (most
do). ls specifies colors according to a limited and abstract palette (“red,” “blue,” etc.), and it’s up
to the terminal program to map these requests to specific colors. You may need to tweak both ls
(the LSCOLORS or LS_COLORS environment variable) and the terminal emulator to achieve
colors that are readable and unobtrusive. Alternatively, you can just remove the default
configuration for colorization (usually /etc/profile.d/colorls*) to eliminate colors entirely.
chmod: change permissions
The chmod command changes the permissions on a file. Only the owner of the file and the
superuser can change a file’s permissions. To use the command on early UNIX systems, you had
to learn a bit of octal notation, but current versions accept both octal notation and a mnemonic
syntax. The octal syntax is generally more convenient for administrators, but it can only be used
to specify an absolute value for the permission bits. The mnemonic syntax can modify some bits
but leave others alone.
The first argument to chmod is a specification of the permissions to be assigned, and the second
and subsequent arguments are names of files on which permissions should be changed. In the
octal case, the first octal digit of the specification is for the owner, the second is for the group,
and the third is for everyone else. If you want to turn on the setuid, setgid, or sticky bits, you use
four octal digits rather than three, with the three special bits forming the first digit.
Table 5.3 illustrates the eight possible combinations for each set of three bits, where r, w, and x
stand for read, write, and execute.

Table 5.3: Permission encoding for chmod

For example, chmod 711 myprog gives all permissions to the user (owner) and execute-only
permission to everyone else. (If myprog were a shell script, it would need both read and execute
permission turned on. For the script to be run by an interpreter, it must be opened and read like a
text file. Binary files are executed directly by the kernel and therefore do not need read
permission turned on.)
For the mnemonic syntax, you combine a set of targets (u, g, or o for user, group, other, or a for
all three) with an operator (+, -, = to add, remove, or set) and a set of permissions. The chmod
man page gives the details, but the syntax is probably best learned by example. Table 5.4
exemplifies some mnemonic operations.

Table 5.4: Examples of chmod’s mnemonic syntax
The hard part about using the mnemonic syntax is remembering whether o stands for “owner” or
“other”; “other” is correct. Just remember u and g by analogy to UID and GID; only one
possibility is left. Or remember the order of letters in the name Hugo.
      On Linux systems, you can also specify the modes to be assigned by copying them from an
      existing file. For example, chmod --reference=filea fileb makes fileb’s mode the same as
filea’s.
With the -R option, chmod recursively updates the file permissions within a directory. However,
this feat is trickier than it looks because the enclosed files and directories may not share the same
attributes; for example, some might be executable files; others, text files. Mnemonic syntax is
particularly useful with -R because it preserves bits whose values you don’t set explicitly. For
example,

adds group write permission to mydir and all its contents without messing up the execute bits of
directories and programs.
If you want to adjust execute bits, be wary of chmod -R. It’s blind to the fact that the execute bit
has a different interpretation on a directory than it does on a flat file. Therefore, chmod -R a-x
probably won’t do what you intend. Use find to select only the regular files:
chown and chgrp: change ownership and group
The chown command changes a file’s ownership, and the chgrp command changes its group
ownership. The syntax of chown and chgrp mirrors that of chmod, except that the first argument
is the new owner or group, respectively.
To change a file’s group, you must either be the superuser or be the owner of the file and belong
to the group you’re changing to. Older systems in the SysV lineage allowed users to give away
their own files with chown, but that’s unusual these days; chown is now a privileged operation.
Like chmod, chown and chgrp offer the recursive -R flag to change the settings of a directory
and all the files underneath it. For example, the sequence

could reset the owner and group of files restored from a backup for the user matt. Don’t try to
chown dot files with a command such as

since the pattern matches ~matt/.. and therefore ends up changing the ownerships of the parent
directory and probably the home directories of other users.
chown can change both the owner and group of a file at once with the syntax

For example,

You can actually omit either user or group, which makes the chgrp command superfluous. If you
include the colon but name no specific group, the Linux version of chown uses the user’s default
group.
Some systems accept the notation user.group as being equivalent to user:group. This is just a
nod to historical variation among systems; it means the same thing.
umask: assign default permissions
You can use the built-in shell command umask to influence the default permissions given to the
files you create. Every process has its own umask attribute; the shell’s built-in umask command
sets the shell’s own umask, which is then inherited by commands that you run.
The umask is specified as a three-digit octal value that represents the permissions to take away.
When a file is created, its permissions are set to whatever the creating program requests minus
whatever the umask forbids. Thus, the individual digits of the umask allow the permissions
shown in Table 5.5.

Table 5.5: Permission encoding for umask

For example, umask 027 allows all permissions for the owner but forbids write permission to the
group and allows no permissions for anyone else. The default umask value is often 022, which
denies write permission to the group and world but allows read permission.

    See Chapter 8 for more information about startup files.

In the standard access control model, you cannot force users to have a particular umask value
because they can always reset it to whatever they want. However, you can put a suitable default
in the sample startup files that you give to new users. If you require more control over the
permissions on user-created files, you’ll need to graduate to a mandatory access control system
such as SELinux; see this page.
Linux bonus flags
Linux defines a set of supplemental flags that can be set on files to request special handling. For
example, the a flag makes a file append-only, and the i flag makes it immutable and undeletable.
Flags have binary values, so they are either present or absent for a given file. The underlying
filesystem implementation must support the corresponding feature, so not all flags can be used on
all filesystem types. In addition, some flags are experimental, unimplemented, or read-only.
Linux uses the commands lsattr and chattr to view and change file attributes. Table 5.6 lists
some of the more mainstream flags.

Table 5.6: Linux file attribute flags

As might be expected from such a random grab bag of features, the value of these flags to
administrators varies. The main thing to remember is that if a particular file seems to be behaving
strangely, check it with lsattr to see if it has one or more flags enabled.
Waiving maintenance of last-access times (the A flag) can boost performance in some situations.
However, its value depends on the filesystem implementation and access pattern; you’ll have to
do your own benchmarking. In addition, modern kernels now default to mounting filesystems
with the relatime option, which minimizes updates to st_atime and makes the A flag largely obsolete.
The immutable and append-only flags (i and a) were largely conceived as ways to make the
system more resistant to tampering by hackers or hostile code. Unfortunately, they can confuse
software and protect only against hackers that don’t know enough to use chattr -ia. Real-world
experience has shown that these flags are more often used by hackers than against them.

     See Chapter 5 for more information about configuration management.
We have seen several cases in which admins have used the i (immutable) flag to prevent changes
that would otherwise be imposed by a configuration management system such as Ansible or Salt.
Needless to say, this hack creates confusion once the details have been forgotten and no one can
figure out why configuration management isn’t working. Never do this—just think of the shame
your mother would feel if she knew what you’d been up to. Fix the issue within the configuration
management system like Mom would want.
The “no backup” flag (d) is potentially of interest to administrators, but since it’s an advisory
flag, make sure that your backup system honors it.

Flags that affect journaling and write synchrony (D, j, and S) exist primarily to support
databases. They are not of general use for administrators. All these options can reduce filesystem
performance significantly. In addition, tampering with write synchrony has been known to
confuse fsck on ext* filesystems.
5.6 ACCESS CONTROL LISTS
The traditional 9-bit owner/group/other access control system is powerful enough to
accommodate the vast majority of administrative needs. Although the system has clear
limitations, it’s very much in keeping with the UNIX traditions (some might say, “former
traditions”) of simplicity and predictability.
Access control lists, aka ACLs, are a more powerful but also more complicated way of regulating
access to files. Each file or directory can have an associated ACL that lists the permission rules
to be applied to it. Each of the rules within an ACL is called an access control entry or ACE.

An access control entry identifies the user or group to which it applies and specifies a set of
permissions to be applied to those entities. ACLs have no set length and can include permission
specifications for multiple users or groups. Most OSes limit the length of an individual ACL, but
the limit is high enough (usually at least 32 entries) that it rarely comes into play.
The more sophisticated ACL systems let administrators specify partial sets of permissions or
negative permissions. Most also have inheritance features that allow access specifications to
propagate to newly created filesystem entities.
A cautionary note
ACLs are widely supported and occupy our attention for the rest of this chapter. However,
neither of these facts should be interpreted as an encouragement to embrace them. ACLs have a
niche, but it lies outside the mainstream of UNIX and Linux administration.
ACLs exist primarily to facilitate Windows compatibility and to serve the needs of the small
segment of enterprises that actually require ACL-level flexibility. They are not the shiny next
generation of access control and are not intended to supplant the traditional model.
ACLs’ complexity creates several potential problems. Not only are ACLs tedious to use, but they
can also cause unexpected interactions with ACL-unaware backup systems, network file service
peers, and even simple programs such as text editors.
ACLs also tend to become increasingly unmaintainable as the number of entries grows. Real-
world ACLs frequently include vestigial entries and entries that serve only to compensate for
issues caused by previous entries. It’s possible to refactor and simplify these complex ACLs, but
that’s risky and time consuming, so it rarely gets done.

In the past, copies of this chapter that we’ve sent out to professional administrators for review
have often come back with notes such as, “This part looks fine, but I can’t really say, because
I’ve never used ACLs.”
ACL types
Two types of ACLs have emerged as the predominant standards for UNIX and Linux: POSIX
ACLs and NFSv4 ACLs.
The POSIX version dates back to specification work done in the mid-1990s. Unfortunately, no
actual standard was ever issued, and initial implementations varied widely. These days, we are in
much better shape. Systems have largely converged on a common framing for POSIX ACLs and
a common command set, getfacl and setfacl, for manipulating them.
To a first approximation, the POSIX ACL model simply extends the traditional UNIX rwx
permission system to accommodate permissions for multiple groups and users.
As POSIX ACLs were coming into focus, it became increasingly common for UNIX and Linux
to share filesystems with Windows, which has its own set of ACL conventions. Here the plot
thickens, because Windows makes a variety of distinctions that are not found in either the
traditional UNIX model or its POSIX ACL equivalent. Windows ACLs are semantically more
complex, too; for example, they allow negative permissions (“deny” entries) and have a
complicated inheritance scheme.

    See Chapter 21 for more information about NFS.

The architects of version 4 of NFS—a common file-sharing protocol—wanted to incorporate
ACLs as a first-class entity. Because of the UNIX/Windows split and the inconsistencies among
UNIX ACL implementations, it was clear that the systems on the ends of an NFSv4 connection
might often be of different types. Each system might understand NFSv4 ACLs, POSIX ACLs,
Windows ACLs, or no ACLs at all. The NFSv4 standard would have to be interoperable with all
these various worlds without causing too many surprises or security problems.
Given this constraint, it’s perhaps not surprising that NFSv4 ACLs are essentially a union of all
preexisting systems. They are a strict superset of POSIX ACLs, so any POSIX ACL can be
represented as an NFSv4 ACL without loss of information. At the same time, NFSv4 ACLs
accommodate all the permission bits found on Windows systems, and they have most of
Windows’ semantic features as well.
Implementation of ACLs
In theory, responsibility for maintaining and enforcing ACLs could be assigned to several
different components of the operating system. ACLs could be implemented by the kernel on
behalf of all the system’s filesystems, by individual filesystems, or perhaps by higher-level
software such as NFS and SMB servers.
In practice, ACL support is both OS-dependent and filesystem-dependent. A filesystem that
supports ACLs on one system might not support them on another, or it might feature a somewhat
different implementation managed by different commands.

     See Chapter 22 for more information about SMB.

File service daemons map their host’s native ACL scheme (or schemes) to and from the
conventions appropriate to the filing protocol: NFSv4 ACLs for NFS, and Windows ACLs for
SMB. The details of that mapping depend on the implementation of the file server. Usually, the
rules are complicated and somewhat tunable with configuration options.

Because ACL implementations are filesystem-specific and because systems support multiple
filesystem implementations, some systems end up supporting multiple types of ACLs. Even a
given filesystem might offer several ACL options, as seen in the various ports of ZFS. If multiple
ACL systems are available, the commands to manipulate them might be the same or different; it
depends on the system. Welcome to sysadmin hell.
Linux ACL support
     Linux has standardized on POSIX-style ACLs. NFSv4 ACLs are not supported at the
     filesystem level, though of course Linux systems can mount and share NFSv4 filesystems
over the network.
An advantage of this standardization is that nearly all Linux filesystems now include POSIX
ACL support, including XFS, Btrfs, and the ext* family. Even ZFS, whose native ACL system is
NFSv4-ish, has been ported to Linux with POSIX ACLs. The standard getfacl and setfacl
commands can be used everywhere, without regard to the underlying filesystem type. (You may,
however, need to ensure that the correct mount option has been used to mount the filesystem.
Filesystems generally support an acl option, a noacl option, or both, depending on their defaults.)

Linux does have a command suite (nfs4_getfacl, nfs4_setfacl, and nfs4_editfacl) for grooming
the NFSv4 ACLs of files mounted from NFS servers. However, these commands cannot be used
on locally stored files. Moreover, they are rarely included in distributions’ default software
inventory; you’ll have to install them separately.
FreeBSD ACL support
    FreeBSD supports both POSIX ACLs and NFSv4 ACLs. Its native getfacl and setfacl
    commands have been extended to include NFSv4-style ACL wrangling. NSFv4 ACL
support is a relatively recent (as of 2017) development.
At the filesystem level, both UFS and ZFS support NFSv4-style ACLs, and UFS supports POSIX
ACLs as well. The potential point of confusion here is ZFS, which is NFSv4-only on BSD (and
on Solaris, its system of origin) and POSIX-only on Linux.
For UFS, use one of the mount options acls or nfsv4acls to specify which world you want to live in.
These options are mutually exclusive.
POSIX ACLs
POSIX ACLs are a mostly straightforward extension of the standard 9-bit UNIX permission
model. Read, write, and execute permission are the only capabilities that the ACL system deals
with. Embellishments such as the setuid and sticky bits are handled exclusively through the
traditional mode bits.
ACLs allow the rwx bits to be set independently for any combination of users and groups. Table
5.7 shows what the individual entries in an ACL can look like.

Table 5.7: Entries that can appear in POSIX ACLs

Users and groups can be identified by name or by UID/GID. The exact number of entries that an
ACL can contain varies with the filesystem implementation but is usually at least 32. That’s
probably about the practical limit for manageability, anyway.

Interaction between traditional modes and ACLs
Files with ACLs retain their original mode bits, but consistency is automatically enforced and the
two sets of permissions can never conflict. The following example demonstrates that the ACL
entries automatically update in response to changes made with the standard chmod command:
(This example is from Linux. The FreeBSD version of getfacl uses -q instead of --omit-header
to suppress the comment-like lines in the output.)
This enforced consistency allows older software with no awareness of ACLs to play reasonably
well in the ACL world. However, there’s a twist. Even though the group:: ACL entry in the
example above appears to be tracking the middle set of traditional mode bits, that will not always
be the case.
To understand why, suppose that a legacy program clears the write bits within all three
permission sets of the traditional mode (e.g., chmod ugo-w file). The intention is clearly to make
the file unwritable by anyone. But what if the resulting ACL were to look like this?

From the perspective of legacy programs, the file appears to be unmodifiable, yet it is actually
writable by anyone in group staff. Not good. To reduce the chance of ambiguity and
misunderstandings, the following rules are enforced:

      The user:: and other:: ACL entries are by definition identical to the “owner” and “other”
      permission bits from the traditional mode. Changing the mode changes the
      corresponding ACL entries, and vice versa.
      In all cases, the effective access permission afforded to the file’s owner and to users
      not mentioned in another way are those specified in the user:: and other:: ACL entries,
      respectively.
      If a file has no explicitly defined ACL or has an ACL that consists of only one user::,
      one group::, and one other:: entry, these ACL entries are identical to the three sets of
      traditional permission bits. This is the case illustrated in the getfacl example above.
      (Such an ACL is termed “minimal” and need not actually be implemented as a
      logically separate ACL.)
      In more complex ACLs, the traditional group permission bits correspond to a special
      ACL entry called mask rather than the group:: ACL entry. The mask limits the access
      that the ACL can confer on all named users, all named groups, and the default group.

In other words, the mask specifies an upper bound on the access that the ACL can assign to
individual groups and users. It is conceptually similar to the umask, except that the ACL mask is
always in effect and that it specifies the allowed permissions rather than the permissions to be
denied. ACL entries for named users, named groups, and the default group can include
permission bits that are not present in the mask, but filesystems simply ignore them.

As a result, the traditional mode bits can never understate the access allowed by the ACL as a
whole. Furthermore, clearing a bit from the group portion of the traditional mode clears the
corresponding bit in the ACL mask and thereby forbids this permission to everyone but the file’s
owner and those who fall in the category of “other.”
When the ACL shown in the previous example is expanded to include entries for a specific user
and group, setfacl automatically supplies an appropriate mask:

The -m option to setfacl means “modify”: it adds entries that are not already present and adjusts
those that are already there. Note that setfacl automatically generates a mask that allows all the
permissions granted in the ACL to take effect. If you want to set the mask by hand, include it in
the ACL entry list given to setfacl or use the -n option to prevent setfacl from regenerating it.
Note that after the setfacl command, ls -l shows a + sign at the end of the file’s mode to denote
that it now has a real ACL associated with it. The first ls -l shows no + because at that point the
ACL is “minimal.”
If you use the traditional chmod command to manipulate an ACL-bearing file, be aware that
your settings for the “group” permissions affect only the mask. To continue the previous
example:

The ls output in this case is misleading. Despite the apparently generous group permissions, no
one actually has permission to execute the file by reason of group membership. To grant such
permission, you must edit the ACL itself.
To remove an ACL entirely and revert to the standard UNIX permission system, use setfacl -bn.
(Strictly speaking, the -n flag is needed only on FreeBSD. Without it, FreeBSD’s setfacl leaves
you with a vestigial mask entry that will screw up later group-mode changes. However, you can
include the -n on Linux without creating problems.)

POSIX access determination
When a process attempts to access a file, its effective UID is compared to the UID that owns the
file. If they are the same, access is determined by the ACL’s user:: permissions. Otherwise, if a
matching user-specific ACL entry exists, permissions are determined by that entry in
combination with the ACL mask.
If no user-specific entry is available, the filesystem tries to locate a valid group-related entry that
authorizes the requested access; these entries are processed in conjunction with the ACL mask. If
no matching entry can be found, the other:: entry prevails.

POSIX ACL inheritance
In addition to the ACL entry types listed in Table 5.7, the ACLs for directories can include default
entries that are propagated to the ACLs of newly created files and subdirectories created within
them. Subdirectories receive these entries both in the form of active ACL entries and in the form
of copies of the default entries. Therefore, the original default entries may eventually propagate
down through several layers of the directory hierarchy.

Once default entries have been copied to new subdirectories, there is no ongoing connection
between the parent and child ACLs. If the parent’s default entries change, those changes are not
reflected in the ACLs of existing subdirectories.
You can set default ACL entries with setfacl -dm. Alternatively, you can include default entries
within a regular access control entry list by prefixing them with default:.

If a directory has any default entries, it must include a full set of defaults for user::, group::, other::,
and mask::. setfacl will fill in any default entries you don’t specify by copying them from the
current permissions ACL, generating a summary mask as usual.
NFSv4 ACLs
     In this section, we discuss the characteristics of NFSv4 ACLs and briefly review the
     command syntax used to set and inspect them on FreeBSD. They aren’t supported on Linux
(other than by NFS service daemons).
From a structural perspective, NFSv4 ACLs are similar to Windows ACLs. The main difference
between them lies in the specification of the entity to which an access control entry refers.
In both systems, the ACL stores this entity as a string. For Windows ACLs, the string typically
contains a Windows security identifier (SID), whereas for NFSv4, the string is typically of the
form user:username or group:groupname. It can also be one of the special tokens owner@, group@, or
everyone@. These latter entries are the most common because they correspond to the mode bits
found on every file.
Systems such as Samba that share files between UNIX and Windows systems must provide some
way of mapping between Windows and NFSv4 identities.

The NFSv4 and Windows permission models are more granular than the traditional UNIX read-
write-execute model. In the case of NFSv4, the main refinements are as follows:

      NFSv4 distinguishes permission to create files within a directory from permission to
      create subdirectories.
      NFSv4 has a separate “append” permission bit.
      NFSv4 has separate read and write permissions for data, file attributes, extended
      attributes, and ACLs.
      NFSv4 controls a user’s ability to change the ownership of a file through the standard
      ACL system. In traditional UNIX, the ability to change the ownership of files is
      usually reserved for root.

Table 5.8 shows the various permissions that can be assigned in the NFSv4 system. It also shows
the one-letter codes used to represent them and the more verbose canonical names.

Table 5.8: NFSv4 file permissions
Although the NFSv4 permission model is fairly detailed, the individual permissions should
mostly be self-explanatory. (The “synchronize” permission allows a client to specify that its
modifications to a file should be synchronous—that is, calls to write should not return until the
data has actually been saved on disk.)
An extended attribute is a named chunk of data that is stored along with a file; most modern
filesystems support such attributes. At this point, the predominant use of extended attributes is to
store ACLs themselves. However, the NFSv4 permission model treats ACLs separately from
other extended attributes.
In FreeBSD’s implementation, a file’s owner always has read_acl, write_acl, read_attributes, and
write_attributes permissions, even if the file’s ACL itself specifies otherwise.

NFSv4 entities for which permissions can be specified
In addition to the garden-variety user:username and group:groupname specifiers, NFSv4 defines
several special entities that may be assigned permissions in an ACL. Most important among these
are owner@, group@, and everyone@, which correspond to the traditional categories in the 9-bit
permission model.
NFSv4 has several differences from POSIX. For one thing, it has no default entity, used in POSIX
to control ACL inheritance. Instead, any individual access control entry (ACE) can be flagged as
inheritable (see ACL inheritance in NFSv4, below). NFSv4 also does not use a mask to reconcile
the permissions specified in a file’s mode with its ACL. The mode is required to be consistent
with the settings specified for owner@, group@, and everyone@, and filesystems that implement NFSv4
ACLs must preserve this consistency when either the mode or the ACL is updated.

NFSv4 access determination
The NFSv4 system differs from POSIX in that an ACE specifies only a partial set of permissions.
Each ACE is either an “allow” ACE or a “deny” ACE; it acts more like a mask than an
authoritative specification of all possible permissions. Multiple ACEs can apply to any given
situation.
When deciding whether to allow a particular operation, the filesystem reads the ACL in order,
processing ACEs until either all requested permissions have been granted or some requested
permission has been denied. Only ACEs whose entity strings are compatible with the current
user’s identity are considered.

This iterative evaluation process means that owner@, group@, and everyone@ are not exact analogs of
the corresponding traditional mode bits. An ACL can contain multiple copies of these elements,
and their precedence is determined by their order of appearance in the ACL rather than by
convention. In particular, everyone@ really does apply to everyone, not just users who aren’t
addressed more specifically.
It’s possible for the filesystem to reach the end of an ACL without having obtained a definitive
answer to a permission query. The NFSv4 standard considers the result to be undefined, but real-
world implementations deny access, both because this is the convention used by Windows and
because it’s the only option that makes sense.

ACL inheritance in NFSv4
Like POSIX ACLs, NFSv4 ACLs allow newly created objects to inherit access control entries
from their enclosing directory. However, the NFSv4 system is a bit more powerful and a lot more
confusing. Here are the important points:

      You can flag any ACE as inheritable. Inheritance for newly created subdirectories
      (dir_inherit or d) and inheritance for newly created files (file_inherit or f) are flagged
      separately.

      You can apply different access control entries to new files and new directories by
      creating separate access control entries on the parent directory and flagging them
      appropriately. You can also apply a single ACE to all new child entities (of whatever
      type) by turning on both the d and f flags.

      From the perspective of access determination, access control entries have the same
      effect on the parent (source) directory whether or not they are inheritable. If you want
      an entry to apply to children but not to the parent directory itself, turn on the ACE’s
      inherit_only (i) flag.

      New subdirectories normally inherit two copies of each ACE: one with the
      inheritance flags turned off, which applies to the subdirectory itself; and one with the
      inherit_only flag turned on, which sets up the new subdirectory to propagate its inherited
      ACEs. You can suppress the creation of this second ACE by turning on the no_propagate
      (n) flag on the parent directory’s copy of the ACE. The end result is that the ACE
      propagates only to immediate children of the original directory.
      Don’t confuse the propagation of access control entries with true inheritance. Your
      setting an inheritance-related flag on an ACE simply means that the ACE will be
      copied to new entities. It does not create any ongoing relationship between the parent
      and its children. If you later change the ACE entries on the parent directory, the
      children are not updated.

Table 5.9 summarizes these various inheritance flags.

Table 5.9: NFSv4 ACE inheritance flags

NFSv4 ACL viewing
FreeBSD has extended the standard setfacl and getfacl commands used with POSIX ACLs to
handle NFSv4 ACLs as well. For example, here’s the ACL for a newly created directory:

The -v flag requests verbose permission names. (We indented the following output lines and
wrapped them at slashes to clarify structure.)
This newly created directory seems to have a complex ACL, but in fact this is just the 9-bit mode
translated into ACLese. It is not necessary for the filesystem to store an actual ACL, because the
ACL and the mode are equivalent. (As with POSIX ACLS, such lists are termed “minimal” or
“trivial.”) If the directory had an actual ACL, ls would show the mode bits with a + on the end
(i.e., drwxr-xr-x+) to mark its presence.

Each clause represents one access control entry. The format is

The entity can be the keywords owner@, group@, or everyone@, or a form such as user:username or
group:groupname. Both the permissions and the inheritance_flags are slash-separated lists of
options in the verbose output and ls-style bitmaps in short output. The type of an ACE is either
allow or deny.

The use of a colon as a subdivider within the entity field makes it tricky for scripts to parse
getfacl output no matter which output format you use. If you need to process ACLs
programmatically, it’s best to do so through a modular API rather than by parsing command
output.

Interactions between ACLs and modes
The mode and the ACL must remain consistent, so whenever you adjust one of these entities, the
other automatically updates to conform to it. It’s easy for the system to determine the appropriate
mode for a given ACL. However, emulating the traditional behavior of the mode with a series of
access control entries is trickier, especially in the context of an existing ACL. The system must
often generate multiple and seemingly inconsistent sets of entries for owner@, group@, and everyone@
that depend on evaluation order for their aggregate effect.
As a rule, it’s best to avoid tampering with a file’s or directory’s mode once you’ve applied an
ACL.

NFSv4 ACL setup
Because the permission system enforces consistency between a file’s mode and its ACL, all files
have at least a trivial ACL. Ergo, ACL changes are always updates.
You make ACL changes with the setfacl command, much as you do under the POSIX ACL
regime. The main difference is that order of access control entries is significant for an NFSv4
ACL, so you might need to insert new entries at a particular point within the existing ACL. You
can do that with the -a flag:

Here, position is the index of the existing access control entry (numbered starting at zero) in front
of which the new entries should be inserted. For example, the command
installs an access control entry on the file ben_keep_out that denies all permissions to the user
ben. The notation full_set is a shorthand notation that includes all possible permissions. (Written
out, those would currently be rwxpDdaARWcCos; compare with Table 5.8.)
Because the new access control entry is inserted at position zero, it’s the first one consulted and
takes precedence over later entries. Ben will be denied access to the file even if, for example, the
everyone@ permissions grant access to other users.

You can also use long names such as write_data to identify permissions. Separate multiple long
names with slashes. You cannot mix single-letter codes and long names in a single command.
As with POSIX ACLs, you can use the -m flag to add new entries to the end of the existing ACL.

As for complex changes to existing ACLs, you can best achieve them by dumping the ACL to a
text file, editing the access control entries in a text editor, and then reloading the entire ACL. For
example:

setfacl’s -b option removes the existing ACL before adding the access control entries listed in
file.acl. Its inclusion lets you delete entries simply by removing them from the text file.
