6 Software Installation and Management

The installation, configuration, and management of software is a large part of most sysadmins’
jobs. Administrators respond to installation and configuration requests from users, apply updates
to fix security problems, and supervise transitions to new software releases that may offer both
new features and incompatibilities. Generally, administrators perform all the following tasks:

      Automating mass installations of operating systems
      Maintaining custom OS configurations
      Keeping systems and applications patched and up to date
      Tracking software licenses

      Managing add-on software packages

The process of configuring an off-the-shelf distribution or software package to conform to your
needs (and to your local conventions for security, file placement, and network topology) is often
referred to as “localization.” This chapter explores some techniques and software that help
reduce the pain of software installation and make these tasks scale more gracefully. We also
discuss the installation procedure for each of our example operating systems, including some
options for automated deployment that use common (platform-specific) tools.
6.1 OPERATING SYSTEM INSTALLATION
Linux distributions and FreeBSD have straightforward procedures for basic installation. For
physical hosts, installation typically involves booting from external USB storage or optical
media, answering a few basic questions, optionally configuring disk partitions, and then telling
the installer which software packages to install. Most systems, including all our example
distributions, include a “live” option on the installation media that lets you run the operating
system without actually installing it on a local disk.
Installing the base operating system from local media is fairly trivial thanks to the GUI
applications that shepherd you through the process. Table 6.1 lists pointers to detailed installation
instructions for each of our example systems.

Table 6.1: Installation documentation
Installing from the network
If you have to install an operating system on more than one computer, you will quickly reach the
limits of interactive installation. It’s time consuming, error prone, and boring to repeat the
standard installation process on hundreds of systems. You can minimize human errors with a
localization checklist, but even this measure does not remove all potential sources of variation.
To alleviate some of these problems, you can use network installation options to simplify
deployments. Network installations are appropriate for sites with more than ten or so systems.
The most common methods use DHCP and TFTP to boot the system sans physical media. They
then retrieve the OS installation files from a network server with HTTP, NFS, or FTP.
You can set up completely hands-free installations through PXE, the Preboot eXecution
Environment. This scheme is a standard from Intel that lets systems boot from a network
interface. It works especially well in virtualized environments.
PXE acts like a miniature OS that sits in a ROM on your network card. It exposes its network
capabilities through a standardized API for the system BIOS to use. This cooperation makes it
possible for a single boot loader to netboot any PXE-enabled PC without having to supply special
drivers for each network card.

     See this page for more information about DHCP.

The external (network) portion of the PXE protocol is straightforward and is similar to the
netboot procedures used on other architectures. A host broadcasts a DHCP “discover” request
with the PXE flag turned on, and a DHCP server or proxy responds with a DHCP packet that
includes PXE options (the name of a boot server and boot file). The client downloads its boot file
over TFTP (or, optionally, multicast TFTP) and then executes it. The PXE boot procedure is
depicted in Exhibit A.

Exhibit A: PXE boot and installation process
The DHCP, TFTP, and file servers can all be located on different hosts. The TFTP-provided boot
file includes a menu with pointers to the available OS boot images, which can then be retrieved
from the file server with HTTP, FTP, NFS, or some other network protocol.
PXE booting is most commonly used in conjunction with unattended installation tools such as
Red Hat’s kickstart or Debian’s preseeding system, as discussed in the upcoming sections. You
can also use PXE to boot diskless systems such as thin clients.

Cobbler, discussed here, includes some glue that makes netbooting much easier. However, you
will still need a working knowledge of the tools that underlie Cobbler, beginning with PXE.
Setting up PXE
The most widely used PXE boot system is H. Peter Anvin’s PXELINUX, which is part of his
SYSLINUX suite of boot loaders for every occasion. Check it out at syslinux.org. Another option
is iPXE (ipxe.org), which supports additional bootstrapping modes, including support for
wireless networks.
PXELINUX supplies a boot file that you install in the TFTP server’s tftpboot directory. To boot
from the network, a PC downloads the PXE boot loader and its configuration from the TFTP
server. The configuration file lists one or more options for operating systems to boot. The system
can boot through to a specific OS installation without any user intervention, or it can display a
custom boot menu.
PXELINUX uses the PXE API for its downloads and is therefore hardware independent all the
way through the boot process. Despite the name, PXELINUX is not limited to booting Linux.
You can deploy PXELINUX to install FreeBSD and other operating systems, including
Windows.

     See this page for more information about DHCP server software.

On the DHCP side, ISC’s (the Internet Systems Consortium’s) DHCP server is your best bet for
serving PXE information. Alternatively, try Dnsmasq (goo.gl/FNk7a), a lightweight server with
DNS, DHCP, and netboot support. Or simply use Cobbler, discussed below.
Using kickstart, the automated installer for Red Hat and CentOS
         Kickstart is a Red Hat-developed tool for performing automated installations. It is
         really just a scripting interface to the standard Red Hat installer software, Anaconda,
and depends both on the base distribution and on RPM packages. Kickstart is flexible and quite
smart about autodetecting the system’s hardware, so it works well for bare-metal and virtual
machines alike. Kickstart installs can be performed from optical media, the local hard drive,
NFS, FTP, or HTTP.

Setting up a kickstart configuration file
Kickstart’s behavior is controlled by a single configuration file, generally called ks.cfg. The
format of this file is straightforward. If you’re visually inclined, Red Hat’s handy GUI tool
system-config-kickstart lets you point and click your way to ks.cfg nirvana.
A kickstart config file consists of three ordered parts. The first part is the command section,
which specifies options such as language, keyboard, and time zone. This section also specifies
the source of the distribution with the url option. In the following example, it’s a host called
installserver.

Here’s an example of a complete command section:

Kickstart uses graphical mode by default, which defeats the goal of unattended installation. The
text keyword at the top of the example fixes this.
The rootpw option sets the new machine’s root password. The default is to specify the password in
cleartext, which presents a serious security problem. Always use the --iscrypted flag to specify a
hashed password. To encrypt a password for use with kickstart, use openssl passwd -1. Still, this
option leaves all your systems with the same root password. Consider running a postboot process
to change the password at build time.
The clearpart and part directives specify a list of disk partitions and their sizes. You can include the -
-grow option to expand one of the partitions to fill any remaining space on the disk. This feature
makes it easy to accommodate systems that have different sizes of hard disk. Advanced
partitioning options, such as the use of LVM, are supported by kickstart but not by the system-
config-kickstart tool. Refer to Red Hat’s on-line documentation for a complete list of disk
layout options.

The second section is a list of packages to install. It begins with a %packages directive. The list can
contain individual packages, collections such as @ GNOME, or the notation @ Everything to include
the whole shebang. When selecting individual packages, specify only the package name, not the
version or the .rpm extension. Here’s an example:

In the third section of the kickstart configuration file, you can specify arbitrary shell commands
for kickstart to execute. There are two possible sets of commands: one introduced with %pre that
runs before installation, and one introduced with %post that runs afterward. Both sections have
some restrictions on the ability of the system to resolve hostnames, so it’s safest to use IP
addresses if you want to access the network. In addition, the postinstall commands are run in a
chrooted environment, so they cannot access the installation media.

The ks.cfg file is quite easy to generate programmatically. One option is to use the pykickstart
Python library, which can read and write kickstart configurations.
For example, suppose you wanted to install different sets of packages on servers and clients and
that you also have two separate physical locations that require slightly different customizations.
You could use pykickstart to write a script that transforms a master set of parameters into a set of
four separate configuration files, one for servers and one for clients in each office.
Changing the complement of packages would then be just a matter of changing the master
configuration file rather than of changing every possible configuration file. There may even be
cases in which you need to generate individualized configuration files for specific hosts. In this
situation, you would certainly want the final ks.cfg files to be automatically generated.

Building a kickstart server
Kickstart expects its installation files, called the installation tree, to be laid out as they are on the
distribution media, with packages stored in a directory called RedHat/RPMS on the server. If
you’re installing over the network via FTP, NFS, or HTTP, you can either copy the contents of
the distribution (leaving the tree intact), or you can simply use the distribution’s ISO images.
You can also add your own packages to this directory. There are, however, a couple of issues to
be aware of.
First, if you tell kickstart to install all packages (with an @ Everything in the packages section of
your ks.cfg), it installs add-on packages in alphabetical order once all the base packages have
been laid down. If your package depends on other packages that are not in the base set, you
might want to call your package something like zzmypackage.rpm to make sure that it’s
installed last.

If you don’t want to install all packages, either list your supplemental packages individually in
the %packages section of the ks.cfg file or add your packages to one or more of the collection lists.
Collection lists are specified by entries such as @ GNOME and stand for a predefined set of
packages whose members are enumerated in the file RedHat/base/comps on the server. The
collections are the lines that begin with 0 or 1; the number specifies whether the collection is
selected by default.
In general, it’s not a good idea to tamper with the standard collections. Leave them as Red Hat
defined them and explicitly name all your supplemental packages in the ks.cfg file.

Pointing kickstart at your config file

     See this page for more information about PXE.

Once you’ve created a config file, you have a couple of ways to get kickstart to use it. The
officially sanctioned method is to boot from external media (USB or DVD) and ask for a
kickstart installation by specifying linux inst.ks at the initial boot: prompt. PXE boot is also an
option.

If you don’t specify additional arguments, the system determines its network address with
DHCP. It then obtains the DHCP boot server and boot file options, attempts to mount the boot
server with NFS, and uses the value of the boot file option as its kickstart configuration file. If no
boot file has been specified, the system looks for a file called /kickstart/host_ip_address-
kickstart.
Alternatively, you can tell kickstart to get its configuration file in some other way by supplying a
path as an argument to the inst.ks option. There are several possibilities. For example, the
instruction
tells kickstart to use HTTP to download the file instead of NFS. (Prior to RHEL 7, the option was
called ks instead of inst.ks. Both are understood for now, but future versions may drop ks.)
To eliminate the use of boot media entirely, you’ll need to graduate to PXE. See this page for
more information about that.
Automating installation for Debian and Ubuntu
         Debian and Ubuntu can use the debian-installer for “preseeding,” the recommended
         method for automated installation. As with Red Hat’s kickstart, a preconfiguration file
answers questions asked by the installer.
All the interactive parts of the Debian installer use the debconf utility to decide which questions
to ask and what default answers to use. By giving debconf a database of preformulated answers,
you fully automate the installer. You can either generate the database by hand (it’s a text file), or
you can perform an interactive installation on an example system and then dump out your
debconf answers with the following commands:

Make the config file available on the net and then pass it to the kernel at installation time with the
following kernel argument:

The syntax of the preseed file, usually called preseed.cfg, is simple and is reminiscent of Red
Hat’s ks.cfg. The sample below has been shortened for simplicity.
Several options in this list simply disable dialogs that would normally require user interaction.
For example, the console-setup/ask_detect clause disables manual keymap selection.

This configuration tries to identify a network interface that’s actually connected to a network
(choose_interface select auto) and obtains network information through DHCP. The system hostname
and domain values are presumed to be furnished by DHCP and are not overridden.

Preseeded installations cannot use existing partitions; they must either use existing free space or
repartition the entire disk. The partman* lines in the code above are evidence that the partman-auto
package is being used for disk partitioning. You must specify a disk to install to unless the
system has only one. In this case, /dev/sda is used.
Several partitioning recipes are available.

       atomic puts all the system’s files in one partition.

       home creates a separate partition for /home.

       multi creates separate partitions for /home, /usr, /var, and /tmp.

You can create users with the passwd series of directives. As with kickstart configuration, we
strongly recommend the use of encrypted (hashed) password values. Preseed files are often
stored on HTTP servers and are apt to be discovered by curious users. (Of course, a hashed
password is still subject to brute force attack. Use a long, complex password.)

The task selection (tasksel) option chooses the type of Ubuntu system to install. Available values
include standard, ubuntu-desktop, dns-server, lamp-server, kubuntu-desktop, edubuntu-desktop, and xubuntu-desktop.

The sample preseed file shown above comes from the Ubuntu installation documentation found
at help.ubuntu.com. This guide contains full documentation for the syntax and usage of the
preseed file.
Although Ubuntu does not descend from the Red Hat lineage, it has grafted compatibility with
kickstart control files onto its own underlying installer. Ubuntu also includes the system-config-
kickstart tool for creating these files. However, the kickstart functionality in Ubuntu’s installer
is missing a number of important features that are supported by Red Hat’s Anaconda, such as
LVM and firewall configuration. We recommend sticking with the Debian installer unless you
have a good reason to choose kickstart (e.g., to maintain compatibility with your Red Hat
systems).
Netbooting with Cobbler, the open source Linux provisioning server
By far the easiest way to bring netbooting services to your network is with Cobbler, a project
originally written by Michael DeHaan, prolific open source developer. Cobbler enhances
kickstart to remove some of its most tedious and repetitive administrative elements. It bundles all
the important netboot features, including DHCP, DNS, and TFTP, and helps you manage the OS
images used to build physical and virtual machines. Cobbler includes command-line and web
interfaces for administration.
Templates are perhaps Cobbler’s most interesting and useful feature. You’ll frequently need
different kickstart and preseed settings for different host profiles. For example, you might have
web servers in two data centers that, apart from network settings, require the same configuration.
You can use Cobbler “snippets” to share sections of the configuration between the two types of
hosts.
A snippet is just a collection of shell commands. For example, this snippet adds a public key to
the authorized SSH keys for the root user:

You save the snippet to Cobbler’s snippet directory, then refer to it in a kickstart template. For
example, if you saved the snippet above as root_pubkey_snippet, you could refer to it in a
template as follows.

Use Cobbler templates to customize disk partitions, conditionally install packages, customize
time zones, add custom package repositories, and perform any other kind of localization
requirement.
Cobbler can also create new virtual machines under a variety of hypervisors. It can integrate with
a configuration management system to provision machines once they boot.
Cobbler packages are available in the standard repositories for our sample Linux distributions.
You can also obtain packages and documentation from the Cobbler GitHub project at
cobbler.github.io.
Automating FreeBSD installation
The FreeBSD bsdinstall utility is a text-based installer that kicks off when you boot a computer
from a FreeBSD installation CD or DVD. Its automation facilities are rudimentary compared to
Red Hat’s kickstart or Debian’s preseed, and the documentation is limited. The best source of
information is the bsdinstall man page.
Creating a customized, unattended installation image is a tedious affair that involves the
following steps.
   1. Download the latest installation ISO (CD image) from ftp.freebsd.org.
   2. Unpack the ISO image to a local directory.

   3. Make any desired edits in the cloned directory.
   4. Create a new ISO image from your customized layout and burn it to media, or create a
      PXE boot image for netbooting.
FreeBSD’s version of tar understands ISO format in addition to many other formats, so you can
simply extract the CD image files to a scratch directory. Create a subdirectory before extracting,
because the ISO file unpacks to the current directory.

Once you’ve extracted the contents of the image, you can customize them to reflect your desired
installation settings. For example, you could add custom DNS resolvers by editing
FreeBSD/etc/resolv.conf to include your own name servers.
bsdinstall normally requires users to select settings such as the type of terminal in use, the
keyboard mapping, and the desired style of disk partitioning. You can bypass the interactive
questions by putting a file called installerconfig in the etc directory of the system image.

This file’s format is described in the bsdinstall man page. It has two sections:

      The preamble, which sets certain installation settings

      A shell script which executes after installation completes

We refer you to the man page rather than regurgitate its contents here. Among other settings, it
contains options for installing directly to a ZFS root and to other custom partitioning schemes.
Once your customizations are complete, you can create a new ISO file with the mkisofs
command. Create a PXE image or burn the ISO to optical media for an unattended installation.
The mfsBSD project (mfsbsd.vx.sk) is a set of scripts that generate a PXE-friendly ISO image.
The basic FreeBSD 11 image weighs in at a lean 47MiB. See the source scripts at
github.com/mmatuska/mfsbsd.
6.2 MANAGING PACKAGES
UNIX and Linux software assets (source code, build files, documentation, and configuration
templates) were traditionally distributed as compressed archives, usually gzipped tarballs (.tar.gz
or .tgz files). This was OK for developers but inconvenient for end users and administrators.
These source archives had to be manually compiled and built for each system on each release of
the software, a tedious and error prone process.
Packaging systems emerged to simplify and facilitate the job of software management. Packages
include all the files needed to run a piece of software, including precompiled binaries,
dependency information, and configuration file templates that can be customized by
administrators. Perhaps most importantly, packaging systems try to make the installation process
as atomic as possible. If an error occurs during installation, a package can be backed out or
reapplied. New versions of software can be installed with a simple package update.

Package installers are typically aware of configuration files and will not normally overwrite local
customizations made by a system administrator. They either back up existing config files that
they change or supply example config files under a different name. If you find that a newly
installed package breaks something on your system, you can, theoretically, back it out to restore
your system to its original state. Of course, theory != practice, so don’t try this on a production
system without testing it first.
Packaging systems define a dependency model that allows package maintainers to ensure that the
libraries and support infrastructure on which their applications depend are properly installed.
Unfortunately, the dependency graphs are sometimes imperfect. Unlucky administrators can find
themselves in package dependency hell, a state where it’s impossible to update a package
because of version incompatibilities among its dependencies. Fortunately, recent versions of
packaging software seem to be less susceptible to this effect.
Packages can run scripts at various points during the installation, so they can do much more than
just disgorge new files. Packages frequently add new users and groups, run sanity checks, and
customize settings according to the environment.
Confusingly, package versions do not always correspond directly to the versions of the software
that they install. For example, consider the following RPM package for docker-engine:

The package itself claims version 1.13.0, but the docker binary reports version 1.13.1. In this
case, the distribution maintainers backported changes and incremented the minor package
version. Be aware that the package version string is not necessarily an accurate indication of the
software version that is actually installed.
You can create packages to facilitate the distribution of your own localizations or software. For
example, you can create a package that, when installed, reads localization information for a
machine (or gets it from a central database) and uses that information to set up local
configuration files.

You can also bundle local applications as packages (complete with dependencies) or create
packages for third party applications that aren’t normally distributed in package format. You can
version your packages and use the dependency mechanism to upgrade machines automatically
when a new version of your localization package is released. We refer you to fpm, the Effing
Package Manager, which is the easiest way to get started building packages for multiple
platforms. You can find it at github.com/jordansissel/fpm.
You can also use the dependency mechanism to create groups of packages. For example, you can
create a package that installs nothing of its own but depends on many other packages. Installing
the package with dependencies turned on results in all the packages being installed in a single
step.
6.3 LINUX PACKAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
Two package formats are in common use on Linux systems. Red Hat, CentOS, SUSE, Amazon
Linux, and several other distributions use RPM, a recursive acronym that expands to “RPM
Package Manager.” Debian and Ubuntu use the separate but equally popular .deb format. The
two formats are functionally similar.
Both the RPM and .deb packaging systems now function as dual-layer soup-to-nuts
configuration management tools. At the lowest level are the tools that install, uninstall, and query
packages: rpm for RPM and dpkg for .deb.

On top of these commands are systems that know how to find and download packages from the
Internet, analyze interpackage dependencies, and upgrade all the packages on a system. yum, the
Yellowdog Updater, Modified, works with the RPM system. APT, the Advanced Package Tool,
originated in the .deb universe but works well with both .deb and RPM packages.
On the next couple of pages, we review the low-level commands rpm and dpkg. In the section
High-level Linux package management systems, we discuss the comprehensive update systems
APT and yum, which build on these low-level facilities. Your day-to-day administration
activities will usually involve the high-level tools, but you’ll occasionally need to wade into the
deep end of the pool with rpm and dpkg.
rpm: manage RPM packages
          The rpm command installs, verifies, and queries the status of packages. It formerly
          built them as well, but this function has now been relegated to a separate command
called rpmbuild. rpm options have complex interactions and can be used together only in
certain combinations. It’s most useful to think of rpm as if it were several different commands
that happen to share the same name.
The mode you tell rpm to enter (such as -i or -q) specifies which of rpm’s multiple personalities
you are hoping to access. rpm --help lists all the options broken down by mode, but it’s worth
your time to read the man page in some detail if you will frequently be dealing with RPM
packages.
The bread-and-butter options are -i (install), -U (upgrade), -e (erase), and -q (query). The -q
option is a bit tricky; you must supply an additional command-line flag to pose a specific
question. For example, the command rpm -qa lists all the packages installed on the system.
Let’s look at an example. We need to install a new version of OpenSSH because of a recent
security fix. Once we’ve downloaded the package, we’ll run rpm -U to replace the older version
with the newer.

D’oh! Perhaps it’s not so simple after all. Here we see that the currently installed version of
OpenSSH, 6.6.1p1-23, is required by several other packages. rpm won’t let us upgrade
OpenSSH to 6.6.1p1-33 because the change might affect the operation of these other packages.
This type of conflict happens all the time, and it’s a major motivation for the development of
systems like APT and yum. In real life we wouldn’t attempt to untangle the dependencies by
hand, but let’s continue with rpm alone for the purpose of this example.
We could force the upgrade with the --force option, but that’s usually a bad idea. The
dependency information is there to save time and trouble, not just to get in the way. There’s
nothing like a broken SSH on a remote system to ruin a sysadmin’s morning.
Instead, we’ll grab updated versions of the dependent packages as well. If we were smart, we
could have determined that other packages depended on OpenSSH before we even attempted the
upgrade:
Suppose that we’ve obtained updated copies of all the packages. We could install them one at a
time, but rpm is smart enough to handle them all at once. If multiple RPMs are listed on the
command line, rpm sorts them by dependency before installation.

Cool! Looks like it succeeded. Note that rpm understands which package we are talking about
even though we didn’t specify the package’s full name or version. (Unfortunately, rpm does not
restart sshd after the installation. You’d need to manually restart it to complete the upgrade.)
dpkg: manage .deb packages
           Just as RPM packages have the all-in-one rpm command, Debian packages have the
           dpkg command. Useful options include --install, --remove, and -l to list the packages
that have been installed on the system. A dpkg --install of a package that’s already on the system
removes the previous version before installing.
Running dpkg -l | grep package is a convenient way to determine if a particular package is
installed. For example, to search for an HTTP server, try

This search found the lighttpd software, an excellent, open source, lightweight web server. The
leading ii indicates that the software is installed.

Suppose that the Ubuntu security team recently released a fix to nvi to patch a potential security
problem. After grabbing the patch, we run dpkg to install it. As you can see, it’s much chattier
than rpm and tells us exactly what it’s doing.

We can now use dpkg -l to verify that the installation worked. The -l flag accepts an optional
prefix pattern to match, so we can just search for nvi.

Our installation seems to have gone smoothly.
6.4 HIGH-LEVEL LINUX PACKAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
Metapackage management systems such as APT and yum share several goals:

      To simplify the task of locating and downloading packages
      To automate the process of updating or upgrading systems

      To facilitate the management of interpackage dependencies

Clearly, these systems include more than just client-side commands. They all require that
distribution maintainers organize their offerings in an agreed-on way so that the software can be
accessed and reasoned about by clients.
Since no single supplier can encompass the entire “world of Linux software,” the systems all
allow for the existence of multiple software repositories. Repositories can be local to your
network, so these systems make a dandy foundation for creating your own internal software
distribution system.
     The Red Hat Network is closely tied to Red Hat Enterprise Linux. It’s a commercial service
     that costs money and offers more in terms of attractive GUIs, site-wide system
management, and automation ability than do APT and yum. It is a shiny, hosted version of Red
Hat’s expensive and proprietary Satellite Server. The client side can reference yum and APT
repositories, and this ability has allowed distributions such as CentOS to adapt the client GUI for
nonproprietary use.
APT is better documented than the Red Hat Network, is significantly more portable, and is free.
It’s also more flexible in terms of what you can do with it. APT originated in the world of Debian
and dpkg, but it has been extended to encompass RPMs, and versions that work with all our
example distributions are available. It’s the closest thing we have at this point to a universal
standard for software distribution.

yum is an RPM-specific analog of APT. It’s included by default on Red Hat Enterprise Linux
and CentOS, although it runs on any RPM-based system, provided that you can point it toward
appropriately formatted repositories.
We like APT and consider it a solid choice if you run Debian or Ubuntu and want to set up your
own automated package distribution network. See the section APT: the Advanced Package Tool
for more information.
Package repositories
Linux distributors maintain software repositories that work hand-in-hand with their chosen
package management systems. The default configuration for the package management system
usually points to one or more well-known web or FTP servers that are under the distributor’s
control.
However, it isn’t immediately obvious what such repositories should contain. Should they
include only the sets of packages blessed as formal, major releases? Formal releases plus current
security updates? Up-to-date versions of all the packages that existed in the formal releases?
Useful third party software not officially supported by the distributor? Source code? Binaries for
multiple hardware architectures? When you run apt upgrade or yum upgrade to bring the
system up to date, what exactly should that mean?
In general, package management systems must answer all these questions and must make it easy
for sites to select the cross-sections they want to include in their software “world.” The following
concepts help structure this process.

      A “release” is a self-consistent snapshot of the package universe. Before the Internet
      era, named OS releases were more or less immutable and were associated with one
      specific time; security patches were made available separately. These days, a release
      is a more nebulous concept. Releases evolve over time as packages are updated.
      Some releases, such as Red Hat Enterprise Linux, are specifically designed to evolve
      slowly; by default, only security updates are incorporated. Other releases, such as
      beta versions, change frequently and dramatically. But in all cases, the release is the
      baseline, the target, the “thing I want to update my system to look like.”
      A “component” is a subset of the software within a release. Distributions partition
      themselves differently, but one common distinction is that between core software
      blessed by the distributor and extra software made available by the broader
      community. Another distinction that’s common in the Linux world is the one between
      the free, open source portions of a release and the parts that are tainted by some kind
      of restrictive licensing agreement.

      Of particular note from an administrative standpoint are minimally active
      components that include only security fixes. Some releases allow you to combine a
      security component with an immutable baseline component to create a relatively
      stable version of the distribution, even though the mainline distribution may evolve
      much faster.

      An “architecture” represents a class of hardware. The expectation is that machines
      within an architecture class are similar enough that they can all run the same binaries.
      Architectures are instances of releases, for example, “Ubuntu Xenial Xerus for
      x86_64.” Since components are subdivisions of releases, there’s a corresponding
      architecture-specific instance for each of them as well.
      Individual packages are the elements that make up components, and therefore,
      indirectly, releases. Packages are usually architecture-specific and are versioned
      independently of the main release and of other packages. The correspondence
      between packages and releases is implicit in the way the network repository is set up.

The existence of components that aren’t maintained by the distributor (e.g., Ubuntu’s “universe”
and “multiverse”) raises the question of how these components relate to the core OS release. Can
they really be said to be “a component” of the specific release, or are they some other kind of
animal entirely?

From a package management perspective, the answer is clear: extras are a true component. They
are associated with a specific release, and they evolve in tandem with it. The separation of
control is interesting from an administrative standpoint, but it doesn’t affect the package
distribution systems, except that multiple repositories might need to be manually added by the
administrator.
RHN: the Red Hat Network
     With Red Hat having gracefully departed from the consumer Linux business, the Red Hat
     Network has become the system management platform for Red Hat Enterprise Linux. You
purchase the right to access the Red Hat Network by subscribing. At its simplest, you can use the
Red Hat Network as a glorified web portal and mailing list. Used in this way, the Red Hat
Network is not much different from the patch notification mailing lists that have been run by
various UNIX vendors for years. But more features are available if you’re willing to pay for
them. For current pricing and features, see rhn.redhat.com.
The Red Hat Network presents a web-based interface for downloading new packages as well as a
command-line alternative. Once you register, your machines get all the patches and bug fixes that
they need without your ever having to intervene.
The downside of automatic registration is that Red Hat decides what updates you need. You
might consider how much you really trust Red Hat (and the software maintainers whose products
they package) not to screw things up.
A reasonable compromise might be to sign up one machine in your organization for automatic
updates. You can take snapshots from that machine at periodic intervals to test as possible
candidates for internal releases.
APT: the Advanced Package Tool
APT is one of the most mature package management systems. It’s possible to upgrade an entire
system full of software with a single apt command or even (as with the Red Hat Network) to
have your boxes continuously keep themselves up to date without human intervention.
The first rule of using APT on Ubuntu systems (and indeed all management of Debian packages)
is to ignore the existence of dselect, which acts as a front end for the Debian package system. It’s
not a bad idea, but the user interface is poor and can be intimidating to the novice user. Some
documentation will try to steer you toward dselect, but stay strong and stick with apt.
If you are using APT to manage a stock Ubuntu installation from a standard repository mirror,
the easiest way to see the available packages is to visit the master list at packages.ubuntu.com.
The web site includes a nice search interface. If you set up your own APT server (see this page),
then of course you will know what packages you have made available and you can list them in
whatever way you want.
Distributions commonly include dummy packages that exist only to claim other packages as
prerequisites. apt downloads and upgrades prerequisite packages as needed, so the dummy
packages make it easy to install or upgrade several packages as a block. For example, installing
the gnome-desktop-environment package obtains and installs all the packages necessary to run
the GNOME UI.

APT includes a suite of low-level commands like apt-get and apt-cache that are wrapped for
most purposes by an omnibus apt command. The wrapper is a later addition to the system, so
you’ll still see occasional references to the low-level commands on the web and in
documentation. To a first approximation, commands that look similar are in fact the same
command. There’s no difference between apt install and apt-get install, for example.
Once you have set up your /etc/apt/sources.list file (described in detail below) and know the
name of a package that you want, the only remaining task is to run apt update to refresh apt’s
cache of package information. After that, just run apt install package-name as a privileged user
to install the package. The same command updates a package that has already been installed.
Suppose you want to install a new version of the sudo package that fixes a security bug. First,
it’s always wise to do an apt update:

Now you can actually fetch the package. Note the use of sudo to fetch the new sudo package
—apt can even upgrade packages that are in use!
Repository configuration
Configuring APT is straightforward; pretty much everything you need to know can be found in
Ubuntu’s community documentation on package management:
  help.ubuntu.com/community/AptGet/Howto
The most important configuration file is /etc/apt/sources.list, which tells APT where to get its
packages. Each line specifies the following:

      A type of package, currently deb or deb-src for Debian-style packages or rpm or rpm-src
      for RPMs
      A URL that points to a file, HTTP server, or FTP server from which to fetch
      packages

      A “distribution” (really, a release name) that lets you deliver multiple versions of
      packages
      A potential list of components (categories of packages within a release)

Unless you want to set up your own APT repository or cache, the default configuration generally
works fine. Source packages are downloaded from the entries beginning with deb-src.

On Ubuntu systems, you’ll almost certainly want to include the “universe” component, which
accesses the larger world of Linux open source software. The “multiverse” packages include
non-open-source content, such as some VMware tools and components.
As long as you’re editing the sources.list file, you may want to retarget the individual entries to
point to your closest mirror. A full list of Ubuntu mirrors can be found at
launchpad.net/ubuntu/+archivemirrors. This is a dynamic (and long) list of mirrors that changes
regularly, so be sure to keep an eye on it between releases.

Make sure that security.ubuntu.com is listed as a source so that you have access to the latest
security patches.
An example /etc/apt/sources.list file
The following example uses archive.ubuntu.com as a package source for the “main” components
of Ubuntu (those that are fully supported by the Ubuntu team). In addition, this sources.list file
includes unsupported but open source “universe” packages, and non-free, unsupported packages
in the “multiverse” component. There is also a repository for updates or bug-fixed packages in
each component. Finally, the last six lines are for security updates.

The distribution and components fields help APT navigate the filesystem hierarchy of the Ubuntu
repository, which has a standardized layout. The root distribution is the working title given to
each release, such as trusty, xenial, or yakkety. The available components are typically called main,
universe, multiverse, and restricted. Add the universe and multiverse repositories only if you are comfortable
having unsupported (and license-restricted, in the case of multiverse) software in your environment.

After you update the sources.list file, run apt-get update to force APT to react to your changes.
Creation of a local repository mirror
If you plan to use apt on a large number of machines, you will probably want to cache packages
locally. Downloading a copy of each package for every machine is not a sensible use of external
bandwidth. A mirror of the repository is easy to configure and convenient for local
administration. Just make sure to keep it updated with the latest security patches.
The best tool for the job is the handy apt-mirror package, which is available from apt-
mirror.github.io. You can also install the package from the universe component with sudo apt
install apt-mirror.
Once installed, apt-mirror drops a file called mirror.list in /etc/apt. It’s a shadow version of
sources.list, but it’s used only as a source for mirroring operations. By default, mirror.list
conveniently contains all the repositories for the running version of Ubuntu.
To actually mirror the repositories in mirror.list, just run apt-mirror as root:

By default, apt-mirror puts its repository copies in /var/spool/apt-mirror. Feel free to change
this by uncommenting the set base_path directive in mirror.list, but be aware that you must then
create mirror, skel, and var subdirectories under the new mirror root.
apt-mirror takes a long time to run on its first pass because it is mirroring many gigabytes of
data (currently ~40GB per Ubuntu release). Subsequent executions are faster and should be run
automatically out of cron. You can run the clean.sh script from the var subdirectory of your
mirror to clean out obsolete files.

To start using your mirror, share the base directory through HTTP, using a web server of your
choice. We like to use symbolic links to the web root. For instance:

To make clients use your local mirror, edit their sources.list files just as if you were selecting a
nonlocal mirror.
APT automation
Use cron to schedule regular apt runs. Even if you don’t install packages automatically, you may
want to run apt update regularly to keep your package summaries up to date.
apt upgrade downloads and installs new versions of any packages that are currently installed on
the local machine. Note that apt upgrade is defined slightly differently from the low-level
command apt-get upgrade, but apt upgrade is usually what you want. (It’s equivalent to apt-
get dist-upgrade --with-new-pkgs.) apt upgrade might want to delete some packages that it
views as irreconcilably incompatible with the upgraded system, so be prepared for potential
surprises.
If you really want to play with fire, have machines perform the upgrade in an unattended fashion
by including the -y option to apt upgrade. It answers any confirmation questions that apt might
ask with an enthusiastic “Yes!” Be aware that some updates, such as kernel packages, might not
take effect until after a system reboot.
It’s probably not a good idea to perform automated upgrades directly from a distribution’s
mirror. However, in concert with your own APT servers, packages, and release control system,
this is a perfect way to keep clients in sync. A one-liner like the following keeps a box up to date
with its APT server.

Use this command in a cron job if you want it to run on a regular schedule. You can also refer to
it from a system startup script to make the machine update at boot time. See this page for more
information about cron; see Chapter 2, Booting and System Management Daemons, for more
information about startup scripts.
If you run updates out of cron on many machines, it’s a good idea to use time randomization to
make sure that everyone doesn’t try to update at once.

If you don’t quite trust your source of packages, consider automatically downloading all changed
packages without installing them. Use apt’s --download-only option to request this behavior,
then review the packages by hand and install the ones you want to update. Downloaded packages
are put in /var/cache/apt, and over time this directory can grow to be quite large. Clean out the
unused files from this directory with apt-get autoclean.
yum: release management for RPM
yum, the Yellowdog Updater, Modified, is a metapackage manager based on RPM. It may be a
bit unfair to call yum an APT clone, but it’s thematically and implementationally similar,
although cleaner and slower in practice.
On the server-side, the yum-arch command compiles a database of header information from a
large set of packages (often an entire release). The header database is then shared along with the
packages through HTTP. Clients use the yum command to fetch and install packages; yum
figures out dependency constraints and does whatever additional work is needed to complete the
installation of the requested packages. If a requested package depends on other packages, yum
downloads and installs those packages as well.
The similarities between apt and yum extend to the command-line options they understand. For
example, yum install foo downloads and installs the most recent version of the foo package (and
its dependencies, if necessary). There is at least one treacherous difference, though: apt update
refreshes apt’s package information cache, but yum update updates every package on the
system (it’s analogous to apt upgrade). To add to the confusion, yum upgrade is the same as
yum update but with obsolescence processing enabled.
yum does not match on partial package names unless you include globbing characters (such as *
and ?) to explicitly request this behavior. For example, yum update 'lib*' refreshes all packages
whose name starts with “lib”. Remember to quote the globbing characters so the shell doesn’t
interfere with them.

Unlike apt, yum defaults to validating its package information cache against the contents of the
network repository every time you run it. Use the -C option to prevent the validation and yum
makecache to update the local cache (it takes awhile to run). Unfortunately, the -C option
doesn’t do much to improve yum’s sluggish performance.
yum’s configuration file is /etc/yum.conf. It includes general options and pointers to package
repositories. Multiple repositories can be active at once, and each repository can be associated
with multiple URLs.
A replacement for yum called DNF (for Dandified Yum) is under active development. It’s
already the default package manager for Fedora and will eventually replace yum completely.
DNF sports better dependency resolution and an improved API, among other features. Visit
dnf.baseurl.org to learn more.
6.5 FREEBSD SOFTWARE MANAGEMENT
     FreeBSD has had packaging facilities for several releases, but it’s only now transitioning to
     a completely package-centric distribution model in which most elements of the core OS are
defined as packages. FreeBSD’s recent releases have segregated software into three general
categories:

      A “base system,” which includes a bundled set of core software and utilities
      A set of binary packages managed with the pkg command

      A separate “ports” system which downloads source code, applies FreeBSD-specific
      patches, then builds and installs it

As of FreeBSD 11, the lines between these territories have become even more muddled. The base
system has been packagized, but the old scheme for managing the base system as one unit is still
in place, too. Many software packages can be installed either as binary packages or as ports, with
essentially similar results but different implications for future updates. However, cross-coverage
is not complete; some things can only be installed as a port or as a package.
Part of the project definition for FreeBSD 12 is to shift the system more decisively toward
universal package management. The base system and ports may both continue to exist in some
form (it’s currently too early to tell exactly how things will work out), but the future direction is
clear.
Accordingly, try to manage add-on software with pkg to the extent possible. Avoid ports unless
the software you want has no packagized version or you need to customize compile-time options.
Another peculiar remnant of the big-iron UNIX era is FreeBSD’s insistence that add-on packages
are “local,” even though they are compiled by FreeBSD and released as part of an official
package repository. Packages install binaries under /usr/local, and most configuration files end
up in /usr/local/etc rather than /etc.
The base system
The base system is updated as a single unit and is functionally distinct from any add-on packages
(at least in theory). The base system is maintained in a Subversion repository. You can browse
the source tree, including all the source branches, at svnweb.freebsd.org.
Several development branches are defined:

      The CURRENT branch is meant only for active development purposes. It is the first
      to receive new features and fixes but is not widely tested by the user community.
      The STABLE branch is regularly updated with improvements intended for the next major
      release. It includes new features but maintains package compatibility and undergoes some
      testing. It may introduce bugs or breaking changes and is recommended only for the
      adventurous.
      The RELEASE branch is forked from STABLE when a release target is achieved. It
      remains mostly static. The only updates to RELEASE are security fixes and fixes for
      serious bugs. Official ISO images derive from the RELEASE branch, and that branch
      is the only one recommended for use on production systems.

View your system’s current branch with uname -r.

Run the freebsd-update command to keep your system updated with the latest packages.
Fetching updates and installing them are separate operations, but you can combine the two into a
single command line:

This command retrieves and installs the latest base binaries. It’s available only for the RELEASE
branch; binaries are not built for the STABLE and CURRENT branches. You can use the same
tool to upgrade between releases of the system. For example:
pkg: the FreeBSD package manager
pkg is intuitive and fast. It’s the easiest way to install software that isn’t already included in the
base system. Use pkg help for a quick reference on the available subcommands, or pkg help
command to display the man page for a particular subcommand. Table 6.2 lists some of the most
frequently used subcommands.

Table 6.2: Example pkg subcommands

When you install packages with pkg install, pkg consults the local package catalog, then
downloads the requested package from the repository at pkg.FreeBSD.org. Once the package is
installed, it’s registered in a SQLite database kept in /var/db/pkg/local.sqlite. Take care not to
delete this file lest your system lose track of which packages have been installed. Create backups
of the database with the pkg backup subcommand.
pkg version, a subcommand for comparing package versions, has an idiosyncratic syntax. It uses
the =, <, and > characters to show packages that are current, older than the latest available
version, or newer than the current version. Use the following command to list packages that have
updates:

This command compares all installed packages to the index (-I), looking for those that are not (-
L) the current version (=), and printing verbose information (-v).
pkg search is faster than Google for finding packages. For example, pkg search dns finds all
packages with “dns” in their names. The search term is a regular expression, so you can search
for something like pkg search ^apache. See pkg help search for details.
The ports collection
FreeBSD ports are a collection of all the software that FreeBSD can build from source. After the
ports tree is initialized, you’ll find all the available software in categorized subdirectories of
/usr/ports. To initialize the ports tree, use the portsnap utility:

To update the ports tree in one command, use portsnap fetch update.

It takes some time to download the ports metadata. The download includes pointers to the source
code for all the ports, plus any associated patches for FreeBSD compatibility. When installation
of the metadata is complete, you can search for software, then build and install anything you
need.
For example, the zsh shell is not included in the FreeBSD base. Use the whereis utility to search
for zsh, then build and install from the ports tree:

To remove software installed through the ports system, run make deinstall from the appropriate
directory.
There’s more than one way to update ports, but we prefer the portmaster utility. First install
portmaster from the ports collection:

Run portmaster -L to see all the ports having updates available, and update them all at once
with portmaster -a.
You can also install ports through the portmaster. In fact, it’s somewhat more convenient than
the typical make-based process because you don’t need to leave your current directory. To install
zsh:

If you need to free up some disk space, clean up the ports’ working directories with portmaster -
c.
6.6 SOFTWARE LOCALIZATION AND CONFIGURATION
Adapting systems to your local (or cloud) environment is one of the prime battlegrounds of
system administration. Addressing localization issues in a structured and reproducible way helps
avoid the creation of snowflake systems that are impossible to recover after a major incident.
We have more to say in this book about these issues. In particular, Chapter 23, Configuration
Management, and Chapter 26, Continuous Integration and Delivery, discuss tools that structure
these tasks. Configuration management systems are your go-to tools for installing and
configuring software in a reproducible manner. They are the master key to sane localization.

Implementation issues aside, how do you know if your local environment is properly designed?
Here are a few points to consider:

      Nonadministrators should not have root privileges. Any need for root privileges in the
      course of normal operations is suspicious and probably indicates that something is
      fishy with your local configuration.
      Systems should facilitate work and not get in users’ way. Users do not wreck the
      system intentionally. Design internal security so that it guards against unintentional
      errors and the widespread dissemination of administrative privileges.
      Misbehaving users are learning opportunities. Interview them before you chastise
      them for not following proper procedures. Users frequently respond to
      inefficient administrative procedures by working around them, so always consider the
      possibility that noncompliance is an indication of architectural problems.
      Be customer-centered. Talk to users and ask them which tasks they find difficult in
      your current configuration. Find ways to make these tasks simpler.

      Your personal preferences are yours. Let your users have their own. Offer choices
      wherever possible.
      When administrative decisions affect users’ experience of the system, be aware of the
      reasons for your decisions. Let your reasons be known.
      Keep your local documentation up to date and easily accessible. See this page for
      more information on this topic.
Organizing your localization
If your site has a thousand computers and each computer has its own configuration, you will
spend a major portion of your working time figuring out why one box has a particular problem
and another doesn’t. Clearly, the solution is to make every computer the same…right? But real-
world constraints and the varying needs of users typically make this solution impossible.
There’s a big difference in administrability between multiple configurations and countless
configurations. The trick is to split your setup into manageable bits. Some parts of the
localization apply to all managed hosts, others apply to only a few, and still others are specific to
individual boxes. Even with the convenience of configuration management tools, try not to allow
too much drift among systems.
However you design your localization system, make sure that all original data is kept in a
revision control system. This precaution lets you keep track of which changes have been
thoroughly tested and are ready for deployment. In addition, it lets you identify the originator of
any problematic changes. The more people involved in the process, the more important this last
consideration becomes.
Structuring updates
In addition to performing initial installations, you will also need to continually roll out updates.
This remains one of the most important security tasks. Keep in mind, though, that different hosts
have different needs for concurrency, stability, and uptime.
Do not roll out new software releases en masse. Instead, stage rollouts according to a gradual
plan that accommodates other groups’ needs and allows time for problems to be discovered while
their potential to cause damage is still limited. This sometimes referred to as a “canary” release
process, named for the fabled “canary in the coal mine.” In addition, never update critical servers
until you have some confidence in the changes you are contemplating. Avoid rolling out changes
on Fridays unless you’re prepared for a long weekend in front of the terminal.
It’s usually advantageous to separate the base OS release from the localization release.
Depending on the stability needs of your environment, you might choose to use minor local
releases only for bug fixing. However, we have found that adding new features in small doses
yields a smoother operation than queuing up changes into “horse pill” releases that risk a major
disruption of service. This principle is closely related to the idea of continuous integration and
deployment; see Chapter 26.
Limiting the field of play
It’s often a good idea to specify a maximum number of “releases” you are willing to have in play
at any given time. Some administrators see no reason to fix software that isn’t broken. They point
out that gratuitously upgrading systems costs time and money and that “cutting edge” all too
often means “bleeding edge.” Those who put these principles into practice must be willing to
collect an extensive catalog of active releases.
By contrast, the “lean and mean” crowd point to the inherent complexity of releases and the
difficulty of comprehending (let alone managing) a random collection of releases dating years
into the past. Their trump cards are security patches, which must typically be applied universally
and on a strict schedule. Patching outdated versions of the operating system is often infeasible, so
administrators are faced with the choice of skipping updates on some computers or crash-
upgrading these machines to a newer internal release. Not good.
Neither of these perspectives is provably correct, but we tend to side with those who favor a
limited number of releases. Better to perform your upgrades on your own schedule rather than
one dictated by an external emergency.
Testing
It’s important to test changes before unleashing them on the world. At a minimum, this means
that you need to test your own local configuration changes. However, you should really test the
software that your vendor releases as well. A major UNIX vendor once released a patch that
performed an rm -rf /. Imagine installing this patch throughout your organization without testing
it first.
Testing is an especially pertinent issue if you use a service that offers an automatic patching
capability, such as most of the packaging systems discussed in this chapter. Never connect
mission-critical systems directly to a vendor-sponsored update service. Instead, point most of
your systems to an internal mirror that you control, and test updates on noncritical systems first.

     See this page for more information about trouble tracking.

If you foresee that an update might cause user-visible problems or changes, notify users well in
advance and give them a chance to communicate with you if they have concerns regarding your
intended changes or timing. Make sure that users have an easy way to report bugs.

If your organization is geographically distributed, make sure that other offices help with testing.
International participation is particularly valuable in multilingual environments. If no one in the
U.S. office speaks Japanese, for example, you had better get the Tokyo office to test anything
that might affect Unicode support. A surprising number of system parameters vary with location.
Does the new version of software you’re installing break UTF-8 encoding, rendering text
illegible for some languages?
6.7 RECOMMENDED READING
INTEL CORPORATION AND SYSTEMSOFT. Preboot Execution Environment (PXE) Specification, v2.1.
1999. pix.net/software/pxeboot/archive/pxespec.pdf
LAWSON, NOLAN. What it feels like to be an open-source maintainer. wp.me/p1t8Ca-1ry

PXELinux Questions. syslinux.zytor.com/wiki/index.php/PXELINUX
RODIN, JOSIP. Debian New Maintainers’ Guide. debian.org/doc/maint-guide
This document contains good information about .deb packages. See also Chapter 7 of the Debian
FAQ and Chapter 2 of the Debian reference manual.
