8 User Management

Modern computing environments span physical hardware, cloud systems, and virtual hosts.
Along with the flexibility of this hybrid infrastructure comes an increasing need for centralized
and structured account management. System administrators must understand both the traditional
account model used by UNIX and Linux and the ways in which this model has been extended to
integrate with directory services such as LDAP and Microsoft’s Active Directory.
Account hygiene is a key determinant of system security. Infrequently used accounts are prime
targets for attackers, as are accounts with easily guessed passwords. Even if you use your
system’s automated tools to add and remove users, it’s important to understand the changes the
tools are making. For this reason, we start our discussion of account management with the flat
files you would modify to add users to a stand-alone machine. In later sections, we examine the
higher-level user management commands that come with our example operating systems and the
configuration files that control their behavior.
Most systems also have simple GUI tools for adding and removing users, but these tools don’t
usually support advanced features such as a batch mode or advanced localization. The GUI tools
are simple enough that we don’t think it’s helpful to review their operation in detail, so in this
chapter we stick to the command line.
This chapter focuses fairly narrowly on adding and removing users. Many topics associated with
user management actually live in other chapters and are referenced here only indirectly. For
example,
Pluggable authentication modules (PAM) for password encryption and the
enforcement of strong passwords are covered in Chapter 17, Single Sign-On. See the
material starting on this page.
Password vaults for managing passwords are described in Chapter 27, Security (see
this page).

Directory services such as OpenLDAP and Active Directory are outlined in Chapter
17, Single Sign-On, starting here.
Policy and regulatory issues are major topics of Chapter 31, Methodology, Policy,
and Politics.
8.1 ACCOUNT MECHANICS
A user is really nothing more than a number. Specifically, an unsigned 32-bit integer known as
the user ID or UID. Almost everything related to user account management revolves around this
number.
The system defines an API (through standard C library routines) that maps UID numbers back
and forth into more complete sets of information about users. For example, getpwuid() accepts a
UID as an argument and returns a corresponding record that includes information such as the
associated login name and home directory. Likewise, getpwnam() looks up this same
information by login name.

Traditionally, these library calls obtained their information directly from a text file, /etc/passwd.
As time went on, they began to support additional sources of information such as network
information databases (e.g., LDAP) and read-protected files in which encrypted passwords could
be stored more securely.

     See this page for more details regarding the nsswitch.conf file.

These layers of abstraction (which are often configured in the nsswitch.conf file) enable higher-
level processes to function without direct knowledge of the underlying account management
method in use. For example, when you log in as “dotty”, the logging-in process (window server,
login, getty, or whatever) does a getpwnam() on dotty and then validates the password you
supply against the encrypted passwd record returned by the library, regardless of its actual origin.
We start with the /etc/passwd file approach, which is still supported everywhere. The other
options emulate this model in spirit if not in form.
8.2 THE /ETC/PASSWD FILE
/etc/passwd is a list of users recognized by the system. It can be extended or replaced by one or
more directory services, so it’s complete and authoritative only on stand-alone systems.
Historically, each user’s encrypted password was also stored in the /etc/passwd file, which is
world-readable. However, the onset of more powerful processors made it increasingly feasible to
crack these exposed passwords. In response, UNIX and Linux moved the passwords to a separate
file (/etc/master.passwd on FreeBSD and /etc/shadow on Linux) that is not world-readable.
These days, the passwd file itself contains only a pro-forma entry to mark the former location of
the password field (x on Linux and * on FreeBSD).

The system consults /etc/passwd at login time to determine a user’s UID and home directory,
among other things. Each line in the file represents one user and contains seven fields separated
by colons:

      Login name
      Encrypted password placeholder (see this page)
      UID (user ID) number
      Default GID (group ID) number

      Optional “GECOS” information: full name, office, extension, home phone
      Home directory
      Login shell

For example, the following lines are all valid /etc/passwd entries:

     See this page for more information about the nsswitch.conf file.

If user accounts are shared through a directory service such as LDAP, you might see special
entries in the passwd file that begin with + or -. These entries tell the system how to integrate the
directory service’s data with the contents of the passwd file. This integration can also be set up
in the /etc/nsswitch.conf file.
The following sections discuss the /etc/passwd fields in more detail.
Login name
Login names (also known as usernames) must be unique and, depending on the operating system,
may have character set restrictions. All UNIX and Linux flavors currently limit logins to 32
characters.
Login names can never contain colons or newlines, because these characters are used as field
separators and entry separators in the passwd file, respectively. Depending on the system, other
character restrictions may also be in place. Ubuntu is perhaps the most lax, as it allows logins
starting with—or consisting entirely of—numbers and other special characters. For reasons too
numerous to list, we recommend sticking with alphanumeric characters for logins, using lower
case, and starting login names with a letter.
Login names are case sensitive. We are not aware of any problems caused by mixed-case login
names, but lowercase names are traditional and also easier to type. Confusion could ensue if the
login names john and John were different people.
Login names should be easy to remember, so random sequences of letters do not make good
login names. Since login names are often used as email addresses, it’s useful to establish a
standard way of forming them. It should be possible for users to make educated guesses about
each other’s login names. First names, last names, initials, or some combination of these make
reasonable naming schemes.

Keep in mind that some email systems treat addresses as being case insensitive, which is yet
another good reason to standardize on lowercase login names. RFC5321 requires that the local
portion of an address (that is, the part before the @ sign) be treated as case sensitive. The
remainder of the address is handled according to the standards of DNS, which is case insensitive.
Unfortunately, this distinction is subtle, and it is not universally implemented. Remember also
that many legacy email systems predate the authority of the IETF.
Any fixed scheme for choosing login names eventually results in duplicate names, so you
sometimes have to make exceptions. Choose a standard way of dealing with conflicts, such as
adding a number to the end.
It’s common for large sites to implement a full-name email addressing scheme (e.g.,
John.Q.Public@mysite.com) that hides login names from the outside world. This is a good idea,
but it doesn’t obviate any of the naming advice given above. If for no other reason than the sanity
of administrators, it’s best if login names have a clear and predictable correspondence to users’
actual names.
Finally, a user should have the same login name on every machine. This rule is mostly for
convenience, both yours and the user’s.
Encrypted password
Historically, systems encrypted users’ passwords with DES. As computing power increased,
those passwords became trivial to crack. Systems then moved to hidden passwords and to MD5-
based cryptography. Now that significant weaknesses have been discovered in MD5, salted
SHA-512-based password hashes have become the current standard. See the Guide to
Cryptography document at owasp.org for up-to-date guidance.
Our example systems support a variety of encryption algorithms, but they all default to SHA-
512. You shouldn’t need to update the algorithm choice unless you are upgrading systems from
much older releases.
     On FreeBSD, the default algorithm can be modified through the /etc/login.conf file.
                On Debian and Ubuntu, the default was formerly managed through
                /etc/login.defs, but this practice has since been obsoleted by Pluggable
Authentication Modules (PAM). Default password policies, including the hashing algorithm to
use, can be found in /etc/pam.d/common-passwd.

          On Red Hat and CentOS, the password algorithm can still be set in /etc/login.defs or
          through the authconfig command, as shown here:

Changing the password algorithm does not update existing passwords, so users must manually
update their passwords before the new algorithm can take effect. To invalidate a user’s password
and force an update, use

Password quality is another important issue. In theory, longer passwords are more secure, as are
passwords that include a range of different character types (e.g., uppercase letters, punctuation
marks, and numbers).

Most systems let you impose password construction standards on your users, but keep in mind
that users can be adept at skirting these requirements if they find them excessive or burdensome.
Table 8.1 shows the default standards used by our example systems.

Table 8.1: Password quality standards
    See this page for more comments on password selection.

Password quality requirements are a matter of debate, but we recommend that you prioritize
length over complexity (see xkcd.com/comics/password_strength.png). Twelve characters is the
minimal length for a future-proof password; note that this is significantly longer than any
system’s default. Your site may also have organization-wide standards for password quality. If it
does, defer to those settings.
If you choose to bypass your system’s tools for adding users and instead modify /etc/passwd by
hand (by running the vipw command—see this page) to create a new account, put a * (FreeBSD)
or an x (Linux) in the encrypted password field. This measure prevents unauthorized use of the
account until you or the user has set a real password.
Encrypted passwords are of constant length (86 characters for SHA-512, 34 characters for MD5,
and 13 characters for DES) regardless of the length of the unencrypted password. Passwords are
encrypted in combination with a random “salt” so that a given password can correspond to many
different encrypted forms. If two users happen to select the same password, this fact usually
cannot be discovered by inspection of the encrypted passwords.
MD5-encrypted password fields in the shadow password file always start with $1$ or $md5$.
Blowfish passwords start with $2$, SHA-256 passwords with $5$, and SHA-512 passwords with
$6$.
UID (user ID) number

     See this page for a description of the root account.

By definition, root has UID 0. Most systems also define pseudo-users such as bin and daemon to
be the owners of commands or configuration files. It’s customary to put such fake logins at the
beginning of the /etc/passwd file and to give them low UIDs and a fake shell (e.g., /bin/false) to
prevent anyone from logging in as those users.
To allow plenty of room for nonhuman users you might want to add in the future, we recommend
that you assign UIDs to real users starting at 1000 or higher. (The desired range for new UIDs
can be specified in the configuration files for useradd.) By default, our Linux reference systems
start UIDs at 1000 and go up from there. FreeBSD starts the first user at UID 1001 and then adds
one for each additional user.
Do not recycle UIDs, even when users leave your organization and you delete their accounts.
This precaution prevents confusion if files are later restored from backups, where users may be
identified by UID rather than by login name.
UIDs should be kept unique across your entire organization. That is, a particular UID should
refer to the same login name and the same person on every machine that person is authorized to
use. Failure to maintain distinct UIDs can result in security problems with systems such as NFS
and can also result in confusion when a user moves from one workgroup to another.

It can be hard to maintain unique UIDs when groups of machines are administered by different
people or organizations. The problems are both technical and political. The best solution is to
have a central database or directory server that contains a record for each user and enforces
uniqueness.
A simpler scheme is to assign each group within an organization its own range of UIDs and to let
each group manage its own range. This solution keeps the UID spaces separate but does not
address the parallel issue of unique login names. Regardless of your scheme, consistency of
approach is the primary goal. If consistency isn’t feasible, UID uniqueness is the second-best
target.
The Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) is a popular system for managing and
distributing account information and works well for large sites. It is briefly outlined in this
chapter starting here and is covered more thoroughly in Chapter 17, Single Sign-On, starting
here.
Default GID (group ID) number
Like a UID, a group ID number is a 32-bit integer. GID 0 is reserved for the group called root,
system, or wheel. As with UIDs, the system uses several predefined groups for its own
housekeeping. Alas, there is no consistency among vendors. For example, the group “bin” has
GID 1 on Red Hat and CentOS, GID 2 on Ubuntu and Debian, and GID 7 on FreeBSD.
In ancient times, when computing power was expensive, groups were used for accounting
purposes so that the right department could be charged for your seconds of CPU time, minutes of
login time, and kilobytes of disk used. Today, groups are used primarily to share access to files.

     See this page for more information about setgid directories.

The /etc/group file defines the groups, with the GID field in /etc/passwd providing a default (or
“effective”) GID at login time. The default GID is not treated specially when access is
determined; it is relevant only to the creation of new files and directories. New files are normally
owned by your effective group; to share files with others in a project group, you must manually
change the files’ group owner.

To facilitate collaboration, you can set the setgid bit (02000) on a directory or mount filesystems
with the grpid option. Both of these measures make newly created files default to the group of
their parent directory.
GECOS field
The GECOS field is sometimes used to record personal information about each user. The field is
a relic from a much earlier time when some early UNIX systems used General Electric
Comprehensive Operating Systems for various services. It has no well-defined syntax. Although
you can use any formatting conventions you like, conventionally, comma-separated GECOS
entries are placed in the following order:

      Full name (often the only field used)
      Office number and building
      Office telephone extension
      Home phone number

           See this page for more information about LDAP.

The chfn command lets users change their own GECOS information. chfn is useful for keeping
things like phone numbers up to date, but it can be misused. For example, a user can change the
information to be obscene or incorrect. Some systems can be configured to restrict which fields
chfn can modify; most college campuses disable it entirely. On most systems, chfn understands
only the passwd file, so if you use LDAP or some other directory service for login information,
chfn may not work at all.
Home directory
A user’s home directory is his or her default directory at login time. Home directories are where
login shells look for account-specific customizations such as shell aliases and environment
variables, as well as SSH keys, server fingerprints, and other program state.
Be aware that if home directories are mounted over a network filesystem, they may be
unavailable in the event of server or network problems. If the home directory is missing at login
time, the system might print a message such as “no home directory” and put the user in /.
Such a message appears when you log in on the console or on a terminal, but not when you log in
through a display manager such as xdm, gdm, or kdm. Not only will you not see the message,
but you will generally be logged out immediately because of the display manager’s inability to
write to the proper directory (e.g., ~/.gnome).
Alternatively, the system might disallow home-directory-less logins entirely, depending on the
configuration.

Home directories are covered in more detail here.
Login shell

    See this page for more information about shells.

The login shell is normally a command interpreter, but it can be any program. A Bourne-shell
compatible sh is the default for FreeBSD, and bash (the GNU “Bourne again” shell) is the
default for Linux.
Some systems permit users to change their shell with the chsh command, but as with chfn, this
command might not work if you are using LDAP or some other directory service to manage
login information. If you use the /etc/passwd file, a sysadmin can always change a user’s shell
by editing the passwd file with vipw.
8.3 THE LINUX /ETC/SHADOW FILE
On Linux, the shadow password file is readable only by the superuser and serves to keep
encrypted passwords safe from prying eyes and password cracking programs. It also includes
some additional account information that wasn’t provided for in the original /etc/passwd format.
These days, shadow passwords are the default on all systems.
The shadow file is not a superset of the passwd file, and the passwd file is not generated from it.
You must maintain both files or use tools such as useradd that maintain both files on your
behalf. Like /etc/passwd, /etc/shadow contains one line for each user. Each line contains nine
fields, separated by colons:

      Login name

      Encrypted password
      Date of last password change
      Minimum number of days between password changes
      Maximum number of days between password changes

      Number of days in advance to warn users about password expiration
      Days after password expiration that account is disabled
      Account expiration date
      A field reserved for future use which is currently always empty

Only the values for the username and password are required. Absolute date fields in /etc/shadow
are specified in terms of days (not seconds) since Jan 1, 1970, which is not a standard way of
reckoning time on UNIX or Linux systems. To convert between the date in seconds and in days,
run expr `date+%s` / 86400.

A typical shadow entry looks like this:

Here is a more complete description of each field:

      The login name is the same as in /etc/passwd. This field connects a user’s passwd
      and shadow entries.
      The encrypted password is identical in concept and execution to the one previously
      stored in /etc/passwd.
      The last change field records the time at which the user’s password was last changed.
      This field is filled in by the passwd command.
      The fourth field sets the number of days that must elapse between password changes.
      The idea is to force authentic changes by preventing users from immediately
      reverting to a familiar password after a required change. However, this feature can be
      somewhat dangerous in the aftermath of a security intrusion. We suggest setting this
      field to 0.

      The fifth field sets the maximum number of days allowed between password changes.
      This feature allows the administrator to enforce password aging; see this page for
      more information. Under Linux, the actual enforced maximum number of days is the
      sum of this field and the seventh (grace period) field.
      The sixth field sets the number of days before password expiration when login should
      begin to warn the user of the impending expiration.
      The eighth field specifies the day (in days since Jan 1, 1970) on which the user’s
      account will expire. The user cannot log in after this date until the field has been reset
      by an administrator. If the field is left blank, the account never expires.

      You can use usermod to set the expiration field. It accepts dates in the format yyyy-
      mm-dd.

      The ninth field is reserved for future use (or at this rate, may never be used).

Let’s look again at our example shadow line:

In this example, the user millert last changed his password on June 19, 2017. The password must
be changed again within 180 days, and millert will receive warnings that the password needs to
be changed for the last two weeks of this period. The account does not have an expiration date.
Use the pwconv utility to reconcile the contents of the shadow file and those of the passwd file,
picking up any new additions and deleting users that are no longer listed in passwd.
8.4 FREEBSD'S /ETC/MASTER.PASSWD AND /ETC/LOGIN.CONF FILES
      The adoption of PAM and the availability of similar user management commands on
      FreeBSD and Linux have made account administration relatively consistent across
platforms, at least at the topmost layer. However, a few differences do exist in the underlying
implementation.
The /etc/master.passwd file
On FreeBSD, the “real” password file is /etc/master.passwd, which is readable only by root.
The /etc/passwd file exists for backward compatibility and does not contain any passwords
(instead, it has * characters as placeholders).
To edit the password file, run the vipw command. This command invokes your editor on a copy
of /etc/master.passwd, then installs the new version and regenerates the /etc/passwd file to
reflect any changes. (vipw is standard on all UNIX and Linux systems, but it’s particularly
important to use on FreeBSD because the dual password files need to stay synchronized. See this
page.)
In addition to containing all the fields of the passwd file, the master.passwd file contains three
bonus fields. Unfortunately, they’re squeezed in between the default GID field and the GECOS
field, so the file formats are not directly compatible. The extra three fields are

      Login class
      Password change time
      Expiration time

The login class (if one is specified) refers to an entry in the /etc/login.conf file. The class
determines resource consumption limits and controls a variety of other settings. See the next
section for specifics.
The password change time field implements password aging. It contains the time in seconds
since the UNIX epoch after which the user will be forced to change his or her password. You can
leave this field blank, indicating that the password never expires.

The account expiration time gives the time and date (in seconds, as for password expiration) at
which the user’s account will expire. The user cannot log in after this date unless the field is reset
by an administrator. If this field is left blank, the account will not expire.
The /etc/login.conf file
FreeBSD’s /etc/login.conf file sets account-related parameters for users and groups of users. Its
format consists of colon-delimited key/value pairs and Boolean flags.
When a user logs in, the login class field of /etc/master.passwd determines which entry in
/etc/login.conf to apply. If the user’s master.passwd entry does not specify a login class, the
default class is used.

A login.conf entry can set any of the following:

      Resource limits (maximum process size, maximum file size, number of open files,
      etc.)
      Session accounting limits (when logins are allowed, and for how long)

      Default environment variables
      Default paths (PATH, MANPATH, etc.)
      Location of the “message of the day” file
      Host and TTY-based access control

      Default umask
      Account controls (mostly superseded by the PAM module pam_passwdqc)

The following example overrides several of the default values. It’s intended for assignment to
system administrators.

Users in the sysadmin login class are allowed to log in even when /var/run/nologin exists, and they
need not have a working home directory (this option permits logins when NFS is not working).
Sysadmin users can start any number of processes and open any number of files (no artificial
limit is imposed). The last line pulls in the contents of the default entry.

Although FreeBSD has reasonable defaults, you might be interested in updating the
/etc/login.conf file to set idle timeout and password expiration warnings. For example, to set the
idle timeout to 15 minutes and enable warnings seven days before passwords expire, you would
add the following clauses to the definition of default:
When you modify the /etc/login.conf file, you must also run the following command to compile
your changes into the hashed version of the file that the system actually refers to in daily
operation:
8.5 THE /ETC/GROUP FILE
The /etc/group file contains the names of UNIX groups and a list of each group’s members.
Here’s a portion of the group file from a FreeBSD system:

Each line represents one group and contains four fields:

      Group name
      Encrypted password or a placeholder
      GID number
      List of members, separated by commas (be careful not to add spaces)

As in /etc/passwd, fields are separated by colons. Group names should be limited to eight
characters for compatibility, although many systems do not actually require this.
It’s possible to set a group password that allows arbitrary users to enter the group with the
newgrp command. However, this feature is rarely used. The group password can be set with
gpasswd, which under Linux stores the encrypted password in the /etc/gshadow file.

As with usernames and UIDs, group names and GIDs should be kept consistent among machines
that share files through a network filesystem. Consistency can be hard to maintain in a
heterogeneous environment because different operating systems use different GIDs for standard
system groups.
If a user defaults to a particular group in /etc/passwd but does not appear to be in that group
according to /etc/group, /etc/passwd wins the argument. The group memberships granted at
login time are the union of those found in the passwd and group files.
Some older systems limit the number of groups a user can belong to. There is no real limit on
current Linux and FreeBSD kernels.
Much as with UIDs, we recommend minimizing the potential for GID collisions by starting local
groups at GID 1000 or higher.

The UNIX tradition was originally to add new users to a group that represented their general
category such as “students” or “finance.” However, this convention increases the likelihood that
users will be able to read one another’s files because of slipshod permission settings, even if that
is not really the intention of the files’ owner.
To avoid this problem, system utilities such as useradd and adduser now default to putting each
user in his or her own personal group (that is, a group named after the user and which includes
only that user). This convention is much easier to maintain if personal groups’ GIDs match their
corresponding users’ UIDs.

To let users share files by way of the group mechanism, create separate groups for that purpose.
The idea behind personal groups is not to discourage the use of groups per se—it’s simply to
establish a more restrictive default group for each user so that files are not inadvertently shared.
You can also limit access to newly created files and directories by setting your user’s default
umask in a default startup file such as /etc/profile or /etc/bashrc (see this page).

     See this page for more information about sudo.

Group membership can also serve as a marker for other contexts or privileges. For example,
rather than entering the username of each system administrator into the sudoers file, you can
configure sudo so that everyone in the “admin” group automatically has sudo privileges.
     Linux supplies the groupadd, groupmod, and groupdel commands to create, modify, and
     delete groups.

     FreeBSD uses the pw command to perform all these functions. To add the user “dan” to the
     group “staff” and then verify that the change was properly implemented, you would run the
following commands:
8.6 MANUAL STEPS FOR ADDING USERS
Before you create an account for a new user at a corporate, government, or educational site, it’s
important that the user sign and date a copy of your local user agreement and policy statement.
(What?! You don’t have a user agreement and policy statement? See this page for more
information about why you need one and what to put in it.)
Users have no particular reason to want to sign a policy agreement, so it’s to your advantage to
secure their signatures while you still have some leverage. We find that it takes extra effort to
secure a signed agreement after an account has been released. If your process allows for it, have
the paperwork precede the creation of the account.

Mechanically, the process of adding a new user consists of several steps required by the system
and a few more that establish a useful environment for the new user and incorporate the user into
your local administrative system.
Required:

      Edit the passwd and shadow files (or the master.passwd file on FreeBSD) to define
      the user’s account.
      Add the user to the /etc/group file (not really necessary, but nice).
      Set an initial password.

      Create, chown, and chmod the user’s home directory.
      Configure roles and permissions (if you use RBAC; see this page).

For the user:

      Copy default startup files to the user’s home directory.

For you:

      Have the new user sign your policy agreement.
      Verify that the account is set up correctly.
      Document the user’s contact information and account status.

This list cries out for a script or tool, and fortunately, each of our example systems includes at
least a partial off-the-shelf solution in the form of an adduser or useradd command. We take a
look at these tools starting on this page.
Editing the passwd and group files
Manual maintenance of the passwd and group files is error prone and inefficient, so we
recommend the slightly higher-level tools such as useradd, adduser, usermod, pw, and chsh as
daily drivers.
If you do have to make manual changes, use the vipw command to edit the passwd and shadow
files (or on FreeBSD, the master.passwd file). Although it sounds vi-centric, it actually invokes
your favorite editor as defined in the EDITOR environment variable. More importantly, it locks
the files so that editing sessions (or your editing and a user’s password change) cannot collide.
     After you run vipw, our Linux reference systems remind you to edit the shadow file after
     you have edited the passwd file. Use vipw -s to do so.
      Under FreeBSD, vipw edits the master.passwd file instead of /etc/passwd. After installing
      your changes, vipw runs pwd_mkdb to generate the derived passwd file and two hashed
versions of master.passwd (one that contains the encrypted passwords and is readable only by
root, and another that lacks the passwords and is world-readable).

For example, running vipw and adding the following line would define an account called
whitney:

Note the star in the encrypted password field. This prevents use of the account until a real
password is set with the passwd command (see the next section).

Next, edit /etc/group by running vigr. Add a line for the new personal group if your site uses
them, and add the user’s login name to each of the groups in which the user should have
membership.
As with vipw, using vigr ensures that the changes made to the /etc/group file are sane and
atomic. After an edit session, vigr should prompt you to run vigr -s to edit the group shadow
(gshadow) file as well. Unless you want to set a password for the group—which is unusual—you
can skip this step.
     On FreeBSD, use pw groupmod to make changes to the /etc/group file.
Setting a password
Set a password for a new user with

You’ll be prompted for the actual password.
Some automated systems for adding new users do not require you to set an initial password.
Instead, they force the user to set a password on first login. Although this feature is convenient,
it’s a giant security hole: anyone who can guess new login names (or look them up in
/etc/passwd) can swoop down and hijack accounts before the intended users have had a chance
to log in.
     Among many other functions, FreeBSD’s pw command can also generate and set random
     user passwords:

     See this page for tips on selecting good passwords.

We’re generally not fans of random passwords for ongoing use. However, they are a good option
for transitional passwords that are only intended to last until the account is actually used.
Creating the home directory and installing startup files
useradd and adduser create new users’ home directories for you, but you’ll likely want to
double-check the permissions and startup files for new accounts.
There’s nothing magical about home directories. If you neglected to include a home directory
when setting up a new user, you can create it with a simple mkdir. You need to set ownerships
and permissions on the new directory as well, but this is most efficiently done after you’ve
installed any local startup files.
Startup files traditionally begin with a dot and end with the letters rc, short for “run command,” a
relic of the CTSS operating system. The initial dot causes ls to hide these “uninteresting” files
from directory listings unless the -a option is used.
We recommend that you include default startup files for each shell that is popular on your
systems so that users continue to have a reasonable default environment even if they change
shells. Table 8.2 lists a variety of common startup files.

Table 8.2: Common startup files and their uses
Sample startup files are traditionally kept in /etc/skel. If you customize your systems’ startup file
examples, /usr/local/etc/skel is a reasonable place to put the modified copies.
The entries in Table 8.2 for the GNOME and KDE window environments are really just the
beginning. In particular, take a look at gconf, which is the tool that stores application preferences
for GNOME programs in a manner analogous to the Windows registry.

Make sure that the default shell files you give to new users set a reasonable default value for
umask; we suggest 077, 027, or 022, depending on the friendliness and size of your site. If you
do not assign new users to individual groups, we recommend umask 077, which gives the owner
full access but the group and the rest of the world no access.

     See this page for details on umask.

Depending on the user’s shell, /etc may contain system-wide startup files that are processed
before the user’s own startup files. For example, bash and sh read /etc/profile before processing
~/.profile and ~/.bash_profile. These files are a good place in which to put site-wide defaults,
but bear in mind that users can override your settings in their own startup files. For details on
other shells, see the man page for the shell in question.
      By convention, Linux also keeps fragments of startup files in the /etc/profile.d directory.
      Although the directory name derives from sh conventions, /etc/profile.d can actually
include fragments for several different shells. The specific shells being targeted are distinguished
by filename suffixes (*.sh, *.csh, etc.). There’s no magic profile.d support built into the shells
themselves; the fragments are simply executed by the default startup script in /etc (e.g.,
/etc/profile in the case of sh or bash).

Separating the default startup files into fragments facilitates modularity and allows software
packages to include their own shell-level defaults. For example, the colorls.* fragments coach
shells on how to properly color the output of ls so as to make it unreadable on dark backgrounds.
Setting home directory permissions and ownerships
Once you’ve created a user’s home directory and copied in a reasonable default environment,
turn the directory over to the user and make sure that the permissions on it are appropriate. The
command

sets ownerships properly. Note that you cannot use

to chown the dot files because newuser would then own not only his or her own files but also the
parent directory “..” as well. This is a common and dangerous mistake.
Configuring roles and administrative privileges
Role-based access control (RBAC) allows system privileges to be tailored for individual users
and is available on many of our example systems. RBAC is not a traditional part of the UNIX or
Linux access control model, but if your site uses it, role configuration must be a part of the
process of adding users. RBAC is covered in detail starting on this page in the Access Control
and Rootly Powers chapter.

    See Chapter 31 for more information about SOX and GLBA

Legislation such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA), and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act in the United States has complicated many
aspects of system administration in the corporate arena, including user management. Roles might
be your only viable option for fulfilling some of the SOX, HIPAA, and GLBA requirements.
Finishing up
To verify that a new account has been properly configured, first log out, then log in as the new
user and execute the following commands:

You need to notify new users of their login names and initial passwords. Many sites send this
information by email, but that’s generally not a secure choice. Better options are to do it in
person, over the phone, or through a text message. (If you are adding 500 new freshmen to the
campus’s CS-1 machines, punt the notification problem to the instructor!) If you must distribute
account passwords by email, make sure the passwords expire in a couple of days if they are not
used and changed.

     See this page for more information about written user contracts.

If your site requires users to sign a written policy agreement or appropriate use policy, be sure
this step has been completed before you release a new account. This check prevents oversights
and strengthens the legal basis of any sanctions you might later need to impose. This is also the
time to point users toward additional documentation on local customs.
Remind new users to change their passwords immediately. You can enforce this by setting the
password to expire within a short time. Another option is to have a script check up on new users
and be sure their encrypted passwords have changed. Because the same password can have many
encrypted representations, this method verifies only that the user has reset the password, not that
it has actually been changed to a different password.
In environments where you know users personally, it’s relatively easy to keep track of who’s
using a system and why. But if you manage a large and dynamic user base, you need a more
formal way to keep track of accounts. Maintaining a database of contact information and account
statuses helps you figure out, once the act of creating the account has faded from memory, who
people are and why they have an account.
8.7 SCRIPTS FOR ADDING USERS: USERADD, ADDUSER, AND NEWUSERS
Our example systems all come with a useradd or adduser script that implements the basic
procedure outlined above. However, these scripts are configurable, and you will probably want to
customize them to fit your environment. Unfortunately, each system has its own idea of what you
should customize, where you should implement the customizations, and what the default
behavior should be. Accordingly, we cover these details in vendor-specific sections.
Table 8.3 is a handy summary of commands and configuration files related to managing users.

Table 8.3: Commands and configuration files for user management
useradd on Linux
Most Linux distributions include a basic useradd suite that draws its configuration parameters
from both /etc/login.defs and /etc/default/useradd.
     The login.defs file addresses issues such as password aging, choice of encryption
     algorithms, location of mail spool files, and the preferred ranges of UIDs and GIDs. You
maintain the login.defs file by hand. The comments do a good job of explaining the various
parameters.
Parameters stored in the /etc/default/useradd file include the location of home directories and
the default shell for new users. You set these defaults through the useradd command itself.
useradd -D prints the current values, and -D in combination with various other flags sets the
values of specific options. For example,

sets bash as the default shell.
Typical defaults are to put new users in individual groups, to use SHA-512 encryption for
passwords, and to populate new users’ home directories with startup files from /etc/skel.
The basic form of the useradd command accepts the name of the new account on the command
line:

This command creates an entry similar to this one in /etc/passwd, along with a corresponding
entry in the shadow file:

useradd disables the new account by default. You must assign a real password to make the
account usable.
A more realistic example is shown below. We specify that hilbert’s primary group should be
“hilbert” and that he should also be added to the “faculty” group. We override the default home
directory location and shell and ask useradd to create the home directory if it does not already
exist:

This command creates the following passwd entry:
The assigned UID is one higher than the highest UID on the system, and the corresponding
shadow entry is

The password placeholder character(s) in the passwd and shadow file vary depending on the
operating system. useradd also adds hilbert to the appropriate groups in /etc/group, creates the
directory /home/math/hilbert with proper ownerships, and populates it from the /etc/skel
directory.
adduser on Debian and Ubuntu
          In addition to the useradd family of commands, the Debian lineage also supplies
          somewhat higher-level wrappers for these commands in the form of adduser and
deluser. These add-on commands are configured in /etc/adduser.conf, where you can specify
options such as these:

      Rules for locating home directories: by group, by username, etc.
      Permission settings for new home directories
      UID and GID ranges for system users and general users
      An option to create individual groups for each user

      Disk quotas (Boolean only, unfortunately)
      Regex-based matching of user names and group names

Other typical useradd parameters, such as rules for passwords, are set as parameters to the PAM
module that does regular password authentication. (See this page for a discussion of PAM, aka
Pluggable Authentication Modules.) adduser and deluser have twin cousins addgroup and
delgroup.
adduser on FreeBSD
    FreeBSD comes with adduser and rmuser shell scripts that you can either use as supplied
    or modify to fit your needs. The scripts are built on top of the facilities provided by the pw
command.
adduser can be used interactively if you prefer. By default, it creates user and group entries and
a home directory. You can point the script at a file containing a list of accounts to create with the
-f flag, or enter in each user interactively.
For example, the process for creating a new user “raphael” looks like this:
newusers on Linux: adding in bulk
Linux’s newusers command creates multiple accounts at one time from the contents of a text
file. It’s pretty gimpy, but it can be handy when you need to add a lot of users at once, such as
when creating class-specific accounts. newusers expects an input file of lines just like the
/etc/passwd file, except that the password field contains the initial password in clear text.
Oops… better protect that file.
     newusers honors the password aging parameters set in the /etc/login.defs file, but it does
     not copy in the default startup files as does useradd. The only startup file it copies in is
.xauth.
At a university, what’s really needed is a batch adduser script that can use a list of students from
enrollment or registration data to generate the input for newusers, with usernames formed
according to local rules and guaranteed to be locally unique, with strong passwords randomly
generated, and with UIDs and GIDs increasing for each user. You’re probably better off writing
your own wrapper for useradd in Python than trying to get newusers to do what you need.
8.8 SAFE REMOVAL OF A USER’S ACCOUNT AND FILES
When a user leaves your organization, that user’s login account and files must be removed from
the system. If possible, don’t do that chore by hand; instead, let userdel or rmuser handle it.
These tools ensure the removal of all references to the login name that were added by you or
your useradd program. Once you’ve removed the remnants, use the following checklist to verify
that all residual user data has been removed:

      Remove the user from any local user databases or phone lists.
      Remove the user from the mail aliases database, or add a forwarding address.

      Remove the user’s crontab file and any pending at jobs or print jobs.
      Kill any of the user’s processes that are still running.
      Remove the user from the passwd, shadow, group, and gshadow files.
      Remove the user’s home directory.

      Remove the user’s mail spool (if mail is stored locally).
      Clean up entries on shared calendars, room reservation systems, etc.
      Delete or transfer ownership of any mailing lists run by the deleted user.

Before you remove someone’s home directory, be sure to relocate any files that are needed by
other users. You usually can’t be sure which files those might be, so it’s always a good idea to
make an extra backup of the user’s home directory before deleting it.
Once you have removed all traces of a user, you may want to verify that the user’s old UID no
longer owns files on the system. To find the paths of orphaned files, you can use the find
command with the -nouser argument. Because find has a way of “escaping” onto network
servers if you’re not careful, it’s usually best to check filesystems individually with -xdev:

If your organization assigns individual workstations to users, it’s generally simplest and most
efficient to re-image the entire system from a master template before turning the system over to a
new user. Before you do the reinstallation, however, it’s a good idea to back up any local files on
the system’s hard disk in case they are needed in the future. (Think license keys!)
Although all our example systems come with commands that automate the process of removing
user presence, they probably do not do as thorough a job as you might like unless you have
religiously extended them as you expanded the number of places in which user-related
information is stored.
            Debian and Ubuntu’s deluser is a Perl script that calls the usual userdel; it undoes all
            the things adduser does. It runs the script /usr/local/sbin/deluser.local, if it exists, to
facilitate easy localization. The configuration file /etc/deluser.conf lets you set options such as
these:

       Whether to remove the user’s home directory and mail spool
       Whether to back up the user’s files, and where to put the backup

       Whether to remove all files on the system owned by the user
                  Whether to delete a group if it now has no members

Red Hat supports a userdel.local script but no pre- and post-execution scripts to automate
sequence-sensitive operations such as backing up an about-to-be-removed user’s files.
     FreeBSD’s rmuser script does a good job of removing instances of the user’s files and
     processes, a task that other vendors’ userdel programs do not even attempt.
8.9 USER LOGIN LOCKOUT
On occasion, a user’s login must be temporarily disabled. A straightforward way to do this is to
put a star or some other character in front of the user’s encrypted password in the /etc/shadow or
/etc/master.passwd file. This measure prevents most types of password-regulated access
because the password no longer decrypts to anything sensible.
     FreeBSD lets you lock accounts with the pw command. A simple

puts the string *LOCKED* at the start of the password hash, making the account unusable. Unlock
the account by running

       On all our Linux distributions, the usermod -L user and usermod -U user commands
       define an easy way to lock and unlock passwords. They are just shortcuts for the password
twiddling described above: the -L puts an ! in front of the encrypted password in the /etc/shadow
file, and the -U removes it.
Unfortunately, modifying a user’s password simply makes logins fail. It does not notify the user
of the account suspension or explain why the account no longer works. In addition, commands
such as ssh that do not necessarily check the system password may continue to function.
An alternative way to disable logins is to replace the user’s shell with a program that prints an
explanatory message and supplies instructions for rectifying the situation. The program then
exits, terminating the login session.

This approach has both advantages and disadvantages. Any forms of access that check the
password but do not pay attention to the shell will not be disabled. To facilitate the “disabled
shell” trick, many daemons that afford nonlogin access to the system (e.g., ftpd) check to see if a
user’s login shell is listed in /etc/shells and deny access if it is not. This is the behavior you want.
Unfortunately, it’s not universal, so you may have to do some fairly comprehensive testing if you
decide to use shell modification as a way of disabling accounts.
Another issue is that your carefully written explanation of the suspended account might never be
seen if the user tries to log in through a window system or through a terminal emulator that does
not leave output visible after a logout.
8.10 RISK REDUCTION WITH PAM
Pluggable Authentication Modules (PAM) is covered in the Single Sign-On chapter starting here.
PAM centralizes the management of the system’s authentication facilities through standard
library routines. That way, programs like login, sudo, passwd, and su need not supply their own
tricky authentication code. An organization can easily expand its authentication methods beyond
passwords to options such as Kerberos, one-time passwords, ID dongles, or fingerprint readers.
PAM reduces the risk inherent in writing secured software, allows administrators to set site-wide
security policies, and defines an easy way to add new authentication methods to the system.
Adding and removing users doesn’t involve tweaking the PAM configuration, but the tools
involved operate under PAM’s rules and constraints. In addition, many of the PAM configuration
parameters are similar to those used by useradd or usermod. If you change a parameter as
described in this chapter and useradd doesn’t seem to be paying attention to it, check to be sure
the system’s PAM configuration isn’t overriding your new value.
8.11 CENTRALIZED ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Some form of centralized account management is essential for medium-to-large enterprises of all
types, be they corporate, academic, or governmental. Users need the convenience and security of
a single login name, UID, and password across the site. Administrators need a centralized system
that allows changes (such as account revocations) to be instantly propagated everywhere.
Such centralization can be achieved in a variety of ways, most of which (including Microsoft’s
Active Directory system) involve LDAP, the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol, in some
capacity. Options range from bare-bones LDAP installations based on open source software to
elaborate commercial identity management systems that come with a hefty price tag.
LDAP and Active Directory
LDAP is a generalized, database-like repository that can store user management data as well as
other types of data. It uses a hierarchical client/server model that supports multiple servers as
well as multiple simultaneous clients. One of LDAP’s big advantages as a site-wide repository
for login data is that it can enforce unique UIDs and GIDs across systems. It also plays well with
Windows, although the reverse is only marginally true.

     See the section starting on this page for more information about LDAP and LDAP
     implementations.

Microsoft’s Active Directory uses LDAP and Kerberos and can manage many kinds of data,
including user information. It’s a bit egotistical and wants to be the boss if it is interacting with
UNIX or Linux LDAP repositories. If you need a single authentication system for a site that
includes Windows desktops as well as UNIX and Linux systems, it is probably easiest to let
Active Directory be in control and to use your UNIX LDAP databases as secondary servers.
See Chapter 17, Single Sign-On, for more information on integrating UNIX or Linux with LDAP,
Kerberos, and Active Directory.
Application-level single sign-on systems
Application-level single sign-on systems balance user convenience with security. The idea is that
a user can sign on once (to a login prompt, web page, or Windows box) and be authenticated at
that time. The user then obtains authentication credentials (usually implicitly, so that no active
management is required) which can be used to access other applications. The user only has to
remember one login and password sequence instead of many.
This scheme allows credentials to be more complex since the user does not need to remember or
even deal with them. That theoretically increases security. However, the impact of a
compromised account is greater because one login gives an attacker access to multiple
applications. These systems make your walking away from a desktop machine while still logged
in a significant vulnerability. In addition, the authentication server becomes a critical bottleneck.
If it’s down, all useful work grinds to a halt across the enterprise.
Although application-level SSO is a simple idea, it implies a lot of back-end complexity because
the various applications and machines that a user might want to access must understand the
authentication process and SSO credentials.
Several open source SSO systems exist:

      JOSSO, an open source SSO server written in Java

      CAS, the Central Authentication Service, from Yale (also Java)
      Shibboleth, an open source SSO distributed under the Apache 2 license

A host of commercial systems are also available, most of them integrated with identity
management suites, which are covered in the next section.
Identity management systems
“Identity management” (sometimes referred to as IAM, for “identity and access management”) is
a common buzzword in user management. In plain language, it means identifying the users of
your systems, authenticating their identities, and granting privileges according to those
authenticated identities. The standardization efforts in this realm are led by the World Wide Web
Consortium and by The Open Group.
Commercial identity management systems combine several key UNIX concepts into a warm and
fuzzy GUI replete with marketing jargon. Fundamental to all such systems is a database of user
authentication and authorization data, often stored in LDAP format. Control is achieved with
concepts such as UNIX groups, and limited administrative privileges are enforced through tools
such as sudo. Most such systems have been designed with an eye toward regulations that
mandate accountability, tracking, and audit trails.
There are many commercial systems in this space: Oracle’s Identity Management, Courion,
Avatier Identity Management Suite (AIMS), VMware Identity Manager, and SailPoint’s
IdentityIQ, to name a few. In evaluating identity management systems, look for capabilities in
the following areas:
Oversight:

      Implement a secure web interface for management that’s accessible both inside and
      outside the enterprise.

      Support an interface through which hiring managers can request that accounts be
      provisioned according to role.
      Coordinate with a personnel database to automatically remove access for employees
      who are terminated or laid off.

Account management:

      Generate globally unique user IDs.
      Create, change, and delete user accounts across the enterprise, on all types of
      hardware and operating systems.
      Support a workflow engine; for example, tiered approvals before a user is given
      certain privileges.

      Make it easy to display all users who have a certain set of privileges. Ditto for the
      privileges granted to a particular user.
      Support role-based access control, including user account provisioning by role. Allow
      exceptions to role-based provisioning, including a workflow for the approval of
      exceptions.
      Configure logging of all changes and administrative actions. Similarly, configure
      reports generated from logging data (by user, by day, etc.).

Ease of use:

      Let users change (and reset) their own passwords, with enforcement of rules for
      picking strong passwords.

      Enable users to change their passwords globally in one operation.

Consider also how the system is implemented at the point where authorizations and
authentications actually take place. Does the system require a custom agent to be installed
everywhere, or does it conform itself to the underlying systems?
