9 Cloud Computing

Cloud computing is the practice of leasing computer resources from a pool of shared capacity.
Users of cloud services provision resources on demand and pay a metered rate for whatever they
consume. Businesses that embrace the cloud enjoy faster time to market, greater flexibility, and
lower capital and operating expenses than businesses that run traditional data centers.
The cloud is the realization of “utility computing,” first conceived by the late computer scientist
John McCarthy, who described the idea in a talk at MIT in 1961. Many technological advances
since McCarthy’s prescient remarks have helped to bring the idea to fruition. To name just a few:

      Virtualization software reliably allocates CPU, memory, storage, and network
      resources on demand.
      Robust layers of security isolate users and virtual machines from each other, even as
      they share underlying hardware.
      Standardized hardware components enable the construction of data centers with vast
      power, storage, and cooling capacities.

      A reliable global network connects everything.

Cloud providers capitalize on these innovations and many others. They offer myriad services
ranging from hosted private servers to fully managed applications. The leading cloud vendors are
competitive, highly profitable, and growing rapidly.
This chapter introduces the motivations for moving to the cloud, fills in some background on a
few major cloud providers, introduces some of the most important cloud services, and offers tips
for controlling costs. As an even briefer introduction, the section Clouds: VPS quick start by
platform, shows how to create cloud servers from the command line.
Several other chapters in this book include sections that relate to the management of cloud
servers. Table 9.1 lists some pointers.

Table 9.1: Cloud topics covered elsewhere in this book

In addition, Chapter 23, Configuration Management, is broadly applicable to the management of
cloud systems.
9.1 THE CLOUD IN CONTEXT
The transition from servers in private data centers to the now-ubiquitous cloud has been rapid
and dramatic. Let’s take a look at the reasons for this stampede.
Cloud providers create technically advanced infrastructure that most businesses cannot hope to
match. They locate their data centers in areas with inexpensive electric power and copious
networking cross-connects. They design custom server chassis that maximize energy efficiency
and minimize maintenance. They use purpose-built network infrastructure with custom hardware
and software fine-tuned to their internal networks. They automate aggressively to allow rapid
expansion and reduce the likelihood of human error.

Because of all this engineering effort (not to mention the normal economies of scale), the cost of
running distributed computing services is much lower for a cloud provider than for a typical
business with a small data center. Cost savings are reflected both in the price of cloud services
and in the providers’ profits.
Layered on top of this hardware foundation are management features that simplify and facilitate
the configuration of infrastructure. Cloud providers offer both APIs and user-facing tools that
control the provisioning and releasing of resources. As a result, the entire life cycle of a system—
or group of systems distributed on a virtual network—can be automated. This concept goes by
the name “infrastructure as code,” and it contrasts starkly with the manual server procurement
and provisioning processes of times past.
Elasticity is another major driver of cloud adoption. Because cloud systems can be
programmatically requested and released, any business that has cyclic demand can optimize
operating costs by adding more resources during periods of peak usage and removing extra
capacity when it is no longer needed. The built-in autoscaling features available on some cloud
platforms streamline this process.
Cloud providers have a global presence. With some planning and engineering effort, businesses
can reach new markets by releasing services in multiple geographic areas. In addition, disaster
recovery is easier to implement in the cloud because redundant systems can be run in separate
physical locations.

     See this page for more information about DevOps.

All these characteristics pair well with the DevOps approach to system administration, which
emphasizes agility and repeatability. In the cloud, you’re no longer restricted by slow
procurement or provisioning processes, and nearly everything can be automated.
Still, a certain mental leap is required when you don’t control your own hardware. One industry
metaphor captures the sentiment neatly: servers should be treated as cattle, not as pets. A pet is
named, loved, and cared for. When the pet is sick, it’s taken to a veterinarian and nursed back to
health. Conversely, cattle are commodities that are herded, traded, and managed in large
quantities. Sick cattle are shot.
A cloud server is just one member of a herd, and to treat it otherwise is to ignore a basic fact of
cloud computing: cloud systems are ephemeral, and they can fail at any time. Plan for that failure
and you’ll be more successful at running a resilient infrastructure.

Despite all its advantages, the cloud is not a panacea for quickly reducing costs or improving
performance. Directly migrating an existing enterprise application from a data center to a cloud
provider (a so-called “lift and shift”) is unlikely to be successful without careful planning.
Operational processes for the cloud are different, and they entail training and testing.
Furthermore, most enterprise software is designed for static environments, but individual systems
in the cloud should be treated as short-lived and unreliable. A system is said to be cloud native if
it is reliable even in the face of unanticipated events.
9.2 CLOUD PLATFORM CHOICES
Multiple factors influence a site’s choice of cloud provider. Cost, past experience, compatibility
with existing technology, security, or compliance requirements, and internal politics are all likely
to play a role. The selection process can also be swayed by reputation, provider size, features,
and of course, marketing.
Fortunately, there are a lot of cloud providers out there. We’ve chosen to focus on just three of
the major public cloud providers: Amazon Web Services (AWS), Google Cloud Platform (GCP),
and DigitalOcean (DO). In this section we mention a few additional options for you to consider.
Table 9.2 enumerates the major players in this space.

Table 9.2: The most widely used cloud platforms
Public, private, and hybrid clouds
In a public cloud, the vendor controls all the physical hardware and affords access to systems
over the Internet. This setup relieves users of the burden of installing and maintaining hardware,
but at the expense of less control over the features and characteristics of the platform. AWS,
GCP, and DO are all public cloud providers.
Private cloud platforms are similar, but are hosted within an organization’s own data center or
managed by a vendor on behalf of a single customer. Servers in a private cloud are single-tenant,
not shared with other customers as in a public cloud.
Private clouds offer flexibility and programmatic control, just as public clouds do. They appeal to
organizations that already have significant capital invested in hardware and engineers, especially
those that value full control of their environment.
OpenStack is the leading open source system used to create private clouds. It receives financial
and engineering support from enterprises such as AT&T, IBM, and Intel. Rackspace itself is one
of the largest contributors to OpenStack.

A combination of public and private clouds is called a hybrid cloud. Hybrids can be useful when
an enterprise is first migrating from local servers to a public cloud, for adding temporary capacity
to handle peak loads, and for a variety of other organization-specific scenarios. Administrators
beware: operating two distinct cloud presences in tandem increases complexity more than
proportionally.
VMware’s vSphere Air cloud, based on vSphere virtualization technology, is a seamless hybrid
cloud for customers that already use VMware virtualization in their on-premises data center.
Those users can move applications to and from vCloud Air infrastructure quite transparently.
The term “public cloud” is a bit unfortunate, connoting as it does the security and hygiene
standards of a public toilet. In fact, customers of public clouds are isolated from each other by
multiple layers of hardware and software virtualization. A private cloud offers little or no
practical security benefit over a public cloud.
In addition, operating a private cloud is an intricate and expensive prospect that should not be
undertaken lightly. Only the largest and most committed organizations have the engineering
resources and wallet needed to implement a robust, secure private cloud. And once implemented,
a private cloud’s features usually fall short of those offered by commercial public clouds.

For most organizations, we recommend the public cloud over the private or hybrid options.
Public clouds offer the highest value and easiest administration. For the remainder of this book,
our cloud coverage is limited to public options The next few sections present a quick overview of
each of our example platforms.
Amazon Web Services
AWS offers scores of services, ranging from virtual servers (EC2) to managed databases and data
warehouses (RDS and Redshift) to serverless functions that execute in response to events
(Lambda). AWS releases hundreds of updates and new features each year. It has the largest and
most active community of users. AWS is by far the largest cloud computing business.
From the standpoint of most users, AWS has essentially unlimited capacity. However, new
accounts come with limits that control how much compute power you can requisition. These
restrictions protect both Amazon and you, since costs can quickly spiral out of control if services
aren’t properly managed. To increase your limits, you complete a form on the AWS support site.
The service limit documentation itemizes the constraints associated with each service.
The on-line AWS documentation located at aws.amazon.com/documentation is authoritative,
comprehensive, and well organized. It should be the first place you look when researching a
particular service. The white papers that discuss security, migration paths, and architecture are
invaluable for those interested in constructing robust cloud environments.
Google Cloud Platform
If AWS is the reigning champion of the cloud, Google is the would-be usurper. It competes for
customers through nefarious tricks such as lowering prices and directly addressing customers’
AWS pain points.
The demand for engineers is so fierce that Google has been known to poach employees from
AWS. In they past, they’ve hosted parties in conjunction with the AWS re:Invent conference in
Las Vegas in an attempt to lure both talent and users. As the cloud wars unfold, customers
ultimately benefit from this competition in the form of lower costs and improved features.
Google runs the most advanced global network in the world, a strength that benefits its cloud
platform. Google data centers are technological marvels that feature many innovations to
improve energy efficiency and reduce operational costs. Google is relatively transparent about its
operations, and their open source contributions help advance the cloud industry. See
google.com/about/datacenters for photos and facts about how Google’s data centers operate.
Despite its technical savvy, in some ways Google is a follower in the public cloud, not a leader.
Google had released other cloud products as early as 2008, including App Engine, the first
platform-as-a-service product. But Google’s strategy and the GCP brand were not well developed
until 2012. At that point, GCP was already somewhat late to the game.

GCP’s services have many of the same features (and often the same names) as their AWS
equivalents. If you’re familiar with AWS, you’ll find the GCP web interface to be somewhat
different on the surface. However, the functionality underneath is strikingly similar.
We anticipate that GCP will gain market share in the years to come as it improves its products
and builds customer trust. It has hired some of the brightest minds in the industry, and they’re
bound to develop some innovative technologies. As consumers, we all stand to benefit.
DigitalOcean
DigitalOcean is a different breed of public cloud. Whereas AWS and GCP compete to serve the
large enterprises and growth-focused startups, DigitalOcean courts small customers with simpler
needs. Minimalism is the name of the game. We like DigitalOcean for experiments and proof-of-
concept projects.
DigitalOcean offers data centers in North America, Europe, and Asia. There are several centers
in each of these regions, but they are not directly connected and so cannot be considered
availability zones (see this page). As a result, it’s considerably more difficult to build global,
highly available production services on DigitalOcean than on AWS or Google.
DigitalOcean servers are called droplets. They are simple to provision from the command line or
web console, and they boot quickly. DigitalOcean supplies images for all our example operating
systems except Red Hat. It also has a handful of images for popular open source applications
such as Cassandra, Drupal, Django, and GitLab.
DigitalOcean also has load balancer and block storage services. In Chapter 26, Continuous
Integration and Delivery, we include an example of provisioning a DigitalOcean load balancer
with two droplets using HashiCorp’s Terraform infrastructure provisioning tool.
9.3 CLOUD SERVICE FUNDAMENTALS
Cloud services are loosely grouped into three categories:

      Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS), in which users request raw compute, memory,
      network, and storage resources. These are typically delivered in the form of virtual
      private servers, aka VPSs. Under IaaS, users are responsible for managing everything
      above the hardware: operating systems, networking, storage systems, and their own
      software.
      Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS), in which developers submit their custom applications
      packaged in a format specified by the vendor. The vendor then runs the code on the
      user’s behalf. In this model, users are responsible for their own code, while the
      vendor manages the OS and network.

      Software-as-a-Service (SaaS), the broadest category, in which the vendor hosts and
      manages software and users pay some form of subscription fee for access. Users
      maintain neither the operating system nor the application. Almost any hosted web
      application (think WordPress) falls into the SaaS category.

Table 9.3 shows how each of these abstract models breaks down in terms of the layers involved
in a complete deployment.

Table 9.3: Which layers are you responsible for managing?

Of these options, IaaS is the most pertinent to system administration. In addition to defining
virtual computers, IaaS providers virtualize the hardware elements that are typically connected to
them, such as disks (now described more generally as “block storage devices”) and networks.
Virtual servers can inhabit virtual networks for which you specify the topology, routes,
addressing, and other characteristics. In most cases, these networks are private to your
organization.
IaaS can also include other core services such as such as databases, queues, key/value stores, and
compute clusters. These features combine to create a complete replacement for (and in many
cases, an improvement over) the traditional data center.

PaaS is an area of great promise that is not yet fully realized. Current offerings such as AWS
Elastic Beanstalk, Google App Engine, and Heroku come with environmental constraints or
nuances that render them impractical (or incomplete) for use in busy production environments.
Time and again we’ve seen business outgrow these services. However, new services in this area
are receiving a lot of attention. We anticipate dramatic improvements in the coming years.
Cloud providers differ widely in terms of their exact features and implementation details, but
conceptually, many services are quite similar. The following sections describe cloud services
generally, but because AWS is the front-runner in this space, we sometimes adopt its
nomenclature and conventions as defaults.
Access to the cloud
Most cloud providers’ primary interface is some kind of web-based GUI. New system
administrators should use this web console to create an account and to configure their first few
resources.
Cloud providers also define APIs that access the same underlying functionality as that of the web
console. In most cases, they also have a standard command-line wrapper, portable to most
systems, for those APIs.
Even veteran administrators make frequent use of web GUIs. However, it’s also important to get
friendly with the command-line tools because they lend themselves more readily to automation
and repeatability. Use scripts to avoid the tedious and sluggish process of requesting everything
through a browser.
Cloud vendors also maintain software development kits (SDKs) for many popular languages to
help developers use their APIs. Third party tools use the SDKs to simplify or automate specific
sets of tasks. You’ll no doubt encounter these SDKs if you write your own tools.

You normally use SSH with public key authentication to access UNIX and Linux systems
running in the cloud. See SSH, the Secure SHell for more information about the effective use of
SSH.
Some cloud providers let you access a console session through a web browser, which can be
especially helpful if you mistakenly lock yourself out with a firewall rule or broken SSH
configuration. It’s not a representation of the system’s actual console, though, so you can’t use
this feature to debug bootstrapping or BIOS issues.
Regions and availability zones
Cloud providers maintain data centers around the world. A few standard terms describe
geography-related features.
A “region” is a location in which a cloud provider maintains data centers. In most cases, regions
are named after the territory of intended service even though the data centers themselves are
more concentrated. For example, Amazon’s us-east-1 region is served by data centers in north
Virginia.
It takes about 5ms for a fiber optic signal to travel 1,000km, so regions the size of the U.S. east
coast are fine from a performance standpoint. The network connectivity available to a data center
is more important than its exact location.
Some providers also have “availability zones” (or simply “zones”) which are collections of data
centers within a region. Zones within a region are peered through high-bandwidth, low-latency,
redundant circuits, so inter-zone communication is fast, though not necessarily cheap.
Anecdotally, we’ve experienced inter-zone latency of less than 1ms.

Zones are typically designed to be independent of one another in terms of power and cooling, and
they’re geographically dispersed so that a natural disaster that affects one zone has a low
probability of affecting others in the same region.
Regions and zones are fundamental to building highly available network services. Depending on
availability requirements, you can deploy in multiple zones and regions to minimize the impact
of a failure within a data center or geographic area. Availability zone outages can occur, but are
rare; regional outages are rarer still. Most services from cloud vendors are aware of zones and
use them to achieve built-in redundancy.

Exhibit A: Servers distributed among multiple regions and zones
Multiregion deployments are more complex because of the physical distances between regions
and the associated higher latency. Some cloud vendors have faster and more reliable inter-region
networks than others. If your site serves users around the world, the quality of your cloud
vendor’s network is paramount.
Choose regions according to geographic proximity to your user base. For scenarios in which the
developers and users are in different geographic regions, consider running your development
systems close to the developers and production systems closer to the users.

For sites that deliver services to a global user base, running in multiple regions can substantially
improve performance for end users. Requests can be routed to each client’s regional servers by
exploitation of geographic DNS resolution, which determines clients’ locations by their source IP
addresses.
Most cloud platforms have regions for North America, South America, Europe, and the Asia
Pacific countries. Only AWS and Azure have a direct presence in China. Some platforms,
notably AWS and vCloud, have regions compatible with strict U.S. federal ITAR requirements.
Virtual private servers
The flagship service of the cloud is the virtual private server, a virtual machine that runs on the
provider’s hardware. Virtual private servers are sometimes called instances. You can create as
many instances as you need, running your preferred operating system and applications, then shut
the instances down when they’re no longer needed. You pay only for what you use, and there’s
typically no up-front cost.
Because instances are virtual machines, their CPU power, memory, disk size, and network
settings can be customized when the instance is created and even adjusted after the fact. Public
cloud platforms define preset configurations called instance types. They range from single-CPU
nodes with 512MiB of memory to large systems with many CPU cores and multiple TiB of
memory. Some instance types are balanced for general use, and others are specialized for CPU-,
memory-, disk-, or network-intensive applications. Instance configurations are one area in which
cloud vendors compete vigorously to match market needs.
Instances are created from “images,” the saved state of an operating system that contains (at
minimum) a root filesystem and a boot loader. An image might also include disk volumes for
additional filesystems and other custom settings. You can easily create custom images with your
own software and settings.
All our example operating systems are widely used, so cloud platforms typically supply official
images for them. (Currently, you must build your own FreeBSD image if you use Google
Compute Engine.) Many third party software vendors also maintain cloud images that have their
software preinstalled to facilitate adoption by customers. It’s also easy to create your own custom
images. Learn more about how to create virtual machine images in Packer.
Networking
Cloud providers let you create virtual networks with custom topologies that isolate your systems
from each other and from the Internet. On platforms that offer this feature, you can set the
address ranges of your networks, define subnets, configure routes, set firewall rules, and
construct VPNs to connect to external networks. Expect some network-related operational
overhead and maintenance when building larger, more complex cloud deployments.

     See this page for more information about VPNs.

     See this page for more information about RFC1918 private addresses.

You can make your servers accessible to the Internet by leasing publicly routable addresses from
your provider—all providers have a large pool of such addresses from which users can draw.
Alternatively, servers can be given only a private RFC1918 address within the address space you
selected for your network, rendering them publicly inaccessible.
Systems without public addresses are not directly accessible from the Internet, even for
administrative attention. You can access such hosts through a jump server or bastion host that is
open to the Internet, or through a VPN that connects to your cloud network. For security, the
smaller the external-facing footprint of your virtual empire, the better.
Although this all sounds promising, you have even less control over virtual networks than you do
over traditional networks, and you’re subject to the whims and vagaries of the feature set made
available by your chosen provider. It’s particularly maddening when new features launch but
can’t interact with your private network. (We’re looking at you, Amazon!)
Skip to this page for the details on TCP/IP networking in the cloud.
Storage
Data storage is a major part of cloud computing. Cloud providers have the largest and most
advanced storage systems on the planet, so you’ll be hard pressed to match their capacity and
capabilities in a private data center. The cloud vendors bill by the amount of data you store. They
are highly motivated to give you as many ways as possible to ingest your data. (Case in point:
AWS offers on-site visits from the AWS Snowmobile, a 45-foot long shipping container towed
by a semi truck that can transfer 100 PiB from your data center to the cloud.)
Here are a few of the most important ways to store data in the cloud:

      “Object stores” contain collections of discrete objects (files, essentially) in a flat
      namespace. Object stores can accommodate a virtually unlimited amount of data with
      exceptionally high reliability but relatively slow performance. They are designed for
      a read-mostly access pattern. Files in an object store are accessed over the network
      through HTTPS. Examples include AWS S3 and Google Cloud Storage.
      Block storage devices are virtualized hard disks. They can be requisitioned at your
      choice of capacities and attached to a virtual server, much like SAN volumes on a
      traditional network. You can move volumes among nodes and customize their I/O
      profiles. Examples include AWS EBS and Google persistent disks.
      Ephemeral storage is local disk space on a VPS that is created from disk drives on the
      host server. These are normally fast and capacious, but the data is lost when you
      delete the VPS. Therefore, ephemeral storage is best used for temporary files.
      Examples include instance store volumes on AWS and local SSDs on GCP.

In addition to these raw storage services, cloud providers usually offer a variety of freestanding
database services that you can access over the network. Relational databases such as MySQL,
PostgreSQL, and Oracle run as services on the AWS Relational Database Service. They offer
built-in multizone redundancy and encryption for data at rest.

Distributed analytics databases such as AWS Redshift and GCP BigQuery offer incredible ROI;
both are worth a second look before you build your own expensive data warehouse. Cloud
vendors also offer the usual assortment of in-memory and NoSQL databases such as Redis and
memcached.
Identity and authorization
Administrators, developers, and other technical staff all need to manage cloud services. Ideally,
access controls should conform to the principle of least privilege: each principal can access only
the entities that are relevant to it, and nothing more. Depending on the context, such access
control specifications can become quite elaborate.
AWS is exceptionally strong in this area. Their service, called Identity and Access Management
(IAM), defines not only users and groups but also roles for systems. A server can be assigned
policies, for example, to allow its software to start and stop other servers, store and retrieve data
in an object store, or interact with queues—all with automatic key rotation. IAM also has an API
for key management to help you store secrets safely.
Other cloud platforms have fewer authorization features. Unsurprisingly, Azure’s service is
based on Microsoft’s Active Directory. It pairs well with sites that have an existing directory to
integrate with. Google’s access control service, also called IAM, is relatively coarse-grained and
incomplete in comparison with Amazon’s.
Automation
The APIs and CLI tools created by cloud vendors are the basic building blocks of custom
automation, but they’re often clumsy and impractical for orchestrating larger collections of
resources. For example, what if you need to create a new network, launch several VPS instances,
provision a database, configure a firewall, and finally, connect all these components? Written in
terms of a raw cloud API, that would make for a complex script.
AWS CloudFormation was the first service to address this problem. It accepts a template in
JSON or YAML format that describes the desired resources and their associated configuration
details. You submit the template to CloudFormation, which checks it for errors, sorts out
dependencies among resources, and creates or updates the cloud configuration according to your
specifications.
CloudFormation templates are powerful but error prone in human hands because of their strict
syntax requirements. A complete template is unbearably verbose and a challenge for humans to
even read. Instead of writing these templates by hand, we prefer to automatically render them
with     a    Python     library     called   Troposphere     from     Mark      Peek     (see
github.com/cloudtools/troposphere).
Third party services also target this problem. Terraform, from the open source company
HashiCorp, is a cloud-agnostic tool for constructing and changing infrastructure. As with
CloudFormation, you describe resources in a custom template and then let Terraform make the
proper API calls to implement your configuration. You can then check your configuration file
into version control and manage the infrastructure over time.
Serverless functions
One of the most innovative features in the cloud since its emergence are the cloud function
services, sometimes called functions-as-a-service, also referred to as “serverless” features. Cloud
functions are a model of code execution that do not require any long-lived infrastructure.
Functions execute in response to an event, such as the arrival of a new HTTP request or an object
being uploaded to a storage location.
For example, consider a traditional web server. HTTP requests are forwarded by the networking
stack of the operating system to a web server, which routes them appropriately. When the
response completes, the web server continues to wait for requests.
Contrast this with the serverless model. An HTTP request arrives, and it triggers the cloud
function to handle the response. When complete, the cloud function terminates. The owner pays
for the period of time that the function executes. There is no server to maintain and no operating
system to manage.
AWS introduced Lambda, their cloud function service, at a conference in 2014. Google followed
shortly with a Cloud Functions service. Several cloud function implementations exist for projects
like OpenStack, Mesos, and Kubernetes.

Serverless functions hold great promise for the industry. A massive ecosystem of tools is
emerging to support simpler and more powerful use of the cloud. We’ve found many uses for
these short-lived, serverless functions in our day-to-day administrative duties. We anticipate
rapid advances in this area in the coming years.
9.4 CLOUDS: VPS QUICK START BY PLATFORM
The cloud is an excellent sandbox in which to learn UNIX and Linux. This short section helps
you get up and running with virtual servers on AWS, GCP, or DigitalOcean. As system
administrators, we rely extensively on the command line (as opposed to web GUIs) for
interacting with the cloud, so we illustrate the use of those tools here.
Amazon Web Services
To use AWS, first set up an account at aws.amazon.com. Once you create the account,
immediately follow the guidance in the AWS Trusted Advisor to configure your account
according to the suggested best practices. You can then navigate to the individual service
consoles for EC2, VPC, etc.
Each AWS service has a dedicated user interface. When you log in to the web console, you’ll see
the list of services at the top. Within Amazon, each service is managed by an independent team,
and the UI unfortunately reflects this fact. Although this decoupling has helped AWS services
grow, it does lead to a somewhat fragmented user experience. Some interfaces are more refined
and intuitive than others.
To protect your account, enable multifactor authentication (MFA) for the root user, then create a
privileged IAM user for day-to-day use. We also generally configure an alias so that users can
access the web console without entering an account number. This option is found on the landing
page for IAM.
In the next section we introduce the official aws CLI tool written in Python. New users might
also benefit from Amazon’s Lightsail quick start service, which aims to start an EC2 instance
with minimum fuss.

aws: control AWS subsystems

    See this page for more information about pip.

aws is a unified command-line interface to AWS services. It manages instances, provisions
storage, edits DNS records, and performs most of the other tasks shown in the web console. The
tool relies on the exceptional Boto library, a Python SDK for the AWS API, and it runs on any
system with a working Python interpreter. Install it with pip:

To use aws, first authenticate it to the AWS API by using a pair of random strings called the
“access key ID” and the “secret access key.” You generate these credentials in the IAM web
console and then copy-and-paste them locally.
Running aws configure prompts you to set your API credentials and default region:
These settings are saved to ~/.aws/config. As long as you’re setting up your environment, we
also recommend that you configure the bash shell’s autocompletion feature so that
subcommands are easier to discover. See the AWS CLI docs for more information.
The first argument to aws names the specific service you want to manipulate; for example, ec2
for actions that control the Elastic Compute Cloud. You can add the keyword help at the end of
any command to see instructions. For example, aws help, aws ec2 help, and aws ec2 describe-
instances help all produce useful man pages.

Creating an EC2 instance
Use aws ec2 run-instances to create and launch EC2 instances. Although you can create
multiple instances with a single command (by using the --count option), the instances must all
share the same configuration. Here’s a minimal example of a complete command:

This example specifies the following configuration details:

      The base system image is an Amazon-supplied version of CentOS 7 named ami-
      d440a6e7. (AWS calls their images AMIs, for Amazon Machine Images.) Like other
      AWS objects, the image names are unfortunately not mnemonic; you must look up
      IDs in the EC2 web console or on the command line (aws ec2 describe-images) to
      decode them.
      The instance type is t2.nano, which is currently the smallest instance type. It has one
      CPU core and 512MiB of RAM. Details about the available instance types can be
      found in the EC2 web console.
      A preconfigured key pair is also assigned to control SSH access. You can generate a
      key pair with the ssh-keygen command (see this page), then upload the public key to
      the AWS EC2 console.

The output of that aws ec2 run-instances command is shown below. It’s JSON, so it’s easily
consumed by other software. For example, after launching an instance, a script could extract the
instance’s IP address and configure DNS, update an inventory system, or coordinate the launch
of multiple servers.
By default, EC2 instances in VPC subnets do not have public IP addresses attached, rendering
them accessible only from other systems within the same VPC. To reach instances directly from
the Internet, use the --associate-public-ip-address option, as shown in our example command.
You can discover the assigned IP address after the fact with aws ec2 describe-instances or by
finding the instance in the web console.
Firewalls in EC2 are known as “security groups.” Because we didn’t specify a security group
here, AWS assumes the “default” group, which allows no access. To connect to the instance,
adjust the security group to permit SSH from your IP address. In real-world scenarios, security
group structure should be carefully planned during network design. We discuss security groups
in Security groups and NACLs.
aws configure sets a default region, so you need not specify a region for the instance unless you
want something other than the default. The AMI, key pair, and subnet are all region-specific, and
aws complains if they don’t exist in the region you specify. (In this particular case, the AMI, key
pair, and subnet are from the us-east-1 region.)
Take note of the InstanceId field in the output, which is a unique identifier for the new instance.
You can use aws ec2 describe-instances --instance-id id to show details about an existing
instance, or just use aws ec2 describe-instances to dump all instances in the default region.

Once the instance is running and the default security group has been adjusted to pass traffic on
TCP port 22, you can use SSH to log in. Most AMIs are configured with a nonroot account that
has sudo privileges. For Ubuntu the username is ubuntu; for CentOS, centos. FreeBSD and
Amazon Linux both use ec2-user. The documentation for your chosen AMI should specify the
username if it’s not one of these.

     See Chapter 8 for more information about user management.

Properly configured images allow only public keys for SSH authentication, not passwords. Once
you’ve logged in with the SSH private key, you’ll have full sudo access with no password
required. We recommend disabling the default user after the first boot and creating personal,
named accounts.

Viewing the console log
Debugging low-level problems such as startup issues and disk errors can be challenging without
access to the instance’s console. EC2 lets you retrieve the console output of an instance, which
can be useful if the instance is in an error state or appears to be hung. You can do this through the
web interface or with aws ec2 get-console-output, as shown:

The full log is of course much longer than this snippet. In the JSON dump, the contents of the log
are unhelpfully concatenated as a single line. For better readability, clean it up with sed:
This log output comes directly from the Linux boot process. The example above shows a few
lines from the moment the instance was first initialized. In most cases, you’ll find the most
interesting information near the end of the log.

Stopping and terminating instances
When you’re finished with an instance, you can “stop” it to shut the instance down but retain it
for later use, or “terminate” it to delete the instance entirely. By default, termination also releases
the instance’s root disk into the ether. Once terminated, an instance can never be resurrected,
even by AWS.

Note that virtual machines don’t change state instantly; it takes a minute for the hamsters to reset.
Hence the presence of transitional states such as “starting” and “stopping.” Be sure to account for
them in any instance-wrangling scripts you might write.
Google Cloud Platform
To get started with GCP, establish an account at cloud.google.com. If you already have a Google
identity, you can sign up using the same account.
GCP services operate within a compartment known as a project. Each project has separate users,
billing details, and API credentials, so you can achieve complete separation between disparate
applications or areas of business. Once you create your account, create a project and enable
individual GCP services according to your needs. Google Compute Engine, the VPS service, is
one of the first services you might want to enable.

Setting up gcloud
gcloud, a Python application, is the CLI tool for GCP. It’s a component of the Google Cloud
SDK, which contains a variety of libraries and tools for interfacing with GCP. To install it,
follow the installation instructions at cloud.google.com/sdk.

Your first action should be to set up your environment by running gcloud init. This command
starts a small, local web server and then opens a browser link to display the Google UI for
authentication. After you authenticate yourself through the web browser, gcloud asks you (back
in the shell) to select a project profile, a default zone, and other defaults. The settings are saved
under ~/.config/gcloud/.
Run gcloud help for general information or gcloud -h for a quick usage summary. Per-
subcommand help is also available; for example, gcloud help compute shows a man page for the
Compute Engine service.

Running an instance on GCE
Unlike aws commands, which return immediately, gcloud compute operates synchronously.
When you run the create command to provision a new instance, for example, gcloud makes the
necessary API call, then waits until the instance is actually up and running before it returns. This
convention avoids the need to poll for the state of an instance after you create it. (See aws ec2
wait for information on polling for events or states within AWS EC2.)

To create an instance, first obtain the name or alias of the image you want to boot:

Then create and boot the instance, specifying its name and the image you want:
The output normally has a column that shows whether the instance is “preemptible,” but in this
case it was blank and we removed it to make the output fit on the page. Preemptible instances are
less expensive than standard instances, but they can run for only 24 hours and can be terminated
at any time if Google needs the resources for another purpose. They’re meant for long-lived
operations that can tolerate interruptions, such as batch processing jobs.
Preemptible instances are similar in concept to EC2’s “spot instances” in that you pay a
discounted rate for otherwise-spare capacity. However, we’ve found Google’s preemptible
instances to be more sensible and simpler to manage than AWS’s spot instances. Long-lived
standard instances remain the most appropriate choice for most tasks, however.
gcloud initializes the instance with a public and private IP address. You can use the public IP
with SSH, but gcloud has a helpful wrapper to simplify SSH logins:

Cha-ching!
DigitalOcean
With advertised boot times of 55 seconds, DigitalOcean’s virtual servers (“droplets”) are the
fastest route to a root shell. The entry level cost is $5 per month, so they won’t break the bank,
either.

     See this page for more details on setting up Ruby gems.

Once you create an account, you can manage your droplets through DigitalOcean’s web site.
However, we find it more convenient to use tugboat, a command-line tool written in Ruby that
uses DigitalOcean’s published API. Assuming that you have Ruby and its library manager, gem,
installed on your local system, just run gem install tugboat to install tugboat.

     See this page for more about SSH.

A couple of one-time setup steps are required. First, generate a pair of cryptographic keys that
you can use to control access to your droplets:

Copy the contents of the public key file and paste them into DigitalOcean’s web console
(currently under Settings → Security). As part of that process, assign a short name to the public
key.

Next, connect tugboat to DigitalOcean’s API by entering an access token that you obtain from
the web site. tugboat saves the token for future use in ~/.tugboat.
To create and start a droplet, first identify the name of the system image you want to use as a
baseline. For example:

You also need DigitalOcean’s numeric ID for the SSH key you pasted into the web console:

This output shows that the numeric ID for the key named id_rsa_do is 1587367. Create and start
a droplet like this:

Here, the argument to -k is the SSH key ID, and the last argument is a short name for the droplet
that you can assign as you wish.
Once the droplet has had time to boot, you can log in with tugboat ssh:

You can create as many droplets as you need, but keep in mind that you’ll be billed for each one,
even if it’s powered down. To inactivate a droplet, power it down, use tugboat snapshot
droplet-name snapshot-name to memorialize the state of the system, and run tugboat destroy
droplet-name to decommission the droplet. You can later recreate the droplet by using the
snapshot as a source image.
9.5 COST CONTROL
Cloud newcomers often naïvely anticipate that large-scale systems will be dramatically cheaper
to run in the cloud than in a data center. This expectation might stem from the inverse sticker
shock engendered by cloud platforms’ low, low price per instance-hour. Or perhaps the idea is
implanted by the siren songs of cloud marketers, whose case studies always show massive
savings.
Regardless of their source, it’s our duty to stamp out hope and optimism wherever they are
found. In our experience, new cloud customers are often surprised when costs climb quickly.

Cloud tariffs generally consist of several components:

      The compute resources of virtual private servers, load balancers, and everything else
      that consumes CPU cycles to run your services. Pricing is per hour of use.
      Internet data transfer (both ingress and egress), as well as traffic among zones and
      regions. Pricing is per GiB or TiB transferred.
      Storage of all types: block storage volumes, object storage, disk snapshots, and in
      some cases, I/O to and from the various persistence stores. Pricing is per GiB or TiB
      stored per month.

For compute resources, the pay-as-you-go model, also known as “on-demand pricing,” is the
most expensive. On AWS and DigitalOcean, the minimum billing increment is one hour, and on
GCP it’s a minute. Prices range from fractions of a cent per hour (DigitalOcean’s smallest droplet
type with 512MiB and one CPU core, or AWS t2.nano instances) to several dollars per hour (an
i2.8xlarge instance on AWS with 32 cores, 104GiB RAM, and 8 × 800GB local SSDs).
You can realize substantial savings on virtual servers by paying up front for longer terms. On
AWS, this is called “reserved instance pricing.” Unfortunately, it’s unbearably cumbersome and
time-consuming to determine precisely what to purchase. Reserved EC2 instances are tied to a
specific instance family. If you decide later that you need something different, your investment is
lost. On the upside, if you reserve an instance, you are guaranteed that it will be available for
your use. With on-demand instances, your desired type might not even be available when you go
to provision it, depending on current capacity and demand. AWS continues to tweak its pricing
structure, so with luck the current system might be simplified in the future.
For number crunching workloads that can tolerate interruptions, AWS offers spot pricing. The
spot market is an auction. If your bid exceeds the current spot price, you’ll be granted use of the
instance type you requested until the price exceeds your maximum bid, at which point your
instance is terminated. The prices can be deeply discounted compared to the EC2 on-demand and
reserved prices, but the use cases are limited.
Google Compute Engine pricing is refreshingly simple by comparison. Discounts are
automatically applied for sustained use, and you never pay up front. You pay the full base price
for the first week of the month, and the incremental price drops each week by 20% of the base
rate, to a maximum discount of 60%. The net discount on a full month of use is 30%. That’s
roughly comparable to the discount on a one-year reserved EC2 instance, but you can change
instances at any time. (For the persnickety and the thrifty: because the discount scheme is linked
to your billing cycle, the timing of transitions makes a difference. You can switch instance types
at the start or end of a cycle with no penalty. The worst case is to switch halfway through a
billing cycle, which incurs a penalty of about 20% of an instance’s monthly base rate.)
Network traffic can be even more difficult to predict reliably. The culprits commonly found to be
responsible for high data-transfer costs include

      Web sites that ingest and serve large media files (videos, images, PDFs, and other
      large documents) directly from the cloud, rather than offloading them to a CDN (see
      this page)

      Inter-zone or inter-region traffic for database clusters that replicate for fault tolerance;
      for example, software such as Cassandra, MongoDB, and Riak
      MapReduce or data warehouse clusters that span multiple zones
      Disk images and volume snapshots transferred between zones or regions for backup
      (or by some other automated process)

In situations where replication among multiple zones is important for availability, you’ll save on
transfer expenses by limiting clusters to two zones rather than using three or more. Some
software offers tweaks such as compression that can reduce the amount of replicated data.
One substantial source of expense on AWS is provisioned IOPS for EBS volumes. Pricing for
EBS is per GiB-month and IOPS-month. The price of a 200GiB EBS volume with 5,000 IOPS is
a few hundred dollars per month. A cluster of these just might break the bank.

The best defense against high bills is to measure, monitor, and avoid overprovisioning. Use
autoscaling features to remove capacity when it isn’t needed, lowering costs at times of low
demand. Use more, smaller instances for more fine-grained control. Watch usage patterns
carefully before spending a bundle on reserved instances or high-bandwidth volumes. The cloud
is flexible, and you can make changes to your infrastructure as needed.
As environments grow, identifying where money is being spent can be a challenge. Larger cloud
accounts might benefit from third party services that analyze use and offer tracking and reporting
features. The two that we’ve used are Cloudability and CloudHealth. Both tap in to the billing
features of AWS to break down reports by user-defined tag, service, or geographic location.
9.6 RECOMMENDED READING
WITTIG, ANDREAS, AND MICHAEL WITTIG. Amazon Web Services In Action. Manning Publications,
2015.
GOOGLE. cloudplatform.googleblog.com. The official blog for the Google Cloud Platform.

BARR, JEFF, AND OTHERS AT AMAZON WEB SERVICES. aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws. The official blog
of Amazon Web Services.
DIGITALOCEAN. digitalocean.com/company/blog. Technical and product blog from DigitalOcean.
VOGELS, WERNER. All Things Distributed. allthingsdistributed.com. The blog of Werner Vogels,
CTO at Amazon.
WARDLEY, SIMON. Bits or pieces? blog.gardeviance.org. The blog of researcher and cloud
trendsetter Simon Wardley. Analysis of cloud industry trends along with occasional rants.

BIAS, RANDY. cloudscaling.com/blog. Randy Bias is a director at OpenStack and has insightful
info on the private cloud industry and its future.
CANTRILL, BRYAN. The Observation Deck. dtrace.org/blogs/bmc. Interesting views and technical
thoughts on general computing from the CTO of Joyent, a niche but interesting cloud platform.
AMAZON. youtube.com/AmazonWebServices. Conference talks and other video content from
AWS.
