10 Logging

System daemons, the kernel, and custom applications all emit operational data that is logged and
eventually ends up on your finite-sized disks. This data has a limited useful life and may need to
be summarized, filtered, searched, analyzed, compressed, and archived before it is eventually
discarded. Access and audit logs may need to be managed closely according to regulatory
retention rules or site security policies.
A log message is usually a line of text with a few properties attached, including a time stamp, the
type and severity of the event, and a process name and ID (PID). The message itself can range
from an innocuous note about a new process starting up to a critical error condition or stack
trace. It’s the responsibility of system administrators to glean useful, actionable information from
this ongoing torrent of messages.
This task is known generically as log management, and it can be divided into a few major
subtasks:

      Collecting logs from a variety of sources
      Providing a structured interface for querying, analyzing, filtering, and monitoring
      messages
      Managing the retention and expiration of messages so that information is kept as long
      as it is potentially useful or legally required, but not indefinitely

UNIX has historically managed logs through an integrated but somewhat rudimentary system,
known as syslog, that presents applications with a standardized interface for submitting log
messages. Syslog sorts messages and saves them to files or forwards them to another host over
the network. Unfortunately, syslog tackles only the first of the logging chores listed above
(message collection), and its stock configuration differs widely among operating systems.
Perhaps because of syslog’s shortcomings, many applications, network daemons, startup scripts,
and other logging vigilantes bypass syslog entirely and write to their own ad hoc log files. This
lawlessness has resulted in a complement of logs that varies significantly among flavors of UNIX
and even among Linux distributions.

     Linux’s systemd journal represents a second attempt to bring sanity to the logging madness.
     The journal collects messages, stores them in an indexed and compressed binary format,
and furnishes a command-line interface for viewing and filtering logs. The journal can stand
alone, or it can coexist with the syslog daemon with varying degrees of integration, depending on
the configuration.
A variety of third party tools (both proprietary and open source) address the more complex
problem of curating messages that originate from a large network of systems. These tools feature
such aids as graphical interfaces, query languages, data visualization, alerting, and automated
anomaly detection. They can scale to handle message volumes on the order of terabytes per day.
You can subscribe to these products as a cloud service or host them yourself on a private
network.
Exhibit A depicts the architecture of a site that uses all the log management services mentioned
above. Administrators and other interested parties can run a GUI against the centralized log
cluster to review log messages from systems across the network. Administrators can also log in
to individual nodes and access messages through the systemd journal or the plain text files
written by syslog. If this diagram raises more questions than answers for you, you’re reading the
right chapter.

Exhibit A: Logging architecture for a site with centralized logging
When debugging problems and errors, experienced administrators turn to the logs sooner rather
than later. Log files often contain important hints that point toward the source of vexing
configuration errors, software bugs, and security issues. Logs are the first place you should look
when a daemon crashes or refuses to start, or when a chronic error plagues a system that is trying
to boot.
The importance of having a well-defined, site-wide logging strategy has grown along with the
adoption of formal IT standards such as PCI DSS, COBIT, and ISO 27001, as well as with the
maturing of regulations for individual industries. Today, these external standards may require
you to maintain a centralized, hardened, enterprise-wide repository for log activity, with time
stamps validated by NTP and with a strictly defined retention schedule. However, even sites
without regulatory or compliance requirements can benefit from centralized logging.
This chapter covers the native log management software used on Linux and FreeBSD, including
syslog, the systemd journal, and logrotate. We also introduce some additional tools for
centralizing and analyzing logs across the network. The chapter closes with some general advice
for setting up a sensible site-wide log management policy.
10.1 LOG LOCATIONS
UNIX is often criticized for being inconsistent, and indeed it is. Just take a look at a directory of
log files and you’re sure to find some with names like maillog, some like cron.log, and some
that use various distribution- and daemon-specific naming conventions. By default, most of these
files are found in /var/log, but some renegade applications write their log files elsewhere on the
filesystem.
Table 10.1 compiles information about some of the more common log files on our example
systems. The table lists the following:

      The log files to archive, summarize, or truncate

      The program that creates each
      An indication of how each filename is specified
      The frequency of cleanup that we consider reasonable
      The systems (among our examples) that use the log file

      A description of the file’s contents

Filenames in Table 10.1 are relative to /var/log unless otherwise noted. Syslog maintains many
of the listed files, but others are written directly by applications.

Table 10.1: Log files on parade
Log files are generally owned by root, although conventions for the ownership and mode of log
files vary. In some cases, a less privileged process such as httpd may require write access to the
log, in which case the ownership and mode should be set appropriately. You might need to use
sudo to view log files that have tight permissions.

     See this page for an introduction to disk partitioning.

Log files can grow quickly, especially the ones for busy services such as web, database, and DNS
servers. An out-of-control log file can fill up the disk and bring the system to its knees. For this
reason, it’s often helpful to define /var/log as a separate disk partition or filesystem. (Note that
this advice is just as relevant to cloud-based instances and private virtual machines as it is to
physical servers.)
Files not to manage
Most logs are text files to which lines are written as interesting events occur. But a few of the
logs listed in Table 10.1 have a rather different context.
wtmp (sometimes wtmpx) contains a record of users’ logins and logouts as well as entries that
record when the system was rebooted or shut down. It’s a fairly generic log file in that new
entries are simply added to the end of the file. However, the wtmp file is maintained in a binary
format. Use the last command to decode the information.
lastlog contains information similar to that in wtmp, but it records only the time of last login for
each user. It is a sparse, binary file that’s indexed by UID. It will stay smaller if your UIDs are
assigned in some kind of numeric sequence, although this is certainly nothing to lose sleep over
in the real world. lastlog doesn’t need to be rotated because its size stays constant unless new
users log in.
Finally, some applications (notably, databases) create binary transaction logs. Don’t attempt to
manage these files. Don’t attempt to view them, either, or you’ll be treated to a broken terminal
window.
How to view logs in the systemd journal

     See the sections starting on this page for more information about systemd and systemd
     units.

For Linux distributions running systemd, the quickest and easiest way to view logs is to use the
journalctl command, which prints messages from the systemd journal. You can view all
messages in the journal, or pass the -u flag to view the logs for a specific service unit. You can
also filter on other constraints such as time window, process ID, or even the path to a specific
executable.
For example, the following output shows journal logs from the SSH daemon:

Use journalctl -f to print new messages as they arrive. This is the systemd equivalent of the
much-beloved tail -f for following plain text files as they are being appended to.
The next section covers the systemd-journald daemon and its configuration.
10.2 THE SYSTEMD JOURNAL
       In accordance with its mission to replace all other Linux subsystems, systemd includes a
       logging daemon called systemd-journald. It duplicates most of syslog’s functions but can
also run peacefully in tandem with syslog, depending on how you or the system have configured
it. If you’re leery of switching to systemd because syslog has always “just worked” for you,
spend some time to get to know systemd. After a little practice, you may be pleasantly surprised.
Unlike syslog, which typically saves log messages to plain text files, the systemd journal stores
messages in a binary format. All message attributes are indexed automatically, which makes the
log easier and faster to search. As discussed above, you can use the journalctl command to
review messages stored in the journal.

The journal collects and indexes messages from several sources:

      The /dev/log socket, to harvest messages from software that submits messages
      according to syslog conventions
      The device file /dev/kmsg, to collect messages from the Linux kernel. The systemd
      journal daemon replaces the traditional klogd process that previously listened on this
      channel and formerly forwarded the kernel messages to syslog.
      The UNIX socket /run/systemd/journal/stdout, to service software that writes log
      messages to standard output
      The UNIX socket /run/systemd/journal/socket, to service software that submits
      messages through the systemd journal API

      Audit messages from the kernel’s auditd daemon

Intrepid administrators can use the systemd-journal-remote utility (and its relatives, systemd-
journal-gateway and systemd-journal-upload,) to stream serialized journal messages over the
network to a remote journal. Unfortunately, this feature does not come preinstalled on vanilla
distributions. As of this writing, packages are available for Debian and Ubuntu but not for Red
Hat or CentOS. We expect this lapse to be rectified soon; in the meantime, we recommend
sticking with syslog if you need to forward log messages among systems.
Configuring the systemd journal
The default journal configuration file is /etc/systemd/journald.conf; however, this file is not
intended to be edited directly. Instead, add your customized configurations to the
/etc/systemd/journald.conf.d directory. Any files placed there with a .conf extension are
automatically incorporated into the configuration. To set your own options, create a new .conf
file in this directory and include the options you want.
The default journald.conf includes a commented-out version of every possible option, along
with each option’s default value, so you can see at a glance which options are available. They
include the maximum size of journal, the retention period for messages, and various rate-limiting
settings.
The Storage option controls whether to save the journal to disk. The possible values are somewhat
confusing:

      volatile stores the journal in memory only.

      persistent saves the journal in /var/log/journal/, creating the directory if it doesn’t
      already exist.

      auto saves the journal in /var/log/journal/ but does not create the directory. This is the
      default value.
      none discards all log data.

Most Linux distributions (including all our examples) default to the value auto and do not come
with a /var/log/journal directory. Hence, the journal is not saved between reboots by default,
which is unfortunate.
You can modify this behavior either by creating the /var/log/journal directory or by updating the
journal to use persistent storage and restarting systemd-journald:

This series of commands creates the custom configuration directory journald.conf.d, creates a
configuration file to set the Storage option to persistent, and restarts the journal so that the new
settings take effect. systemd-journald will now create the directory and retain the journal. We
recommend this change for all systems; it’s a real handicap to lose all log data every time the
system reboots.
One of the niftiest journal options is Seal, which enables Forward Secure Sealing (FSS) to
increase the integrity of log messages. With FSS enabled, messages submitted to the journal
cannot be altered without access to a cryptographic key pair. You generate the key pair itself by
running journalctl --setup-keys. Refer to the man pages for journald.conf and journalctl for
the full scoop on this option.
Adding more filtering options for journalctl
We showed a quick example of a basic journalctl log search here. In this section, we show some
additional ways to use journalctl to filter messages and gather information about the journal.
To allow normal users to read from the journal without needing sudo permissions, add them to
the systemd-journal UNIX group.
The --disk-usage option shows the size of the journal on disk:

The --list-boots option shows a sequential list of system boots with numerical identifiers. The
most recent boot is always 0. The dates at the end of the line show the time stamps of the first
and last messages generated during that boot.

You can use the -b option to restrict the log display to a particular boot session. For example, to
view logs generated by SSH during the current session:

To show all the messages from yesterday at midnight until now:

To show the most recent 100 journal entries from a specific binary:

You can use journalctl --help as a quick reference for these arguments.
Coexisting with syslog
Both syslog and the systemd journal are active by default on each of our example Linux systems.
Both packages collect and store log messages. Why would you want both of them running, and
how does that even work?
Unfortunately, the journal is missing many of the features that are available in syslog. As the
discussion starting on this page demonstrates, rsyslog can receive messages from a variety of
input plug-ins and forward them to a diverse set of outputs according to filters and rules, none of
which is possible when the systemd journal is used. The systemd universe does include a remote
streaming tool, systemd-journal-remote, but it’s relatively new and untested in comparison with
syslog. Administrators may also find it convenient to keep certain log files in plain text, as syslog
does, instead of in the journal’s binary format.
We anticipate that over time, new features in the journal will usurp syslog’s responsibilities. But
for now, Linux distributions still need to run both systems to achieve full functionality.
The mechanics of the interaction between the systemd journal and syslog are somewhat
convoluted. To begin with, systemd-journald takes over responsibility for collecting log
messages from /dev/log, the logging socket that was historically controlled by syslog. (More
specifically, the journal links /dev/log to /run/systemd/journal/dev-log.) For syslog to get in on
the logging action, it must now access the message stream through systemd. Syslog can retrieve
log messages from the journal in two ways:

      The systemd journal can forward messages to another socket (typically
      /run/systemd/journal/syslog), from which the syslog daemon can read them. In this
      mode of operation, systemd-journald simulates the original message submitters and
      conforms to the standard syslog API. Therefore, only the basic message parameters
      are forwarded; some systemd-specific metadata is lost.

      Alternatively, syslog can consume messages directly from the journal API, in the
      same manner as the journalctl command. This method requires explicit support for
      cooperation on the part of syslogd, but it’s a more complete form of integration that
      preserves the metadata for each message. (See man systemd.journal-fields for a
      rundown of the available metadata.)

Debian and Ubuntu default to the former method, but Red Hat and CentOS use the latter. To
determine which type of integration has been configured on your system, inspect the
ForwardToSyslog option in /etc/systemd/journald.conf. If its value is yes, socket-forwarding is in
use.
10.3 SYSLOG
Syslog, originally written by Eric Allman, is a comprehensive logging system and IETF-standard
logging protocol. RFC5424 is the latest version of the syslog specification, but the previous
version, RFC3164, may better reflect the real-world installed base.
Syslog has two important functions: to liberate programmers from the tedious mechanics of
writing log files, and to give administrators control of logging. Before syslog, every program was
free to make up its own logging policy. System administrators had no consistent control over
what information was kept or where it was stored.

Syslog is flexible. It lets administrators sort messages by source (“facility”) and importance
(“severity level”) and route them to a variety of destinations: log files, users’ terminals, or even
other machines. It can accept messages from a wide variety of sources, examine the attributes of
the messages, and even modify their contents. Its ability to centralize the logging for a network is
one of its most valuable features.
On Linux systems, the original syslog daemon (syslogd) has been replaced with a newer
implementation called rsyslog (rsyslogd). Rsyslog is an open source project that extends the
capabilities of the original syslog but maintains backward API compatibility. It is the most
reasonable choice for administrators working on modern UNIX and Linux systems and is the
only version of syslog we cover in this chapter.
     Rsyslog is available for FreeBSD, and we recommend that you adopt it in preference to the
     standard FreeBSD syslog unless you have simple needs. For instructions on converting a
FreeBSD system to use rsyslog, see wiki.rsyslog.com/index.php/FreeBSD. If you decide to stick
with FreeBSD’s traditional syslog, jump to this page for configuration information.
Reading syslog messages
You can read plaintext messages from syslog with normal UNIX and Linux text processing tools
such as grep, less, cat, and awk. The snippet below shows typical events in /var/log/syslog from
a Debian host:

The example contains entries from several different daemons and subsystems: networking, NFS,
cron, Docker, and the power management daemon, acpid. Each message contains the following
space-separated fields:

      Time stamp

      System’s hostname, in this case jessie
      Name of the process and its PID in square brackets
      Message payload

Some daemons encode the payload to add metadata about the message. In the output above, the
docker process includes its own time stamp, a log level, and information about the configuration
of the daemon itself. This additional information is entirely up to the sending process to generate
and format.
Rsyslog architecture
Think about log messages as a stream of events and rsyslog as an event-stream processing
engine. Log message “events” are submitted as inputs, processed by filters, and forwarded to
output destinations. In rsyslog, each of these stages is configurable and modular. By default,
rsyslog is configured in /etc/rsyslog.conf.
The rsyslogd process typically starts at boot and runs continuously. Programs that are syslog
aware write log entries to the special file /dev/log, a UNIX domain socket. In a stock
configuration for systems without systemd, rsyslogd reads messages from this socket directly,
consults its configuration file for guidance on how to route them, and dispatches each message to
an appropriate destination. It’s also possible (and common) to configure rsyslogd to listen for
messages on a network socket.

     See this page for more information about signals.

If you modify /etc/rsyslog.conf or any of its included files, you must restart the rsyslogd daemon
to make your changes take effect. A TERM signal makes the daemon exit. A HUP signal causes
rsyslogd to close all open log files, which is useful for rotating (renaming and restarting) logs.

By longstanding convention, rsyslogd writes its process ID to /var/run/syslogd.pid, so it’s easy
to send signals to rsyslogd from a script. (On modern Linux systems, /var/run is a symbolic link
to /run.) For example, the following command sends a hangup signal:

Trying to compress or rotate a log file that rsyslogd has open for writing is not healthy and has
unpredictable results, so be sure to send a HUP signal before you do this. Refer to this page for
information on sane log rotation with the logrotate utility.
Rsyslog versions
Red Hat and CentOS use rsyslog version 7, but Debian and Ubuntu have updated to version 8.
FreeBSD users installing from ports can choose either version 7 or version 8. As you might
expect, the rsyslog project recommends using the most recent version, and we defer to their
advice. That said, it won’t make or break your logging experience if your operating system of
choice is a version behind the latest and greatest.
Rsyslog 8 is a major rewrite of the core engine, and although a lot has changed under the hood
for module developers, the user-facing aspects remain mostly unchanged. With a few exceptions,
the configurations in the following sections are valid for both versions.
Rsyslog configuration
rsyslogd’s behavior is controlled by the settings in /etc/rsyslog.conf. All our example Linux
distributions include a simple configuration with sensible defaults that suit most sites. Blank lines
and lines beginning with a # are ignored. Lines in an rsyslog configuration are processed in order
from beginning to end, and order is significant.
At the top of the configuration file are global properties that configure the daemon itself. These
lines specify which input modules to load, the default format of messages, ownerships and
permissions of files, the working directory in which to maintain rsyslog’s state, and other
settings. The following example configuration is adapted from the default rsyslog.conf on
Debian Jessie:

Most distributions use the $IncludeConfig legacy directive to include additional files from a
configuration directory, typically /etc/rsyslog.d/*.conf. Because order is important, distributions
organize files by preceding file names with numbers. For example, the default Ubuntu
configuration includes the following files:
  20-ufw.conf
  21-cloudinit.conf
  50-default.conf
rsyslogd interpolates these files into /etc/rsyslog.conf in lexicographic order to form its final
configuration.
Filters, sometimes called “selectors,” constitute the bulk of an rsyslog configuration. They define
how rsyslog sorts and processes messages. Filters are formed from expressions that select
specific message criteria and actions that route selected messages to a desired destination.
Rsyslog understands three configuration syntaxes:

      Lines that use the format of the original syslog configuration file. This format is now
      known as “sysklogd format,” after the kernel logging daemon sysklogd. It’s simple
      and effective but has some limitations. Use it to construct simple filters.
      Legacy rsyslog directives, which always begin with a $ sign. The syntax comes from
      ancient versions of rsyslog and really ought to be obsolete. However, not all options
      have been converted to the newer syntax, and so this syntax remains authoritative for
      certain features.

      RainerScript, named for Rainer Gerhards, the lead author of rsyslog. This is a
      scripting syntax that supports expressions and functions. You can use it to configure
      most—but not all—aspects of rsyslog.

Many real-world configurations include a mix of all three formats, sometimes to confusing
effect. Although it has been around since 2008, RainerScript remains slightly less common than
the others. Fortunately, none of the dialects are particularly complex. In addition, many sites will
have no need to do major surgery on the vanilla configurations included with their stock
distributions.
To migrate from a traditional syslog configuration, simply start with your existing syslog.conf
file and add options for the rsyslog features you want to activate.

Modules
Rsyslog modules extend the capabilities of the core processing engine. All inputs (sources) and
outputs (destinations) are configured through modules, and modules can even parse and mutate
messages. Although most modules were written by Rainer Gerhards, some were contributed by
third parties. If you’re a C programmer, you can write your own.

Module names follow a predictable prefix pattern. Those beginning with im are input modules;
om* are output modules, mm* are message modifiers, and so on. Most modules have additional
configuration options that customize their behavior. The rsyslog module documentation is the
complete reference.
The following list briefly describes some of the more common (or interesting) input and output
modules, along with a few nuggets of exotica:

      imjournal integrates with the systemd journal, as described in Coexisting with syslog.

             reads messages from a UNIX domain socket. This is the default when
      imuxsock
      systemd is not present.
      imklog understands how to read kernel messages on Linux and BSD.
      imfile converts a plain text file to syslog message format. It’s useful for importing log
      files generated by software that doesn’t have native syslog support. Two modes exist:
      polling mode, which checks the file for updates at a configurable interval, and
      notification mode (inotify), which uses the Linux filesystem event interface. This
      module is smart enough to resume where it left off whenever rsyslogd is restarted.

           See this page for more information about TLS.

      imtcp and imudp accept network messages over TCP and UDP, respectively. They allow
      you to centralize logging on a network. In combination with rsyslog’s network stream
      drivers, the TCP module can also accept mutually authenticated syslog messages
      through TLS. For Linux sites with extremely high volume, see also the imptcp module.

      If the immark module is present, rsyslog produces time stamp messages at regular
      intervals. These time stamps can help you figure out that your machine crashed
      between 3:00 and 3:20 a.m., not just “sometime last night.” This information is also a
      big help when you are debugging problems that seem to occur regularly. Use the
      MarkMessagePeriod option to configure the mark interval.

      omfile writes messages to a file. This is the most commonly used output module, and
      the only one configured in a default installation.
      omfwd forwards messages to a remote syslog server over TCP or UDP. This is the
      module you’re looking for if your site needs centralized logging.

      omkafka is a producer implementation for the Apache Kafka data streaming engine.
      Users at high-volume sites may benefit from being able to process messages that have
      many potential consumers.
      Similarly to omkafka, omelasticsearch writes directly to an Elasticsearch cluster. See this
      page for more information about the ELK log management stack, which includes
      Elasticsearch as one of its components.
      ommysql  sends messages to a MySQL database. The rsyslog source distribution
      includes an example schema. Combine this module with the $MainMsgQueueSize legacy
      directive for better reliability.

Modules can be loaded and configured through either the legacy or RainerScript configuration
formats. We show some examples in the format-specific sections below.

sysklogd syntax
The sysklogd syntax is the traditional syslog configuration format. If you encounter a standard
syslogd, such as the version installed on stock FreeBSD, this is likely all you’ll need to
understand. (But note that the configuration file for the traditional syslogd is /etc/syslog.conf, not
/etc/rsyslog.conf.)
This format is primarily intended for routing messages of a particular type to a desired
destination file or network address. The basic format is

The selector is separated from the action by one or more spaces or tabs. For example, the line

causes messages related to authentication to be saved in /var/log/auth.log.
Selectors identify the source program (“facility”) that is sending a log message and the message’s
priority level (“severity”) with the syntax

Both facility names and severity levels must be chosen from a short list of defined values;
programs can’t make up their own. Facilities are defined for the kernel, for common groups of
utilities, and for locally written programs. Everything else is classified under the generic facility
“user.”
Selectors can contain the special keywords * and none, meaning all or nothing, respectively. A
selector can include multiple facilities separated by commas. Multiple selectors can be combined
with semicolons.

In general, selectors are ORed together: a message matching any selector is subject to the line’s
action. However, a selector with a level of none excludes the listed facilities regardless of what
other selectors on the same line might say.
Here are some examples of ways to format and combine selectors:

Table 10.2 lists the valid facility names. They are defined in syslog.h in the standard library.
Table 10.2: Syslog facility names

Don’t take the distinction between auth and authpriv too seriously. All authorization-related
messages are sensitive, and none should be world-readable. sudo logs use authpriv.
Table 10.3 lists the valid severity levels in order of descending importance.

Table 10.3: Syslog severity levels (descending severity)

The severity level of a message specifies its importance. The distinctions between the various
levels are sometimes fuzzy. There’s a clear difference between notice and warning and between
warning and err, but the exact shade of meaning expressed by alert as opposed to crit is a matter
of conjecture.
Levels indicate the minimum importance that a message must have to be logged. For example, a
message from SSH at level warning would match the selector auth.warning as well as the selectors
auth.info, auth.notice, auth.debug, *.warning, *.notice, *.info, and *.debug. If the configuration directs auth.info
messages to a particular file, auth.warning messages will go there also.
The format also allows the characters = and ! to be prefixed to priority levels to indicate “this
priority only” and “except this priority and higher,” respectively. Table 10.4 shows examples.

Table 10.4: Examples of priority level qualifiers

The action field tells what to do with each message. Table 10.5 lists the options.

Table 10.5: Common actions

If a filename (or fifoname) action is specified, the name should be an absolute path. If you specify
a nonexistent filename, rsyslogd will create the file when a message is first directed to it. The
ownership and permissions of the file are specified in the global configuration directives as
shown on this page.
Here are a few configuration examples that use the traditional syntax:
You can preface a filename action with a dash to indicate that the filesystem should not be
synced after each log entry is written. syncing helps preserve as much logging information as
possible in the event of a crash, but for busy log files it can be devastating in terms of I/O
performance. We recommend including the dashes (and thereby inhibiting syncing) as a matter
of course. Remove the dashes only temporarily when investigating a problem that is causing
kernel panics.

Legacy directives
Although rsyslog calls these “legacy” options, they remain in widespread use, and you will find
them in the majority of rsyslog configurations. Legacy directives can configure all aspects of
rsyslog, including global daemon options, modules, filtering, and rules.
In practice, however, these directives are most commonly used to configure modules and the
rsyslogd daemon itself. Even the rsyslog documentation warns against using the legacy format
for message-processing rules, claiming that it is “extremely hard to get right.” Stick with the
sysklogd or RainerScript formats for actually filtering and processing messages.

Daemon options and modules are straightforward. For example, the options below enable
logging over UDP and TCP on the standard syslog port (514). They also permit keep-alive
packets to be sent to clients to keep TCP connections open; this option reduces the cost of
reconstructing connections that have timed out.

To put these options into effect, you could add the lines to a new file to be included in the main
configuration such as /etc/rsyslog.d/10-network-inputs.conf. Then restart rsyslogd. Any
options that modify a module’s behavior must appear after the module has been loaded.
Table 10.6 describes a few of the more common legacy directives.
Table 10.6: Rsyslog legacy configuration options

RainerScript
The RainerScript syntax is an event-stream-processing language with filtering and control-flow
capabilities. In theory, you can also set basic rsyslogd options through RainerScript. But since
some legacy options still don’t have RainerScript equivalents, why confuse things by using
multiple option syntaxes?
RainerScript is more expressive and human-readable than rsyslogd’s legacy directives, but it has
an unusual syntax that’s unlike any other configuration system we’ve seen. In practice, it feels
somewhat cumbersome. Nonetheless, we recommend it for filtering and rule development if you
need those features. In this section we discuss only a subset of its functionality.
    Of our example distributions, only Ubuntu uses RainerScript in its default configuration
    files. However, you can use RainerScript format on any system running rsyslog version 7 or
newer.
You can set global daemon parameters by using the global() configuration object. For example:

Most legacy directives have identically named RainerScript counterparts, such as workDirectory and
maxMessageSize in the lines above. The equivalent legacy syntax for this configuration would be:

You can also load modules and set their operating parameters through RainerScript. For example,
to load the UDP and TCP modules and apply the same configuration demonstrated on this page,
you’d use the following RainerScript:
In RainerScript, modules have both “module parameters” and “input parameters.” A module is
loaded only once, and a module parameter (e.g., the KeepAlive option in the imtcp module above)
applies to the module globally. By contrast, input parameters can be applied to the same module
multiple times. For example, we could instruct rsyslog to listen on both TCP ports 514 and 1514:

Most of the benefits of RainerScript relate to its filtering capabilities. You can use expressions to
select messages that match a certain set of characteristics, then apply a particular action to the
matching messages. For example, the following lines route authentication-related messages to
/var/log/auth.log:

In this example, $syslogfacility-text is a message property—that is, a part of the message’s metadata.
Properties are prefixed by a dollar sign to indicate to rsyslog that they are variables. In this case,
the action is to use the omfile output module to write matching messages to auth.log.

Table 10.7 lists some of the most frequently used properties.

Table 10.7: Commonly used rsyslog message properties

A given filter can include multiple filters and multiple actions. The following fragment targets
kernel messages of critical severity. It logs the messages to a file and sends email to alert an
administrator of the problem.

Here, we’ve specified that we don’t want more than one email message generated per hour
(3,600 seconds).
Filter expressions support regular expressions, functions, and other sophisticated techniques.
Refer to the RainerScript documentation for complete details.
Config file examples
In this section we show three sample configurations for rsyslog. The first is a basic but complete
configuration that writes log messages to files. The second example is a logging client that
forwards syslog messages and httpd access and error logs to a central log server. The final
example is the corresponding log server that accepts log messages from a variety of logging
clients.
These examples rely heavily on RainerScript because it’s the suggested syntax for the latest
versions of rsyslog. A few of the options are valid only in rsyslog version 8 and include Linux-
specific settings such as inotify.

Basic rsyslog configuration
The following file can serve as a generic RainerScript rsyslog.conf for any Linux system:

This example begins with a few default log collection options for rsyslogd. The default file
permissions of 0640 for new log files is more restrictive than the omfile default of 0644.
Network logging client
This logging client forwards system logs and the Apache access and error logs to a remote server
over TCP.

Apache httpd does not write messages to syslog by default, so the access and error logs are read
from text files with imfile. The messages are tagged for later use in a filter expression. (httpd can
log directly to syslog with mod_syslog, but we use imfile here for illustration.)

At the end of the file, the if statement is a filter expression that searches for Apache messages and
forwards those to logs.admin.com, the central log server. Logs are sent over TCP, which
although more reliable than UDP still can potentially drop messages. You can use RELP (the
Reliable Event Logging Protocol), a nonstandard output module, to guarantee log delivery.

     See Chapter 23 for more about configuration management.

In a real-world scenario, you might render the Apache-related portion of this configuration to
/etc/rsyslog.d/55-apache.conf as part of the configuration management setup for the server.
Central logging host
The configuration of the corresponding central log server is straightforward: listen for incoming
logs on TCP port 514, filter by log type, and write to files in the site-wide logging directory.

The central logging host generates a time stamp for each message as it writes out the message.
Apache messages include a separate time stamp that was generated when httpd logged the
message. You’ll find both of these time stamps in the site-wide log files.
Syslog message security
Rsyslog can send and receive log messages over TLS, a layer of encryption and authentication
that runs on top of TCP. See this page for general information about TLS.
The example below assumes that the certificate authority, public certificates, and keys have
already been generated. See this page for details on public key infrastructure and certificate
generation.
This configuration introduces a new option: the network stream driver, a module that operates at
a layer between the network and rsyslog. It typically implements features that enhance basic
network capabilities. TLS is enabled by the gtls netstream driver.

The following example enables the gtls driver for a log server. The gtls driver requires a CA
certificate, a public certificate, and the server’s private key. The imtcp module then enables the gtls
stream driver.

The log server listens on the TLS version of the standard syslog port, 6514. The authMode option
tells syslog what type of validation to perform. x509/name, the default, checks that the certificate is
signed by a trusted authority and also validates the subject name that binds a certificate to a
specific client through DNS.
Configuration for the client side of the TLS connection is similar. Use the client certificate and
private key, and use the gtls netstream driver for the log forwarding output module.
In this case, we forward all log messages with a sort of Frankenstein version of the sysklogd
syntax: the action component is a RainerScript form instead of one of the standard sysklogd-
native options. If you need to be pickier about which messages to forward (or you need to send
different classes of message to different destinations), you can use RainerScript filter
expressions, as demonstrated in several of the examples earlier in this chapter.
Syslog configuration debugging
The logger command is useful for submitting log entries from shell scripts or the command line.
You can also use it to test changes to rsyslog’s configuration. For example, if you have just
added the line

and want to verify that it is working, run the command

A line containing “test message” should be written to /tmp/evi.log. If this doesn’t happen,
perhaps you’ve forgotten to restart rsyslogd?
10.4 KERNEL AND BOOT-TIME LOGGING
The kernel and the system startup scripts present some special challenges in the domain of
logging. In the case of the kernel, the problem is to create a permanent record of the boot process
and kernel operation without building in dependencies on any particular filesystem or filesystem
organization. For startup scripts, the challenge is to capture a coherent and accurate narrative of
the startup process without permanently tying any system daemons to a startup log file,
interfering with any
programs’ own logging, or gooping up the startup scripts with glue that serves only to capture
boot-time messages.
For kernel logging at boot time, kernel log entries are stored in an internal buffer of limited size.
The buffer is large enough to accommodate messages about all the kernel’s boot-time activities.
When the system is up and running, a user process accesses the kernel’s log buffer and disposes
of its contents.

      On Linux systems, systemd-journald reads kernel messages from the kernel buffer by
      reading the device file /dev/kmsg. You can view these messages by running journalctl -k
or its alias, journalctl --dmesg. You can also use the traditional dmesg command.
     On FreeBSD and older Linux systems, the dmesg command is the best way to view the
     kernel buffer; the output even contains messages that were generated before init started.
Another issue related to kernel logging is the appropriate management of the system console. As
the system is booting, it’s important for all output to come to the console. However, once the
system is up and running, console messages may be more an annoyance than a help, especially if
the console is used for logins.
Under Linux, dmesg lets you set the kernel’s console logging level with a command-line flag.
For example,

Level 7 is the most verbose and includes debugging information. Level 1 includes only panic
messages; the lower-numbered levels are the most severe. All kernel messages continue to go to
the central buffer (and thence, to syslog) regardless of whether they are forwarded to the console.
10.5 MANAGEMENT AND ROTATION OF LOG FILES
Erik Troan’s logrotate utility implements a variety of log management policies and is standard
on all our example Linux distributions. It also runs on FreeBSD, but you’ll have to install it from
the ports collection. By default, FreeBSD uses a different log rotation package, called newsyslog;
see this page for details.
logrotate: cross-platform log management
A logrotate configuration consists of a series of specifications for groups of log files to be
managed. Options that appear outside the context of a log file specification (such as errors, rotate,
and weekly in the following example) apply to all subsequent specifications. They can be
overridden within the specification for a particular file and can also be respecified later in the file
to modify the defaults.
Here’s a somewhat contrived example that handles several different log files:

This configuration rotates /var/log/messages every week. It keeps five versions of the file and
notifies rsyslog each time the file is reset. Samba log files (there might be several) are also
rotated weekly, but instead of being moved aside and restarted, they are copied and then
truncated. The Samba daemons are sent HUP signals only after all log files have been rotated.
Table 10.8 lists the most useful logrotate.conf options.

Table 10.8: logrotate options
logrotate is normally run out of cron once a day. Its standard configuration file is
/etc/logrotate.conf, but multiple configuration files (or directories containing configuration files)
can appear on logrotate’s command line.
This feature is used by Linux distributions, which define the /etc/logrotate.d directory as a
standard place for logrotate config files. logrotate-aware software packages (there are many)
can drop in log management instructions as part of their installation procedure, thus greatly
simplifying administration.
The delaycompress option is worthy of further explanation. Some applications continue to write to
the previous log file for a bit after it has been rotated. Use delaycompress to defer compression for
one additional rotation cycle. This option results in three types of log files lying around: the
active log file, the previously rotated but not yet compressed file, and compressed, rotated files.
     In addition to logrotate, Ubuntu has a simpler program called savelog that manages rotation
     for individual files. It’s more straightforward than logrotate and doesn’t use (or need) a
config file. Some packages prefer to use their own savelog configurations rather than logrotate.
newsyslog: log management on FreeBSD
The misleadingly named newsyslog—so named because it was originally intended to rotate files
managed by syslog—is the FreeBSD equivalent of logrotate. Its syntax and implementation are
entirely different from those of logrotate, but aside from its peculiar date formatting, the syntax
of a newsyslog configuration is actually somewhat simpler.
The primary configuration file is /etc/newsyslog.conf. See man newsyslog for the format and
syntax. The default /etc/newsyslog.conf has examples for standard log files.
Like logrotate, newsyslog runs from cron. In a vanilla FreeBSD configuration, /etc/crontab
includes a line that runs newsyslog once per hour.
10.6 MANAGEMENT OF LOGS AT SCALE
It’s one thing to capture log messages, store them on disk, and forward them to a central server.
It’s another thing entirely to handle logging data from hundreds or thousands of servers. The
message volumes are simply too high to be managed effectively without tools designed to
function at this scale. Fortunately, multiple commercial and open source tools are available to
address this need.
The ELK stack
The clear leader in the open source space—and indeed, one of the better software suites we’ve
had the pleasure of working with—is the formidable “ELK” stack consisting of Elasticsearch,
Logstash, and Kibana. This combination of tools helps you sort, search, analyze, and visualize
large volumes of log data generated by a global network of logging clients. ELK is built by
Elastic (elastic.co), which also offers training, support, and enterprise add-ons for ELK.
Elasticsearch is a scalable database and search engine with a RESTful API for querying data. It’s
written in Java. Elasticsearch installations can range from a single node that handles a low
volume of data to several dozen nodes in a cluster that indexes many thousands of events each
second. Searching and analyzing log data is one of the most popular applications for
Elasticsearch.
If Elasticsearch is the hero of the ELK stack, Logstash is its sidekick and trusted partner.
Logstash accepts data from many sources, including queueing systems such as RabbitMQ and
AWS SQS. It can also read data directly from TCP or UDP sockets and from the traditional
logging stalwart, syslog. Logstash can parse messages to add additional structured fields and can
filter out unwanted or nonconformant data. Once messages have been ingested, Logstash can
write them to a wide variety of destinations, including, of course, Elasticsearch.
You can send log entries to Logstash in a variety of ways. You can configure a syslog input for
Logstash and use the rsyslog omfwd output module, as described in Rsyslog configuration. You
can also use a dedicated log shipper. Elastic’s own version is called Filebeat and can ship logs
either to Logstash or directly to Elasticsearch.

The final ELK component, Kibana, is a graphical front end for Elasticsearch. It gives you a
search interface through which to find the entries you need among all the data that has been
indexed by Elasticsearch. Kibana can create graphs and visualizations that help to generate new
insights about your applications. It’s possible, for example, to plot log events on a map to see
geographically what’s happening with your systems. Other plug-ins add alerting and system
monitoring interfaces.
Of course, ELK doesn’t come without operational burden. Building a large scale ELK stack with
a custom configuration is no simple task, and managing it takes time and expertise. Most
administrators we know (present company included!) have accidentally lost data because of bugs
in the software or operational errors. If you choose to deploy ELK, be aware that you’re signing
up for substantial administrative overhead.
We are aware of at least one service, logz.io, that offers production-grade ELK-as-a-service. You
can send log messages from your network over encrypted channels to an endpoint that logz.io
provides. There, the messages are ingested, indexed, and made available through Kibana. This is
not a low-cost solution, but it’s worth evaluating. As with many cloud services, you may find that
it’s ultimately more expensive to replicate the service locally.
Graylog
Graylog is the spunky underdog to ELK’s pack leader. It resembles the ELK stack in several
ways: it keeps data in Elasticsearch, and it can accept log messages either directly or through
Logstash, just as in the ELK stack. The real differentiator is the Graylog UI, which many users
proclaim to be superior and easier to use.

    See this page for more information about RBAC and this page for more information
    about LDAP.

Some of the enterprise (read: paid) features of ELK are included in the Graylog open source
product, including support for role-based access control and LDAP integration. Graylog is
certainly worthy of inclusion in a bake-off when you’re choosing a new logging infrastructure.
Logging as a service
Several commercial log management offerings are available. Splunk is the most mature and
trusted; both hosted and on-premises versions are available. Some of the largest corporate
networks rely on Splunk, not only as a log manager but also as a business analytics system. But if
you choose Splunk, be prepared to pay dearly for the privilege.
Alternative SaaS options include Sumo Logic, Loggly, and Papertrail, all of which have native
syslog integration and a reasonable search interface. If you use AWS, Amazon’s CloudWatch
Logs service can collect log data both from AWS services and from your own applications.
10.7 LOGGING POLICIES
Over the years, log management has emerged from the realm of system administration minutiae
to become a formidable enterprise management challenge in its own right. IT standards,
legislative edicts, and provisions for security-incident handling may all impose requirements on
the handling of log data. A majority of sites will eventually need to adopt a holistic and
structured approach to the management of this data.
Log data from a single system has a relatively inconsequential effect on storage, but a centralized
event register that covers hundreds of servers and dozens of applications is a different story
entirely. Thanks in large part to the mission-critical nature of web services, application and
daemon logs have become as important as those generated by the operating system.

Keep these questions in mind when designing your logging strategy:

      How many systems and applications will be included?
      What type of storage infrastructure is available?
      How long must logs be retained?
      What types of events are important?

The answers to these questions depend on business requirements and on any applicable standards
or regulations. For example, one standard from the Payment Card Industry Security Standards
Council requires that logs be retained on easy-access media (e.g., a locally mounted hard disk)
for three months and archived to long-term storage for at least one year. The same standard also
includes guidance about the types of data that must be included.

Of course, as one of our reviewers mentioned, you can’t be subpoenaed for log data you do not
possess. Some sites do not collect (or intentionally destroy) sensitive log data for this reason.
You might or might not be able get away with this kind of approach, depending on the
compliance requirements that apply to you.
However you answer the questions above, be sure to gather input from your information security
and compliance departments if your organization has them.
For most applications, consider capturing at least the following information:

      Username or user ID
      Event success or failure
      Source address for network events
      Date and time (from an authoritative source, such as NTP)
      Sensitive data added, altered, or removed
      Event details

A log server should have a carefully considered storage strategy. For example, a cloud-based
system might offer immediate access to 90 days of data, with a year of older data being rolled
over to an object storage service and three additional years being saved to an archival storage
solution. Storage requirements evolve over time, so a successful implementation must adapt
easily to changing conditions.

Limit shell access to centralized log servers to trusted system administrators and personnel
involved in addressing compliance and security issues. These log warehouse systems have no
real role in the organization’s daily business beyond satisfying auditability requirements, so
application administrators, end users, and the help desk have no business accessing them. Access
to log files on the central servers should itself be logged.
Centralization takes work, and at smaller sites it may not represent a net benefit. We suggest
twenty servers as a reasonable threshold for considering centralization. Below that size, just
ensure that logs are rotated properly and are archived frequently enough to avoid filling up a
disk. Include log files in a monitoring solution that alerts you if a log file stops growing.
