11 Drivers and the Kernel

The kernel is the central government of a UNIX or Linux system. It’s responsible for enforcing
rules, sharing resources, and providing the core services that user processes rely on.
We don’t usually think too much about what the kernel is doing. That’s fortunate, because even a
simple command such as cat /etc/passwd entails a complex series of underlying actions. If the
system were an airliner, we’d want to think in terms of commands such as “increase altitude to
35,000 feet” rather than having to worry about the thousands of tiny internal steps that were
needed to manage the airplane’s control surfaces.
The kernel hides the details of the system’s hardware underneath an abstract, high-level interface.
It’s akin to an API for application programmers: a well-defined interface that provides useful
facilities for interacting with the system. This interface provides five basic features:

      Management and abstraction of hardware devices
      Processes and threads (and ways to communicate among them)
      Management of memory (virtual memory and memory-space protection)
      I/O facilities (filesystems, network interfaces, serial interfaces, etc.)
      Housekeeping functions (startup, shutdown, timers, multitasking, etc.)
Only device drivers are aware of the specific capabilities and communication protocols of the
system’s hardware. User programs and the rest of the kernel are largely independent of that
knowledge. For example, a filesystem on disk is very different from a network filesystem, but the
kernel’s VFS layer makes them look the same to user processes and to other parts of the kernel.
You don’t need to know whether the data you’re writing is headed to block 3,829 of disk device
#8 or whether it’s headed for Ethernet interface e1000e wrapped in a TCP packet. All you need
to know is that it will go to the file descriptor you specified.
Processes (and threads, their lightweight cousins) are the mechanisms through which the kernel
implements CPU time sharing and memory protection. The kernel fluidly switches among the
system’s processes, giving each runnable thread a small slice of time in which to get work done.
The kernel prevents processes from reading and writing each other’s memory spaces unless they
have explicit permission to do so.

The memory management system defines an address space for each process and creates the
illusion that the process owns an essentially unlimited region of contiguous memory. In reality,
different processes’ memory pages are jumbled together in the system’s physical memory. Only
the kernel’s bookkeeping and memory protection schemes keep them sorted out.
Layered on top of the hardware device drivers, but below most other parts of the kernel, are the
I/O facilities. These consist of filesystem services, the networking subsystem, and various other
services that are used to get data into and out from the system.
11.1 KERNEL CHORES FOR SYSTEM ADMINISTRATORS
Nearly all of the kernel’s multilayered functionality is written in C, with a few dabs of assembly
language code thrown in to give access to CPU features that are not accessible through C
compiler directives (e.g., the atomic read-modify-write instructions defined by many CPUs).
Fortunately, you can be a perfectly effective system administrator without being a C programmer
and without ever touching kernel code.
That said, it’s inevitable that at some point you’ll need to make some tweaks. These can take
several forms.

Many of the kernel’s behaviors (such as network-packet forwarding) are controlled or influenced
by tuning parameters that are accessible from user space. Setting these values appropriately for
your environment and workload is a common administrative task.
Another common kernel-related task is the installation of new device drivers. New models and
types of hardware (video cards, wireless devices, specialized audio cards, etc.) appear on the
market constantly, and vendor-distributed kernels aren’t always equipped to take advantage of
them.
In some cases, you may even need to build a new version of the kernel from source code.
Sysadmins don’t have to build kernels as frequently as they used to, but it still makes sense in
some situations. It’s easier than it sounds.
Kernels are tricky. It’s surprisingly easy to destabilize the kernel even through minor changes.
Even if the kernel boots, it may not run as well as it should. What’s worse, you may not even
realize that you’ve hurt performance unless you have a structured plan for assessing the results of
your work. Be conservative with kernel changes, especially on production systems, and always
have a backup plan for reverting to a known-good configuration.
11.2 KERNEL VERSION NUMBERING
Before we dive into the depths of kernel wrangling, it’s worth spending a few words to discuss
kernel versions and their relationship to distributions.
The Linux and FreeBSD kernels are under continuous active development. Over time, defects are
fixed, new features added, and obsolete features removed.

Some older kernels continue to be supported for an extended period of time. Likewise, some
distributions choose to emphasize stability and so run the older, more tested kernels. Other
distributions try to offer the most recent device support and features but might be a bit less stable
as a result. It’s incumbent upon you as an administrator to select among these options in a
manner that accommodates your users’ needs. No single solution is appropriate for every context.
Linux kernel versions
      The Linux kernel and the distributions based on it are developed separately from one other,
      so the kernel has its own versioning scheme. Some kernel releases do achieve a sort of
iconic popularity, so it’s not unusual to find that several independent distributions are all using
the same kernel. You can check with uname -r to see what kernel a given system is running.

     See semver.org for more information about semantic versioning.

Linux kernels are named according to the rules of so-called semantic versioning, that is, they
include three components: a major version, a minor version, and a patch level. At present, there
is no predictable relationship between a version number and its intended status as a stable or
development kernel; kernels are blessed as stable when the developers decide that they’re stable.
In addition, the kernel’s major version number has historically been incremented somewhat
capriciously.
Many stable versions of the Linux kernel can be under long-term maintenance at one time. The
kernels shipped by major Linux distributions often lag the latest releases by a substantial margin.
Some distributions even ship kernels that are formally out of date.

You can install newer kernels by compiling and installing them from the kernel source tree.
However, we don’t recommend that you do this. Different distributions have different goals, and
they select kernel versions appropriate to those goals. You never know when a distribution has
avoided a newer kernel because of some subtle but specific concern. If you need a more recent
kernel, install a distribution that’s designed around that kernel rather than trying to shoehorn the
new kernel into an existing system.
FreeBSD kernel versions
     FreeBSD takes a fairly straightforward approach to versions and releases. The project
     maintains two major production versions, which as of this writing are versions 10 and 11.
The kernel has no separate versioning scheme; it’s released as part of the complete operating
system and shares its version number.
The older of the two major releases (in this case, FreeBSD 10) can be thought of as a
maintenance version. It doesn’t receive sweeping new features, and it’s maintained with a focus
on stability and security updates.
The more recent version (FreeBSD 11, right now) is where active development occurs. Stable
releases intended for general use are issued from this tree as well. However, the kernel code is
always going to be newer and somewhat less battle-tested than that of the previous major
version.
In general, dot releases occur about every four months. Major releases are explicitly supported
for five years, and the dot releases within them are supported for three months after the next dot
release comes out. That’s not an extensive lifetime for old dot releases; FreeBSD expects you to
stay current with patches.
11.3 DEVICES AND THEIR DRIVERS
A device driver is an abstraction layer that manages the system’s interaction with a particular
type of hardware so that the rest of the kernel doesn’t need to know its specifics. The driver
translates between the hardware commands understood by the device and a stylized
programming interface defined (and used) by the kernel. The driver layer helps keep the majority
of the kernel device-independent.
Given the remarkable pace at which new hardware is developed, it is practically impossible to
keep main-line OS distributions up to date with the latest hardware. Hence, you will occasionally
need to add a device driver to your system to support a new piece of hardware.

Device drivers are system-specific, and they are often specific to a particular range of kernel
revisions as well. Drivers for other operating systems (e.g., Windows) do not work on UNIX and
Linux, so keep this in mind when you purchase new hardware. In addition, devices vary in their
degree of compatibility and functionality when used with various Linux distributions, so it’s wise
to pay some attention to the experiences that other sites have had with any hardware you are
considering.
Hardware vendors are attracted to the FreeBSD and Linux markets and often publish appropriate
drivers for their products. In the optimal case, your vendor furnishes you with both a driver and
installation instructions. Occasionally, you might find the driver you need only on some sketchy-
looking and uncommented web page. Caveat emptor.
Device files and device numbers
In most cases, device drivers are part of the kernel; they are not user processes. However, a
driver can be accessed both from within the kernel and from user space, usually through “device
files” that live in the /dev directory. The kernel maps operations on these files into calls to the
code of the driver.
Most non-network devices have one or more corresponding files in /dev. Complex servers may
support hundreds of devices. By virtue of being device files, the files in /dev each have a major
and minor device number associated with them. The kernel uses these numbers to map device-
file references to the corresponding driver.
The major device number identifies the driver with which the file is associated (in other words,
the type of device). The minor device number usually identifies which particular instance of a
given device type is to be addressed. The minor device number is sometimes called the unit
number.
You can see the major and minor number of a device file with ls -l:

This example shows the first SCSI/SATA/SAS disk on a Linux system. It has a major number of
8 and a minor number of 0.
The minor device number is sometimes used by the driver to select or enable certain
characteristics particular to that device. For example, a tape drive can have one file in /dev that
rewinds the drive automatically when it’s closed and another file that does not. The driver is free
to interpret the minor device number in whatever way it likes. Look up the man page for the
driver to determine what convention it is using.

There are actually two types of device files: block device files and character device files. A block
device is read or written one block (a group of bytes, usually a multiple of 512) at a time; a
character device can be read or written one byte at a time. The character b at the start of the ls
output above indicates that /dev/sda is a block device; ls would show this character as a c if it
were a character device.
Traditionally, certain devices could act as either block or character devices, and separate device
files existed to make them accessible in either mode. Disks and tapes led dual lives, but most
other devices did not. However, this parallel access system is not used anymore. FreeBSD
represents all formerly dual-mode devices as character devices, and Linux represents them as
block devices.
It is sometimes convenient to implement an abstraction as a device driver even when it controls
no actual device. Such phantom devices are known as pseudo-devices. For example, a user who
logs in over the network is assigned a pseudo-TTY (PTY) that looks, feels, and smells like a
serial port from the perspective of high-level software. This trick allows programs written in the
days when everyone used a physical terminal to continue to function in the world of windows
and networks. /dev/zero, /dev/null, and /dev/urandom are some other examples of pseudo-
devices.
When a program performs an operation on a device file, the kernel intercepts the reference, looks
up the appropriate function name in a table, and transfers control to the appropriate part of the
driver.

To perform an operation that doesn’t have a direct analog in the filesystem model (ejecting a
DVD, for example), a program traditionally uses the ioctl system call to pass a message directly
from user space into the driver. Standard ioctl request types are registered by a central authority
in a manner similar to the way that network protocol numbers are maintained by IANA.
FreeBSD continues to use the traditional ioctl system. Traditional Linux devices also use ioctl,
but modern networking code uses the more flexible Netlink sockets system described in
RFC3549. These sockets provide a more flexible messaging system than ioctl without the need
for a central authority.
Challenges of device file management
Device files have been a tricky problem for many years. When systems supported only a few
types of devices, manual maintenance of device files was manageable. As the number of
available devices grew, however, the /dev filesystem became cluttered, often with files irrelevant
to the current system. Red Hat Enterprise Linux version 3 included more than 18,000 device
files, one for every possible device that could be attached to the system! The creation of static
device files quickly became a crushing problem and an evolutionary dead end.
USB, FireWire, Thunderbolt, and other device interfaces introduce additional wrinkles. Ideally, a
drive that is initially recognized as /dev/sda would remain available as /dev/sda despite
intermittent disconnections and regardless of the activity of other devices and buses. The
presence of other transient devices such as cameras, printers, and scanners (not to mention other
types of removable media) muddies the waters and makes the persistent identity problem even
worse.
Network interfaces have this same problem; they are devices but do not have device files to
represent them in /dev. For these devices, the modern approach is to use the relatively simple
Predictable Network Interface Names system, which assigns interface names that are stable
across reboots, changes in hardware, and changes in drivers. Modern systems now have
analogous methods for dealing with the names of other devices, too.
Manual creation of device files
Modern systems manage their device files automatically. However, a few rare corner cases may
still require you to create devices manually with the mknod command. So here’s how to do it:
  mknod filename type major minor
Here, filename is the device file to be created, type is c for a character device or b for a block
device, and major and minor are the major and minor device numbers. If you are creating a
device file that refers to a driver that’s already present in your kernel, check the documentation
for the driver to find the appropriate major and minor device numbers.
Modern device file management
Linux and FreeBSD both automate the management of device files. In classic UNIX fashion, the
systems are more or less the same in concept but entirely separate in their implementations and in
the formats of their configuration files. Let a thousand flowers bloom!
When a new device is detected, both systems automatically create the device’s corresponding
device files. When a device goes away (e.g., a USB thumb drive is unplugged), its device files
are removed. For architectural reasons, both Linux and FreeBSD isolate the “creating device
files” part of this equation.
In FreeBSD, devices are created by the kernel in a dedicated filesystem type (devfs) that’s
mounted on /dev. In Linux, a daemon running in user space called udev is responsible for this
activity. Both systems listen to an underlying stream of kernel-generated events that report the
arrival and departure of devices.
However, there’s a lot more we might want to do with a newly discovered device than just create
a device file for it. If it represents a piece of removable storage media, for example, we might
want to automount it as a filesystem. If it’s a hub or a communications device, we might want to
get it set up with the appropriate kernel subsystem.

Both Linux and FreeBSD leave such advanced procedures to a user-space daemon: udevd in the
case of Linux, and devd in the case of FreeBSD. The main conceptual distinction between the
two platforms is that Linux concentrates most intelligence in udevd, whereas FreeBSD’s devfs
filesystem is itself slightly configurable.
Table 11.1 summarizes the components of the device file management systems on both
platforms.

Table 11.1: Outline of automatic device management
Linux device management
      Linux administrators should understand how udevd’s rule system works and should know
      how to use the udevadm command. Before peering into those details, however, let’s first
review the underlying technology of sysfs, the device information repository from which udevd
gets its raw data.

Sysfs: a window into the souls of devices
Sysfs was added to the Linux kernel at version 2.6. It is a virtual, in-memory filesystem
implemented by the kernel to provide detailed and well-organized information about the system’s
available devices, their configurations, and their state. Sysfs device information is accessible both
from within the kernel and from user space.
You can explore the /sys directory, where sysfs is typically mounted, to find out everything from
what IRQ a device is using to how many blocks have been queued for writing to a disk
controller. One of the guiding principles of sysfs is that each file in /sys should represent only
one attribute of the underlying device. This convention imposes a certain amount of structure on
an otherwise chaotic data set.

Table 11.2 shows the directories within /sys, each of which is a subsystem that has been
registered with sysfs. The exact directories vary slightly by distribution.

Table 11.2: Subdirectories of /sys

Device configuration information was formerly found in the /proc filesystem, if it was available
at all. /proc was inherited from System V UNIX and grew organically and somewhat randomly
over time. It ended up collecting all manner of unrelated information, including many elements
unrelated to processes. Although extra junk in /proc is still supported for backward
compatibility, /sys is a more predictable and organized way of reflecting the kernel’s internal
data structures. We anticipate that all device-specific information will move to /sys over time.

udevadm: explore devices
The udevadm command queries device information, triggers events, controls the udevd daemon,
and monitors udev and kernel events. Its primary use for administrators is to build and test rules,
which are covered in the next section.
udevadm expects one of six commands as its first argument: info, trigger, settle, control,
monitor, or test. Of particular interest to system administrators are info, which prints device-
specific information, and control, which starts and stops udevd or forces it to reload its rules
files. The monitor command displays events as they occur.
The following command shows all udev attributes for the device sdb. The output is truncated
here, but in reality it goes on to list all parent devices—such as the USB bus—that are ancestors
of sdb in the device tree.

All paths in udevadm output (such as /devices/pci0000:00/…) are relative to /sys, even though
they may appear to be absolute pathnames.
The output is formatted so that you can feed it back to udev when constructing rules. For
example, if the ATTR{size}=="1974271" clause were unique to this device, you could copy that snippet
into a rule as the identifying criterion.
Refer to the man page on udevadm for additional options and syntax.

Rules and persistent names
udevd relies on a set of rules to guide its management of devices. The default rules live in the
/lib/udev/rules.d directory, but local rules belong in /etc/udev/rules.d. You need never edit or
delete the default rules; you can ignore or override a file of default rules by creating a new file
with the same name in the custom rules directory.
The master configuration file for udevd is /etc/udev/udev.conf; however, the default behaviors
are reasonable. The udev.conf files on our example distributions contain only comments, with
the exception of one line that enables error logging.

Sadly, because of political bickering among distributors and developers, there is little rule
synergy among distributions. Many of the filenames in the default rules directory are the same
from distribution to distribution, but the contents of the files differ significantly.
Rule files are named according to the pattern nn-description.rules, where nn is usually a two-
digit number. Files are processed in lexical order, so lower numbers are processed first. Files
from the two rules directories are combined before the udev daemon, udevd, parses them. The
.rules suffix is mandatory; files without it are ignored.
Rules are of the form

The match clauses define the situations in which the rule is to be applied, and the assignment
clauses tell udevd what to do when a device is consistent with all the rule’s match clauses. Each
clause consists of a key, an operator, and a value. For example, the match clause
ATTR{size}=="1974271" was referred to above as a potential component of a rule; it selects all devices
whose size attribute is exactly 1,974,271.
Most match keys refer to device properties (which udevd obtains from the /sys filesystem), but
some refer to other context-dependent attributes, such as the operation being handled (e.g.,
device addition or removal). All match clauses must match in order for a rule to be activated.
Table 11.3 shows the match keys understood by udevd.

Table 11.3: udevd match keys
The assignment clauses specify actions udevd should take to handle any matching events. Their
format is similar to that for match clauses.
The most important assignment key is NAME, which indicates how udevd should name a new
device. The optional SYMLINK assignment key creates a symbolic link to the device through its
desired path in /dev.
Here, we put these components together with an example configuration for a USB flash drive.
Suppose we want to make the drive’s device name persist across insertions and we want the drive
to be mounted and unmounted automatically.
To start with, we insert the flash drive and check to see how the kernel identifies it. This task can
be approached in a couple of ways. By running the lsusb command, we can inspect the USB bus
directly:

Alternatively, we can check for kernel log entries by running dmesg or journalctl. In our case,
the attachment leaves an extensive audit trail:
The log messages above indicate that the drive was recognized as sdb, which gives us an easy
way to identify the device in /sys. We can now examine the /sys filesystem with udevadm in
search of some rule snippets that are characteristic of the device and so might be useful to
incorporate in udev rules.

The output from udevadm shows several opportunities for matching. One possibility is the size
field, which is likely to be unique to this device. However, if the size of the partition were to
change, the device would not be recognized. Instead, we can use a combination of two values:
the kernel’s naming convention of sd plus an additional letter, and the contents of the model
attribute, USB2FlashStorage. For creating rules specific to this particular flash drive, another good
choice would be the device’s serial number (which we’ve omitted from the output here).
We next put our rules for this device in the file /etc/udev/rules.d/10-local.rules. Because we
have multiple objectives in mind, we need a series of rules.
First, we take care of creating device symlinks in /dev. The following rule uses our knowledge of
the ATTRS and KERNEL match keys, gleaned from udevadm, to identify the device:

(The rule has been folded here to fit the page; in the original file, it’s all one line.)
When the rule triggers, udevd sets up /dev/ate-flashN as a symbolic link to the device (where N
is the next integer in sequence, starting at 0). We don’t really expect more than one of these
devices to appear on the system. If more copies do appear, they receive unique names in /dev,
but the exact names will depend on the insertion order of the devices.
Next, we use the ACTION key to run some commands whenever the device appears on the USB
bus. The RUN assignment key lets us create an appropriate mount point directory and mount the
device there.

The PROGRAM and RUN keys look similar, but PROGRAM is a match key that’s active during the rule
selection phase, whereas RUN is an assignment key that’s part of the rule’s actions once triggered.
The second rule above verifies that the flash drive contains a Windows filesystem before
mounting it with the -t vfat option to the mount command.

Similar rules clean up when the device is removed:

Now that our rules are in place, we must notify udevd of our changes. udevadm’s control
command is one of the few that require root privileges:

Typos are silently ignored after a reload, even with the --debug flag, so be sure to double-check
the rules’ syntax.
That’s it! Now when the flash drive is plugged into a USB port, udevd creates a symbolic link
called /dev/ate-flash1 and mounts the drive as /mnt/ate-flash1.
FreeBSD device management
     As we saw in the brief overview on this page, FreeBSD’s implementation of the self-
     managing /dev filesystem is called devfs, and its user-level device management daemon is
called devd.

Devfs: automatic device file configuration
Unlike Linux’s udev filesystem, devfs itself is somewhat configurable. However, the
configuration system is both peculiar and rather impotent. It’s split into boot-time
(/etc/devfs.conf) and dynamic (/etc/devfs.rules) portions. The two configuration files have
different syntaxes and somewhat different capabilities.
Devfs for static (nonremovable) devices is configured in /etc/devfs.conf. Each line is a rule that
starts with an action. The possible actions are link, own, and perm. The link action sets up symbolic
links for specific devices. The own and perm actions change the ownerships and permissions of
device files, respectively.

Each action accepts two parameters, the interpretation of which depends on the specific action.
For example, suppose we want our DVD-ROM drive /dev/cd0 to also be accessible by the name
/dev/dvd. The following line would do the trick:

We could set the ownerships and permissions on the device with the following lines.

Just as /etc/devfs.conf specifies actions to take for built-in devices, /etc/devfs.rules contains
rules for removable devices. Rules in devfs.rules also have the option to make devices hidden or
inaccessible, which can be useful for jail(8) environments.

devd: higher-level device management
The devd daemon runs in the background, watching for kernel events related to devices and
acting on the rules defined in /etc/devd.conf. The configuration of devd is detailed in the
devd.conf man page, but the default devd.conf file includes many useful examples and
enlightening comments.
The format of /etc/devd.conf is conceptually simple, consisting of “statements” containing
groups of “substatements”. Statements are essentially rules, and substatements provide details
about the rule. Table 11.4 lists the available statement types.

Table 11.4: Statement types in /etc/devd.conf
Despite being conceptually simple, the configuration language for substatements is rich and
complex. For this reason, many of the common configuration statements are already included in
the standard distribution’s configuration file. In many cases, you will never need to modify the
default /etc/devd.conf.
Automatic mounting of removable media devices such as USB hard disks and thumb drives is
now handled by FreeBSD’s implementation of autofs, not by devd. See this page for general
information about autofs. Although autofs is found on most UNIX-like operating systems,
FreeBSD is unusual in assigning it this extra task.
11.4 LINUX KERNEL CONFIGURATION
     You can use any of three basic methods to configure a Linux kernel. Chances are that you
     will have the opportunity to try all of them eventually. The methods are

      Modifying tunable (dynamic) kernel configuration parameters
      Building a kernel from scratch (by compiling it from the source code, possibly with
      modifications and additions)

      Loading new drivers and modules into an existing kernel on the fly

These procedures are used in different situations, so learning which approaches are needed for
which tasks is half the battle. Modifying tunable parameters is the easiest and most common
kernel tweak, whereas building a kernel from source code is the hardest and least often required.
Fortunately, all these approaches become second nature with a little practice.
Tuning Linux kernel parameters
Many modules and drivers in the kernel were designed with the knowledge that one size doesn’t
fit all. To increase flexibility, special hooks allow parameters such as an internal table’s size or
the kernel’s behavior in a particular circumstance to be adjusted on the fly by the system
administrator. These hooks are accessible through an extensive kernel-to-userland interface
represented by files in the /proc filesystem (aka procfs). In some cases, a large user-level
application (especially an infrastructure application such as a database) might require a sysadmin
to adjust kernel parameters to accommodate its needs.
You can view and set kernel options at run time through special files in /proc/sys. These files
mimic standard Linux files, but they are really back doors into the kernel. If a file in /proc/sys
contains a value you want to change, you can try writing to it. Unfortunately, not all files are
writable (regardless of their apparent permissions), and not much documentation is available. If
you have the kernel source tree installed, you may be able to read about some of the values and
their meanings in the subdirectory Documentation/sysctl (or on-line at kernel.org/doc).
For example, to change the maximum number of files the system can have open at once, try
something like

Once you get used to this unorthodox interface, you’ll find it quite useful. However, note that
changes are not remembered across reboots.
A more permanent way to modify these same parameters is to use the sysctl command. sysctl can
set individual variables either from the command line or from a list of variable=value pairs in a
configuration file. By default, /etc/sysctl.conf is read at boot time and its contents are used to set
the initial values of parameters.
For example, the command

turns off IP forwarding. (Alternatively, you can manually edit /etc/sysctl.conf.) You form the
variable names used by sysctl by replacing the slashes in the /proc/sys directory structure with
dots.
Table 11.5 lists some commonly tuned parameters for Linux kernel version 3.10.0 and higher.
Default values vary widely among distributions.

Table 11.5: Files in /proc/sys for some tunable kernel parameters
Note that there are two IP networking subdirectories of /proc/sys/net: ipv4 and ipv6. In the past,
administrators only had to worry about IPv4 behaviors because that was the only game in town.
But as of this writing (2017), the IPv4 address blocks have all been assigned, and IPv6 is
deployed and in use almost everywhere, even within smaller organizations.
In general, when you change a parameter for IPv4, you should also change that parameter for
IPv6, if you are supporting both protocols. It’s all too easy to modify one version of IP and not
the other, then run into problems several months or years later when a user reports strange
network behavior.
Building a custom kernel
Because Linux evolves rapidly, you’ll likely be faced with the need to build a custom kernel at
some point or another. The steady flow of kernel patches, device drivers, and new features that
arrive on the scene is something of a mixed blessing. On one hand, it’s a privilege to live at the
center of an active and vibrant software ecosystem. On the other hand, just keeping abreast of the
constant flow of new material can be a job of its own.

If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it
Carefully weigh your site’s needs and risks when planning kernel upgrades and patches. A new
release may be the latest and greatest, but is it as stable as the current version? Could the upgrade
or patch be delayed and installed with another group of patches at the end of the month? Resist
the temptation to let keeping up with the Joneses (in this case, the kernel-hacking community)
dominate the best interests of your user community.
A good rule of thumb is to upgrade or apply patches only when the productivity gains you expect
to obtain (usually measured in terms of reliability and performance) exceed the effort and lost
time required for the installation. If you’re having trouble quantifying the specific gain, that’s a
good sign that the patch can wait for another day. (Of course, security-related patches should be
installed promptly.)

Setting up to build the Linux kernel
It’s less likely that you’ll need to build a kernel on your own if you’re running a distribution that
uses a “stable” kernel to begin with. It used to be that the second part of the version number
indicated whether the kernel was stable (even numbers) or in development (odd numbers). But
these days, the kernel developers no longer follow that system. Check kernel.org for the official
word on any particular kernel version. The kernel.org site is also the best source for Linux kernel
source code if you are not relying on a particular distribution or vendor to provide you with a
kernel.
Each distribution has a specific way to configure and build custom kernels. However,
distributions also support the traditional way of doing things, which is what we describe here. It’s
generally safest to use your distributor’s recommended procedure.

Configuring kernel options
Most distributions install kernel source files in versioned subdirectories under /usr/src/kernels.
In all cases, you need to install the kernel source package before you can build a kernel on your
system. See Chapter 6, Software Installation and Management, for tips on package installation.
Kernel configuration revolves around the .config file at the root of the kernel source directory.
All the kernel configuration information is specified in this file, but its format is somewhat
cryptic. Use the decoding guide in
  kernel_src_dir/Documentation/Configure.help
to find out what the various options mean. It’s usually inadvisable to edit the .config file by hand
because the effect of changing options is not always obvious. Options are frequently
interdependent, so turning on an option might not be a simple matter of changing an n to a y.

To save folks from having to edit the .config file directly, Linux has several make targets that
help you configure the kernel through a user interface. If you are running KDE, the prettiest
configuration interface is provided by make xconfig. Likewise, if you’re running GNOME,
make gconfig is probably the best option. These commands bring up a graphical configuration
screen in which you can pick the devices to add to your kernel (or to compile as loadable
modules).
If you are not running KDE or GNOME, you can use a terminal-based alternative invoked with
make menuconfig. Finally, the bare-bones make config prompts you to respond to every single
configuration option that’s available, which results in a lot of questions—and if you change your
mind, you have to start over. We recommend make xconfig or make gconfig if your
environment supports them; otherwise, use make menuconfig. Avoid make config, the least
flexible and most painful option.
If you’re migrating an existing kernel configuration to a new kernel version (or tree), you can use
the make oldconfig target to read in the previous config file and ask only the questions that are
new to this edition of the kernel.
These tools are straightforward as far as the options you can turn on. Unfortunately, they are
painful to use if you want to maintain multiple versions of the kernel to accompany multiple
architectures or hardware configurations found in your environment.

All the various configuration interfaces described above generate a .config file that looks
something like this:
As you can see, the contents are cryptic and do not attempt to describe what the various CONFIG
tags mean. Each line refers to a specific kernel configuration option. The value y compiles the
option into the kernel, and the value m enables the option as a loadable module.

Some options can be configured as modules and some can’t. You just have to know which is
which; it will not be clear from the .config file. Nor are the CONFIG tags easily mapped to
meaningful information.
The option hierarchy is extensive, so set aside many hours if you plan to scrutinize every
possibility.

Building the kernel binary
Setting up an appropriate .config file is the most important part of the Linux kernel configuration
process, but you must jump through several more hoops to turn that file into a finished kernel.
Here’s an outline of the entire process:
   1. Change directory (cd) to the top level of the kernel source directory.
   2. Run make xconfig, make gconfig, or make menuconfig.
   3. Run make clean.
   4. Run make.
   5. Run make modules_install.
   6. Run make install.
     See this page for more information about GRUB.

You might also have to update, configure, and install the GRUB boot loader’s configuration file
if this was not performed by the make install step. The GRUB updater scans the boot directory
to see which kernels are available and automatically includes them in the boot menu.
The make clean step is not strictly necessary, but it’s generally a good idea to start with a clean
build environment. In practice, many problems can be traced back to this step having been
skipped.
Adding a Linux device driver
On Linux systems, device drivers are typically distributed in one of three forms:

      A patch against a specific kernel version
      A loadable kernel module
      An installation script or package that installs the driver

The most common form is the installation script or package. If you’re lucky enough to have one
of these for your new device, you should be able to follow the standard procedure for installing
new software.
In situations where you have a patch against a specific kernel version, you can in most cases
install the patch with the following procedure:
11.5 FREEBSD KERNEL CONFIGURATION
    FreeBSD supports the same three methods of changing kernel parameters as Linux:
    dynamically tuning the running kernel, building a new kernel from source, and loading
dynamic modules.
Tuning FreeBSD kernel parameters
Many FreeBSD kernel parameters can be changed dynamically with the sysctl command, as is
done on Linux. You can set values automatically at boot time by adding them to /etc/sysctl.conf.
Many, many parameters can be changed this way; type sysctl -a to see them all. Not everything
that shows up in the output of that command can be changed; many parameters are read-only.
The following paragraphs outline a few of the more commonly modified or interesting
parameters that you might want to adjust.
net.inet.ip.forwarding   and net.inet6.ip6.forwarding control IP packet forwarding for IPv4 and IPv6,
respectively.
kern.maxfiles sets the maximum number of file descriptors that the system can open. You may need
to increase this on systems such as database or web servers.

net.inet.tcp.mssdflt sets the default TCP maximum segment size, which is the size of the TCP packet
payload carried over IPv4. Certain payload sizes are too large for long-haul network links, and
hence might be dropped by their routers. Changing this parameter can be useful when debugging
long-haul connectivity issues.
net.inet.udp.blackhole controls whether an ICMP “port unreachable” packet is returned when a packet
arrives for a closed UDP port. Enabling this option (that is, disabling “port unreachable” packets)
might slow down port scanners and potential attackers.
net.inet.tcp.blackhole is similar in concept to the udp.blackhole parameter. TCP normally sends an RST
(connection reset) response when packets arrive for closed ports. Setting this parameter to 1
prevents any SYN (connection setup) arriving on a closed port from generating an RST. Setting
it to 2 prevents RST responses to any segment at all that arrives on a closed port.
kern.ipc.nmbclusters controls the number of mbuf clusters available to the system. Mbufs are the
internal storage structure for network packets, and mbuf clusters can be thought of as the mbuf
“payload.” For servers that experience heavy network loads, this value may need to be increased
from the default (currently 253,052 on FreeBSD 10).

kern.maxvnodes sets the maximum number of vnodes, which are kernel data structures that track
files. Increasing the number of available vnodes can improve disk throughput on a busy server.
Examine the value of vfs.numvnodes on servers that are experiencing poor performance; if its value
is close to the value of kern.maxvnodes, increase the latter.
Building a FreeBSD kernel
Kernel source comes from the FreeBSD servers in the form of a compressed tarball. Just
download and unpack to install. Once the kernel source tree has been installed, the process for
configuring and building the kernel is similar to that of Linux. However, the kernel source
always lives in /usr/src/sys. Under that directory is a set of subdirectories, one for each
architecture that is supported. Inside each architecture directory, a conf subdirectory includes a
configuration file named GENERIC for the so-called “generic kernel,” which supports every
possible device and option.
The configuration file is analogous to the Linux .config file. The first step in making a custom
kernel is to copy the GENERIC file to a new, distinct name in the same directory, e.g.,
MYCUSTOM. The second step is to edit the config file and modify its parameters by
commenting out functions and devices that you don’t need. The final step is to build and install
the kernel. That final step must be performed in the top-level /usr/src directory.
FreeBSD kernel configuration files must be edited by hand. There are no dedicated user
interfaces for this task as there are in the Linux world. Information on the general format is
available from the config(5) man page, and information about how the config file is used can be
found in the config(8) man page.
The configuration file contains some internal comments that describe what each option does.
However, you do still need some background knowledge on a wide variety of technologies to
make informed decisions about what to leave in. In general, you’ll want to leave all the options
from the GENERIC configuration enabled and modify only the device-specific lines lower in
the configuration file. It’s best to leave options enabled unless you’re absolutely certain you
don’t need them.

For the final build step, FreeBSD has a single, highly automated make buildkernel target that
combines parsing the configuration file, creating the build directories, copying the relevant
source files, and compiling those files. This target accepts the custom configuration filename in
the form of a build variable, KERNCONF. An analogous install target, make installkernel,
installs the kernel and boot loader.
Here is a summary of the process:
   1. Change directory (cd) to /usr/src/sys/arch/conf for your architecture.
   2. Copy the generic configuration: cp GENERIC MYCUSTOM.
   3. Edit your MYCUSTOM configuration file.
   4. Change directory to /usr/src.
   5. Run make buildkernel KERNCONF=MYCUSTOM.
   6. Run make installkernel KERNCONF=MYCUSTOM.
Note that these steps are not cross-compilation-enabled! That is, if your build machine has an
AMD64 architecture, you cannot cd to /usr/src/sys/sparc/conf, follow the normals steps, and
end up with a SPARC-ready kernel.
11.6 LOADABLE KERNEL MODULES
Loadable kernel modules (LKMs) are available in both Linux and FreeBSD. LKM support
allows a device driver—or any other kernel component—to be linked into and removed from the
kernel while the kernel is running. This capability facilitates the installation of drivers because it
avoids the need to update the kernel binary. It also allows the kernel to be smaller because
drivers are not loaded unless they are needed.
Although loadable drivers are convenient, they are not 100% safe. Any time you load or unload a
module, you risk causing a kernel panic. So don’t try out an untested module when you are not
willing to crash the machine.

Like other aspects of device and driver management, the implementation of loadable modules is
OS-dependent.
Loadable kernel modules in Linux
     Under Linux, almost anything can be built as a loadable kernel module. The exceptions are
     the root filesystem type (whatever that might be on a given system) and the PS/2 mouse
driver.
Loadable kernel modules are conventionally stored under /lib/modules/version, where version is
the version of your Linux kernel as returned by uname -r.
You can inspect the currently loaded modules with the lsmod command:

Loaded on this machine are the Intelligent Platform Management Interface modules and the
iptables firewall, among other modules.
As an example of manually loading a kernel module, here’s how we would insert a module that
implements sound output to USB devices:

We can also pass parameters to modules as they are loaded; for example,

modprobe is a semi-automatic wrapper around a more primitive command, insmod. modprobe
understands dependencies, options, and installation and removal procedures. It also checks the
version number of the running kernel and selects an appropriate version of the module from
within /lib/modules. It consults the file /etc/modprobe.conf to figure out how to handle each
individual module.
Once a loadable kernel module has been manually inserted into the kernel, it remains active until
you explicitly request its removal or reboot the system. You could use modprobe -r snd-usb-
audio to remove the audio module loaded above. Removal works only if the number of current
references to the module (listed in the “Used by” column of lsmod’s output) is 0.
You can dynamically generate an /etc/modprobe.conf file that corresponds to all your currently
installed modules by running modprobe -c. This command generates a long file that looks like
this:
The path statements tell where a particular module can be found. You can modify or add entries of
this type to keep your modules in a nonstandard location.
The alias statements map between module names and block-major device numbers, character-
major device numbers, filesystems, network devices, and network protocols.
The options lines are not dynamically generated but must be manually added by an administrator.
They specify options that should be passed to a module when it is loaded. For example, you
could use the following line to pass in additional options to the USB sound module:

modprobe also understands the statements install and remove. These statements allow commands to
be executed when a specific module is inserted into or removed from the running kernel.
Loadable kernel modules in FreeBSD
     Kernel modules in FreeBSD live in /boot/kernel (for standard modules that are part of the
     distribution) or /boot/modules (for ported, proprietary, and custom modules). Each kernel
module uses the .ko filename extension, but it is not necessary to specify that extension when
loading, unloading, or viewing the status of the module.
For example, to load a module named foo.ko, run kldload foo in the appropriate directory. To
unload the module, run kldunload foo from any location. To view the module’s status, run
kldstat -m foo from any location. Running kldstat without any parameters displays the status of
all currently loaded modules.
Modules listed in either of the files /boot/defaults/loader.conf (system defaults) or
/boot/loader.conf are loaded automatically at boot time. To add a new entry to
/boot/loader.conf, use a line of the form

The appropriate variable name is just the module basename with _load appended to it. The line
above ensures that the module /boot/kernel/zfs.ko will be loaded at boot; it implements the ZFS
filesystem.
11.7 BOOTING
Now that we have covered kernel basics, it’s time to learn what actually happens when a kernel
loads and initializes at startup. You’ve no doubt seen countless boot messages, but do you know
what all of those messages actually mean?
The following messages and annotations come from some key phases of the boot process. They
almost certainly won’t be an exact match for what you see on your own systems and kernels.
However, they should give you a notion of some of the major themes in booting and a feeling for
how the Linux and FreeBSD kernels start up.
Linux boot messages
     The first boot log we examine is from a CentOS 7 machine running a 3.10.0 kernel.

These initial messages tell us that the top-level control groups (cgroups) are starting up on a
Linux 3.10.0 kernel. The messages tell us who built the kernel and where, and which compiler
they used (gcc). Note that although this log comes from a CentOS system, CentOS is a clone of
Red Hat, and the boot messages remind us of that fact.
The parameters set in the GRUB boot configuration and passed from there into the kernel are
listed above as the “command line.”

These messages describe the processor that the kernel has detected and show how the RAM is
mapped. Note that the kernel is aware that it’s booting within a hypervisor and is not actually
running on bare hardware.
Here the kernel initializes the system’s various data buses, including the PCI bus and the USB
subsystem.

These messages document the kernel’s discovery of various devices, including the power button,
a USB hub, a mouse, and a real-time clock (RTC) chip. Some of the “devices” are metadevices
rather than actual hardware; these constructs manage groups of real, related hardware devices.
For example, the usbhid (USB Human Interface Device) driver manages keyboards, mice,
tablets, game controllers, and other types of input devices that follow USB reporting standards.

In this phase, the kernel initializes a variety of network drivers and facilities.
The drop monitor is a Red Hat kernel subsystem that implements comprehensive monitoring of
network packet loss. “TCP cubic” is a congestion-control algorithm optimized for high-latency,
high-bandwidth connections, so-called long fat pipes.
As mentioned here, Netlink sockets are a modern approach to communication between the kernel
and user-level processes. The XFRM Netlink socket is the link between the user-level IPsec
process and the kernel’s IPsec routines.

The last two lines document the registration of two additional network protocol families.

Like other OSs, CentOS provides a way to incorporate and validate updates. The validation
portion uses X.509 certificates that are installed into the kernel.

Here, the kernel reports that it’s unable to find a Trusted Platform Module (TPM) on the system.
TPM chips are cryptographic hardware devices that provide for secure signing operations. When
used properly, they can make it much more difficult to hack into a system.
For example, the TPM can be used to sign kernel code and to make the system refuse to execute
any portion of the code for which the current signature doesn’t match the TPM signature. This
measure helps avoid the execution of maliciously injected code. An admin who expects to have a
working TPM would be unhappy to see this message!
The last message shows the kernel setting the battery-backed real-time clock to the current time
of day. This is the same RTC that we saw mentioned earlier when it was identified as a device.

     See this page for more information about DHCP.

Now the kernel has found the gigabit Ethernet interface and initialized it. The interface’s MAC
address (08:00:27:d0:ae:6f) might be of interest to you if you wanted this machine to obtain its IP
address through DHCP. Specific IP addresses are often locked to specific MACs in the DHCP
server configuration so that servers can have IP address continuity.
Here the kernel recognizes and initializes various drives and support devices (hard disk drives, a
SCSI-based virtual CD-ROM, and an ATA hard disk). It also mounts a filesystem (XFS) that is
part of the device-mapper subsystem (the dm-0 filesystem).
As you can see, Linux kernel boot messages are verbose almost to a fault. However, you can rest
assured that you’ll see everything the kernel is doing as it starts up, a most useful feature if you
encounter problems.
FreeBSD boot messages
     The log below is from a FreeBSD 10.3-RELEASE system that runs the kernel shipped with
     the release. Much of the output will look eerily familiar; the sequence of events is quite
similar to that found in Linux. One notable difference is that the FreeBSD kernel produces far
fewer boot messages than does Linux. Compared to Linux, FreeBSD is downright taciturn.

The initial messages above tell you the OS release, the time at which the kernel was built from
source, the name of the builder, the configuration file that was used, and finally, the compiler that
generated the code (Clang version 3.4.1: a compiler front end, really; but let’s not quibble).

Above are the system’s total amount of memory and the amount that’s available to user-space
code. The remainder of the memory is reserved for the kernel itself.

Total memory of 4608MB probably looks a bit strange. However, this FreeBSD instance is
running under a hypervisor. The amount of “real memory” is an arbitrary value that was set when
the virtual machine was configured. On bare-metal systems, the total memory is likely to be a
power of 2, since that’s how actual RAM chips are manufactured (e.g., 8192MB).

There’s the default video display, which was found on the PCI bus. The output shows the
memory range to which the frame buffer has been mapped.

And above, the Ethernet interface, along with its hardware (MAC) address.
As shown above, the kernel initializes the USB bus, the USB hub, the CD-ROM drive (actually a
DVD-ROM drive, but virtualized to look like a CD-ROM), and the ada disk driver.

     See this page for more comments on the “random” driver.

The final messages in the FreeBSD boot log document a variety of odds and ends. The “random”
pseudo-device harvests entropy from the system and generates random numbers. The kernel
seeded its number generator and put it in nonblocking mode. A few other devices came up, and
the kernel mounted the root filesystem.
At this point, the kernel boot messages end. Once the root filesystem has been mounted, the
kernel transitions to multiuser mode and initiates the user-level startup scripts. Those scripts, in
turn, start the system services and make the system available for use.
11.8 BOOTING ALTERNATE KERNELS IN THE CLOUD
Cloud instances boot differently from traditional hardware. Most cloud providers sidestep GRUB
and use either a modified open source boot loader or some kind of scheme that avoids the use of
a boot loader altogether. Therefore, booting an alternate kernel on a cloud instance usually
requires that you interact with the cloud provider’s web console or API.
This section briefly outlines some of the specifics that relate to booting and kernel selection on
our example cloud platforms. For a more general introduction to cloud systems, see Chapter 9,
Cloud Computing.

On AWS, you’ll need to start with a base AMI (Amazon machine image) that uses a boot loader
called PV-GRUB. PV-GRUB runs a patched version of legacy GRUB and lets you specify the
kernel in your AMI’s menu.lst file.
After compiling a new kernel, edit /boot/grub/menu.lst to add it to the boot list:

Here, the custom kernel is the default, and the fallback option points to the standard Amazon
Linux kernel. Having a fallback helps ensure that your system can boot even if your custom
kernel can’t be loaded or doesn’t work correctly. See Amazon EC2’s User Guide for Linux
Instances for more details on this process.
Historically, DigitalOcean bypassed the boot loader through a QEMU (short for Quick Emulator)
feature that allowed a kernel and RAM disk to be loaded directly into a droplet. Thankfully,
DigitalOcean now allows droplets to use their own boot loaders. Most modern operating systems
are supported, including CoreOS, FreeBSD, Fedora, Ubuntu, Debian, and CentOS. Changes to
boot options, including selection of the kernel, are handled by the respective OS boot loaders
(GRUB, usually).
Google Cloud Platform (GCP) is the most flexible platform when it comes to boot management.
Google lets you upload complete system disk images to your Compute Engine account. Note that
in order for a GCP image to boot properly, it must use the MBR partitioning scheme and include
an appropriate (installed) boot loader. UEFI and GPT do not apply here!
The cloud.google.com/compute/docs/creating-custom-image tutorial on building images is
incredibly thorough and specifies not only the required kernel options but also the recommended
settings for kernel security.
11.9 KERNEL ERRORS
Kernel crashes (aka kernel panics) are an unfortunate reality that can happen even on properly
configured systems. They have a variety of causes. Bad commands entered by privileged users
can certainly crash the system, but a more common cause is faulty hardware. Physical memory
failures and hard drive errors (bad sectors on a platter or device) are both notorious for causing
kernel panics.
It’s also possible for bugs in the implementation of the kernel to result in crashes. However, such
crashes are exceedingly rare in kernels anointed as “stable.” Device drivers are another matter,
however. They come from many different sources and are often of less-than-exemplary code
quality.

If hardware is the underlying cause of a crash, keep in mind that the crash may have occurred
long after the device failure that sparked it. For example, you can often remove a hot-swappable
hard drive without causing immediate problems. The system continues to hum along without
(much) complaint until you try to reboot or perform some other operation that depends on that
particular drive.
Despite the names “panic” and “crash,” kernel panics are usually relatively structured events.
User-space programs rely on the kernel to police them for many kinds of misbehavior, but the
kernel has to monitor itself. Consequently, kernels include a liberal helping of sanity-checking
code that attempts to validate important data structures and invariants in passing. None of those
checks should ever fail; if they do, it’s sufficient reason to panic and halt the system, and the
kernel does so proactively.
Or at least, that’s the traditional approach. Linux has liberalized this rule somewhat through the
“oops” system; see the next section.
Linux kernel errors
Linux has four varieties of kernel failure: soft lockups, hard lockups, panics, and the infamous
Linux “oops.” Each one of these usually provides a complete stack trace, except for certain soft
lockups that are recoverable without a panic.
     A soft lockup occurs when the system is in kernel mode for more than a few seconds, thus
     preventing user-level tasks from running. The interval is configurable, but it is usually
around 10 seconds, which is a long time for a process to be denied CPU cycles! During a soft
lockup, the kernel is the only thing running, but it is still servicing interrupts such as those from
network interfaces and keyboards. Data is still flowing in and out of the system, albeit in a
potentially crippled fashion.
A hard lockup is the same as a soft lockup, but with the additional complication that most
processor interrupts go unserviced. Hard lockups are overtly pathological conditions that are
detected relatively quickly, whereas soft lockups can occur even on correctly configured systems
that are experiencing some kind of extreme condition, such as a high CPU load.
In both cases, a stack trace and a display of the CPU registers (a “tombstone”) are usually
dumped to the console. The trace shows the sequence of function calls that resulted in the lockup.
In most cases, this trace tells you quite a bit about the cause of the problem.

A soft or hard lockup is almost always the result of a hardware failure, the most common culprit
being bad memory. The second most common reason for a soft lockup is a kernel spinlock that
has been held too long; however, this situation normally occurs only with nonstandard kernel
modules. If you are running any unusual modules, try unloading them and see if the problem
recurs.
When a lockup occurs, the usual behavior is for the system to stay frozen so that the tombstone
remains visible on the console. But in some environments, it’s preferable to have the system
panic and thus reboot. For example, an automated test rig needs systems to avoid hanging, so
these systems are often configured to reboot into a safe kernel after encountering a lockup.
sysctl can configure both soft and hard lockups to panic:

You can set these parameters at boot by listing them in /etc/sysctl.conf, just like any other kernel
parameter.
The Linux “oops” system is a generalization of the traditional UNIX “panic after any anomaly”
approach to kernel integrity. Oops doesn’t stand for anything; it’s just the English word oops, as
in “Oops! I zeroed out your SAN again.” Oopses in the Linux kernel can lead to a panic, but they
needn’t always. If the kernel can repair or address an anomaly through a less drastic measure,
such as killing an individual process, it might do that instead.
When an oops occurs, the kernel generates a tombstone in the kernel message buffer that’s
viewable with the dmesg command. The cause of the oops is listed at the top. It might be
something like “unable to handle kernel paging request at virtual address 0x0000000000000.”
You probably won’t be debugging your own kernel oopses. However, your chance of attracting
the interest of a kernel or module developer is greatly increased if you do a good job of capturing
the available context and diagnostic information, including the full tombstone.

The most valuable information is at the beginning of the tombstone. That fact can present a
problem after a full-scale kernel panic. On a physical system, you may be able to just go to the
console and page up through the history to see the full dump. But on a virtual machine, the
console might be a window that becomes frozen when the Linux instance panics; it depends on
the hypervisor. If the text of the tombstone has scrolled out of view, you won’t be able to see the
cause of the crash.
One way to minimize the likelihood of information loss is to increase the resolution of the
console screen. We’ve found that a resolution of 1280 × 1024 is adequate to display the full text
of most kernel panics.
You can set the console resolution by modifying /etc/grub2/grub.cfg and adding vga=795 as a
kernel startup parameter for the kernel you want to boot. You can also set the resolution by
adding this clause to the kernel “command line” from GRUB’s boot menu screen. The latter
approach lets you test the waters without making any permanent changes.
To make the change permanent, find the menu item with the boot command for the kernel that
you wish to boot, and modify it. For example, if the boot command looks like this:

then simply modify it to add the vga=795 parameter at the end:

Other resolutions can be achieved by setting the vga boot parameter to other values. Table 11.6
lists the possibilities.

Table 11.6: VGA mode values
FreeBSD kernel panics
     FreeBSD does not divulge much information when the kernel panics. If you are running a
     generic kernel from a production release, the best thing to do if you are encountering regular
panics is to instrument the kernel for debugging. Rebuild the generic kernel with makeoptions
DEBUG=-g enabled in the kernel configuration, and reboot with that new kernel. Once the system
panics again, you can use kgdb to generate a stack trace from the resulting crash dump in
/var/crash.
Of course, if you’re running unusual kernel modules and the kernel doesn’t panic when you don’t
load them, that’s a good indication of where the issue lies.
An important note: crash dumps are the same size as real (physical) memory, so you must ensure
that /var/crash has at least that much space available before you enable these dumps. There are
ways to get around this, though: for more information, see the man pages for dumpon and
savecore and the dumpdev variable in /etc/rc.conf.
11.10 RECOMMENDED READING
You can visit lwn.net for the latest information on what the kernel community is doing. In
addition, we recommend the following books.
BOVET, DANIEL P., AND MARCO CESATI. Understanding the Linux Kernel (3rd Edition). Sebastopol,
CA: O’Reilly Media, 2006.

LOVE, ROBERT. Linux Kernel Development (3rd Edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-
Wesley Professional, 2010.
MCKUSICK, MARSHALL KIRK, ET AL. The Design and Implementation of the FreeBSD Operating
System (2nd Edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-Wesley Professional, 2014.
ROSEN, RAMI. Linux Kernel Networking: Implementation and Theory. Apress, 2014.
