12 Printing

Printing is a necessary evil. No one wants to deal with it, but every user wants to print. For better
or worse, printing on UNIX and Linux systems typically requires at least some configuration and
occasionally some coddling by a system administrator.
Ages ago, there were three common printing systems: BSD, System V, and CUPS (the Common
UNIX Printing System). Today, Linux and FreeBSD both use CUPS, an up-to-date,
sophisticated, network- and security-aware printing system. CUPS includes a modern, browser-
based GUI as well as shell-level commands that allow the printing system to be controlled by
scripts.
Before we start, a general point: system administrators often consider printing a lower priority
than do users. Administrators are accustomed to reading documents on-line, but users often need
hard copy, and they want the printing system to work 100% of the time. Satisfying these desires
is one of the easier ways for sysadmins to earn Brownie points with users.
Printing relies on a handful of pieces:

      A print “spooler” that collects and schedules jobs. The word “spool” originated as an
      acronym for Simultaneous Peripheral Operation On-Line. Now it’s just a generic
      term.
      User-level utilities (command-line interfaces or GUIs) that talk to the spooler. These
      utilities send jobs to the spooler, query the system about jobs (both pending and
      complete), remove or reschedule jobs, and configure the other parts of the system.
      Back ends that talk to the printing devices themselves. (These are normally unseen
      and hidden under the floorboards.)

      A network protocol that lets spoolers communicate and transfer jobs.

Modern environments often use network-attached printers that minimize the amount of setup and
processing that must be done on the UNIX or Linux side.
12.1 CUPS PRINTING
CUPS was created by Michael Sweet and has been adopted as the default printing system for
Linux, FreeBSD, and macOS. Michael has been at Apple since 2007, where he continues to
develop CUPS and its ecosystem.
Just as newer mail transport systems include a command called sendmail that lets older scripts
(and older system administrators!) work as they always did back in sendmail’s glory days, CUPS
supplies traditional commands such as lp and lpr that are backward compatible with legacy
UNIX printing systems.

CUPS servers are also web servers, and CUPS clients are web clients. The clients can be
commands such as the CUPS versions of lpr and lpq, or they can be applications with their own
GUIs. Under the covers they’re all web apps, even if they’re talking only to the CUPS daemon
on the local system. CUPS servers can also act as clients of other CUPS servers.
A CUPS server offers a web interface to its full functionality on port 631. For administrators, a
web browser is usually the most convenient way to manage the system; just navigate to
http://printhost:631. If you need secure communication with the daemon (and your system offers
it), use https://printhost:433 instead. Scripts can use discrete commands to control the system,
and users normally access it through a GNOME or KDE interface. These routes are all
equivalent.
HTTP is the underlying protocol for all interactions among CUPS servers and their clients.
Actually, it’s the Internet Printing Protocol, a souped-up version of HTTP. Clients submit jobs
with the HTTP/IPP POST operation and request status with HTTP/IPP GET. The CUPS
configuration files also look suspiciously similar to Apache web server configuration files.
Interfaces to the printing system
CUPS printing is often done from a GUI, and administration is often done through a web
browser. As a sysadmin, though, you (and perhaps some of your hard-core terminal users) might
want to use shell-level commands as well. CUPS includes work-alike commands for many of the
basic, shell-level printing commands of the legacy BSD and System V printing systems.
Unfortunately, CUPS doesn’t necessarily emulate all the bells and whistles. Sometimes, it
emulates the old interfaces entirely too well; instead of giving you a quick usage summary, lpr --
help and lp --help just print error messages.
Here’s how you might print the files foo.pdf and /tmp/testprint.ps to your default printer under
CUPS:

The lpr command transmits copies of the files to the CUPS server, cupsd, which stores them in
the print queue. CUPS processes each file in turn as the printer becomes available.
When printing, CUPS examines both the document and the printer’s PostScript Printer
Description (PPD) file to see what needs to be done to get the document to print properly.
(Despite the name, PPD files are used even for non-PostScript printers.)
To prepare a job for printing on a specific printer, CUPS passes it through a series of filters. For
example, one filter might reformat the job so that two reduced-size page images print on each
physical page (aka “2-up printing”), and another might transform the job from PostScript to PCL.
Filters can also do printer-specific processing such as printer initialization. Some filters perform
rasterization, turning abstract instructions such as “draw a line across the page” into a bitmap
image. Such rasterizers are useful for printers that do not include their own rasterizers or that
don’t speak the language in which a job was originally submitted.
The final stage of the print pipeline is a back end that transmits the job from the host to the
printer through an appropriate protocol such as Ethernet. The back end also communicates status
information in the other direction, back to the CUPS server. After transmitting the print job, the
CUPS daemon returns to processing its queues and handling requests from clients, and the printer
goes off to print the job it was shipped.
The print queue
cupsd’s centralized control of the printing system makes it easy to understand what the user-
level commands are doing. For example, the lpq command requests job status information from
the server and reformats it for display. Other CUPS clients ask the server to suspend, cancel, or
reprioritize jobs. They can also move jobs from one queue to another.
Most changes require jobs to be identified by their job number, which you can get from lpq. For
example, to remove a print job, just run lprm jobid.
lpstat -t summarizes the print server’s overall status.
Multiple printers and queues
The CUPS server maintains a separate queue for each printer. Command-line clients accept an
option (typically -P printer or -p printer) by which you specify the queue to address. You can
also set a default printer for yourself by setting the PRINTER environment variable

or by telling CUPS to use a particular default for your account.

When run as root, lpoptions sets system-wide defaults in /etc/cups/lpoptions, but it’s more
typically used by individual, nonroot users. lpoptions lets each user define personal printer
instances and defaults, which it stores in ~/.cups/lpoptions. The command lpoptions -l lists the
current settings.
Printer instances
If you have only one printer but want to use it in several ways—say, both for quick drafts and for
final production work—CUPS lets you set up different “printer instances” for these different
uses.
For example, if you already have a printer named Phaser_6120, the command

creates an instance named Phaser_6120/2up that performs 2-up printing and adds banner pages.
Once the instance has been created, the command

prints the PostScript file biglisting.ps as a 2-up job with a banner page.
Network printer browsing
From CUPS’s perspective, a network of machines isn’t very different from an isolated machine.
Every computer runs a cupsd, and all the CUPS daemons talk to one another.
If you’re working on the command line, you configure a CUPS daemon to accept print jobs from
remote systems by editing the /etc/cups/cupsd.conf file (see this page). By default, servers that
are set up this way broadcast information every 30 seconds about the printers they serve. As a
result, computers on the local network automatically learn about the printers that are available to
them. You can effect the same configuration by clicking a checkbox in the CUPS GUI in your
browser.
If someone has plugged in a new printer, if you’ve brought your laptop into work, or if you’ve
just installed a new workstation, you can tell cupsd to redetermine what printing services are
available; click the Find New Printers button in the Administration tab of the CUPS GUI.
Because broadcast packets do not cross subnet boundaries, it’s a bit tricker to make printers
available to multiple subnets. One solution is to designate, on each subnet, a slave server that
polls the other subnets’ servers for information and then relays that information to machines on
the local subnet.

For example, suppose the print servers allie (192.168.1.5) and jj (192.168.2.14) live on different
subnets and we want both of them to be accessible to users on a third subnet, 192.168.3. We
designate a slave server (say, copeland, 192.168.3.10) and add these lines to its cupsd.conf file:

The first two lines tell the slave’s cupsd to poll the cupsds on allie and jj for information about
the printers they serve. The third line tells copeland to relay the information it learns to its own
subnet. Simple!
Filters
Rather than using a specialized printing tool for every printer, CUPS uses a chain of filters to
convert each printed file into a form the destination printer can understand.
The CUPS filter scheme is elegant. Given a document and a target printer, CUPS uses its .types
files to figure out the document’s MIME type. It consults the printer’s PPD file to figure out what
MIME types the printer can handle. It then uses .convs files to deduce what filter chains could
convert one format to the other, and what each prospective chain would cost. Finally, it picks a
chain and passes the document through those filters. The final filter in the chain passes the
printable format to a back end, which transmits the data to the printer through whatever hardware
or protocol the printer understands.
We can flesh out that process a bit. CUPS uses rules in /usr/share/cups/mime/mime.types to
figure out the incoming data type. For example, the rule

means “If a file has a .pdf extension or starts with the string %PDF, then its MIME type is
application/pdf.”
CUPS figures out how to convert one data type to another by looking up rules in the file
mime.convs (usually in /etc/cups or /usr/share/cups/mime). For example,

means “To convert an application/pdf file to an application/postscript file, run the filter pdftops.”
The number 33 is the cost of the conversion. When CUPS finds that several filter chains can
convert a file from one type to another, it picks the chain with the lowest total cost. (Costs are
chosen by whoever creates the mime.convs file—the distribution maintainers, perhaps. If you
want to spend time tuning them because you think you can do a better job, you may have too
much free time.)
The last component in a CUPS pipeline is a filter that talks directly to the printer. In the PPD of a
non-PostScript printer, you might see lines such as

or even

The quoted string has the same format as a line in mime.convs, but there’s only one MIME type
instead of two. This line advertises that the foomatic-rip filter converts data of type
application/vnd.cups-postscript to the printer’s native data format. The cost is zero (or omitted)
because there’s only one way to do this step, so why pretend there’s a cost? (Some PPDs for non-
PostScript printers, like those from the Gutenprint project, are slightly different.)
To find the filters available on your system, try running locate pstops. pstops is a popular filter
that massages PostScript jobs in various ways, such as adding a PostScript command to set the
number of copies. Wherever you find pstops, the other filters won’t be far away.

You can ask CUPS for a list of the available back ends by running lpinfo -v. If your system lacks
a back end for the network protocol you need, it may be available from the web or from your
Linux distributor.
12.2 CUPS SERVER ADMINISTRATION
cupsd starts at boot time and runs continuously. All our example systems are set up this way by
default.

     See this page for details about Apache configuration.

The CUPS configuration file, cupsd.conf, is usually found in /etc/cups. The file format is similar
to that of the Apache configuration file. If you’re comfortable with one of these files, you’ll be
comfortable with the other. You can view and edit cupsd.conf with a text editor or, once again,
from the CUPS web GUI.
The default config file is well commented. The comments and the cupsd.conf man page are good
enough that we won’t belabor the details of configuration here.
CUPS reads its configuration file only at startup. If you change the contents of cupsd.conf, you
must restart cupsd for changes to take effect. If you make changes through cupsd’s web GUI,
cupsd restarts automatically.
Network print server setup
If you’re having trouble printing over the network, review the browser-based CUPS GUI and
make sure you’ve checked all the right boxes. Possible problem areas include an unpublished
printer, a CUPS server that isn’t broadcasting its printers to the network, or a CUPS server that
won’t accept network print jobs.
If you’re editing the cupsd.conf file directly, you’ll need to make a couple of changes. First,
change

to

Replace netaddress with the IP address of the network from which you want to accept jobs (e.g.,
192.168.0.0).
Then, look for the BrowseAddress keyword and set it to the broadcast address on that network plus
the CUPS port; for example,

These steps tell the server to accept requests from any machine on the designated subnet and to
broadcast what it knows about the printers it’s serving to every CUPS daemon on that network.
That’s it! Once you restart cupsd, it comes back as a server.
Printer autoconfiguration
You can use CUPS without a printer (e.g., to convert files to PDF or fax format), but its typical
role is to manage real printers. In this section, we review the ways in which you can deal with the
printers per se.
In some cases, adding a printer is trivial. CUPS autodetects USB printers when they’re plugged
into the system and figures out what to do with them.
Even if you have to do some configuration work yourself, adding a printer is often no more
painful than plugging in the hardware, connecting to the CUPS web interface at
localhost:631/admin, and answering a few questions. KDE and GNOME come with their own
printer configuration widgets, which you may prefer to the CUPS interface. (We like the CUPS
GUI.)
If someone else adds a printer and one or more CUPS servers running on the network know
about it, your CUPS server will learn of its existence. You don’t have to explicitly add the printer
to the local inventory or copy PPDs to your machine. It’s magic.
Network printer configuration
Network printers—that is, printers whose primary hardware interface is an Ethernet jack or Wi-Fi
radio—need some configuration of their own just to be proper citizens of the TCP/IP network. In
particular, they need to know their own IP addresses and netmasks. That information is usually
conveyed to them in one of two ways.
Network printers can get this information from a BOOTP or DHCP server, and this method
works well in environments that have many such printers. See DHCP: the Dynamic Host
Configuration Protocol for more information about DHCP.
Alternatively, you can assign the printer a static IP address from its console, which usually
consists of a set of buttons on the printer’s front panel and a one-line display. Fumble around
with the menus until you discover where to set the IP address. (If there is a menu option to print
the menus, use it and put the printed version underneath the printer for future reference.)
Once configured, network printers usually have a web console that’s accessible from a browser.
However, printers must have an IP address and must be up and running on the network before
you can access them this way, so this interface is unavailable just when it’s most needed.
Printer configuration examples
Below, we add the parallel printer groucho and the network printer fezmo from the command
line:

Groucho is attached to port /dev/lp0 and fezmo is at IP address 192.168.0.12. We specify each
device in the form of a universal resource indicator (URI) and choose an appropriate PPD from
the ones in /usr/share/cups/model.

As long as cupsd has been configured as a network server, it immediately makes the new printers
available to other clients on the network. No restart is required.
CUPS accepts a wide variety of URIs for printers. Here are a few more examples:

      ipp://zoe.admin.com/ipp
      lpd://riley.admin.com/ps
      serial://dev/ttyS0?baud=9600+parity=even+bits=7
      socket://gillian.admin.com:9100
      usb://XEROX/Phaser%206120?serial=YGG210547

Some types take options (e.g., serial) and others don’t. lpinfo -v lists the devices your system can
see and the types of URIs that CUPS understands.
Service shutoff
Removing a printer is easily done with lpadmin -x:

OK, but what if you just want to disable a printer temporarily for service instead of removing it?
You can block the print queue at either end. If you disable the tail (the exit or printer side) of the
queue, users can still submit jobs, but the jobs won’t print until the outlet is re-enabled. If you
disable the head (the entrance) of the queue, jobs that are already in the queue can still print, but
the queue rejects attempts to submit new jobs.

The cupsdisable and cupsenable commands control the exit side of the queue, and the reject
and accept commands control the submission side. For example,

Which to use? It’s a bad idea to accept print jobs that have no hope of being printed in the
foreseeable future, so use reject for extended downtime. For brief interruptions that should be
invisible to users (e.g., changing a toner cartridge), use cupsdisable.
Administrators occasionally ask for a mnemonic to help them remember which commands
control which end of the queue. Consider: if CUPS “rejects” a job, that means you can’t “inject”
it. Another way to keep the commands straight is to remember that accepting and rejecting are
things you can do to print jobs, whereas disabling and enabling are things you can do to printers.
It doesn’t make any sense to “accept” a printer or queue.
CUPS itself sometimes temporarily disables a printer that it’s having trouble with (e.g., if
someone has dislodged a cable). Once you fix the problem, remember to re-cupsenable the
queue. If you forget, lpstat will tell you. (For a complete discussion of this issue and an
alternative approach, see linuxprinting.org/beh.html.)
Other configuration tasks
Today’s printers are eminently configurable, and CUPS lets you tweak a wide variety of features
through its web interface and through the lpadmin and lpoptions commands. As a rule of thumb,
lpadmin is for system-wide tasks and lpoptions is for per-user tasks.
lpadmin can restrict access to printers and queues. For example, you can set up printing quotas
and specify which users can print to which printers.
Table 12.1 lists the commands that come with CUPS and classifies them according to their
origin.

Table 12.1: CUPS command-line utilities and their origins
12.3 TROUBLESHOOTING TIPS
Printers combine all the foibles of a mechanical device with all the communication eccentricities
of a foreign operating system. They (and the software that drives them) seem dedicated to
creating problems for you and your users. The next sections offer some general tips for dealing
with printer adversity.
Print daemon restart
Always remember to restart daemons after changing a configuration file.
You can restart cupsd in whatever way your system normally restarts daemons, usually
systemctl restart org.cups.cupsd.service or a similar incantation. In theory, you can also send
cupsd a HUP signal. Alternatively, you can use the CUPS GUI.
Log files
CUPS maintains three logs: a page log, an access log, and an error log. The page log lists the
pages that CUPS has printed. The other two logs are just like the access log and error log for
Apache, which should not be surprising since the CUPS server is a web server.
The cupsd.conf file specifies the logging level and the locations of the log files. They’re all
typically kept underneath /var/log.
Here’s an excerpt from a log file that corresponds to a single print job:
Direct printing connections
Under CUPS, to verify the physical connection to a local printer, you can directly run the
printer’s back end. For example, here’s what we get when we execute the back end for a USB-
connected printer:

When the USB cable for the Phaser 6120 is disconnected, that printer drops out of the back end’s
output:
Network printing problems
To begin tracking down a network printing problem, first try connecting to the printer daemon.
You can connect to cupsd with a web browser (hostname:631) or with the telnet command
(telnet hostname 631).
If you have problems debugging a network printer connection, keep in mind that there must be a
queue for the job on some machine, a way to decide where to send the job, and a method of
sending the job to the machine that hosts the print queue. On the print server, there must be a
place to queue the job, sufficient permissions to allow the job to be printed, and a way to output
to the device.
Any and all of these prerequisites will, at some point, go awry. Be prepared to hunt for problems
in many places, including these:

      System log files on the sending machine, for name resolution and permission
      problems
      System log files on the print server, for permission problems

      Log files on the sending machine, for missing filters, unknown printers, missing
      directories, etc.
      The print daemon’s log files on the print server’s machine, for messages about bad
      device names, incorrect formats, etc.
      The printer log file on the printing machine, for errors in transmitting the job
      The printer log file on the sending machine, for errors about preprocessing or queuing
      the job

The locations of CUPS log files are specified in /etc/cups/cupsd.conf. See Chapter 10, Logging,
for general information about log management.
12.4 RECOMMENDED READING
CUPS comes with a lot of documentation in HTML format. An excellent way to access it is to
connect to a CUPS server and click the link for on-line help. Of course, this isn’t any help if
you’re consulting the documentation to figure out why you can’t connect to the CUPS server. On
your computer, the documents should be installed in /usr/share/doc/cups in both HTML and
PDF formats. If they aren’t there, ask your distribution’s package manager or look on cups.org.
SHAH, ANKUR. CUPS Administrative Guide: A practical tutorial to installing, managing, and
securing this powerful printing system. Birmingham, UK: Packt Publishing, 2008.
