13 TCP/IP Networking

It would be hard to overstate the importance of networks to modern computing, although that
doesn’t seem to stop people from trying. At many sites—perhaps even the majority—web and
email access are the primary uses of computers. As of 2017, internetworldstats.com estimates the
Internet to have more than 3.7 billion users, or just slightly less than half of the world’s
population. In North America, Internet penetration approaches 90%.
TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) is the networking system that
underlies the Internet. TCP/IP does not depend on any particular hardware or operating system,
so devices that speak TCP/IP can all exchange data (“interoperate”) despite their many
differences.
TCP/IP works on networks of any size or topology, whether or not they are connected to the
outside world. This chapter introduces the TCP/IP protocols in the context of the Internet, but
stand-alone networks are quite similar at the TCP/IP level.
13.1 TCP/IP AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO THE INTERNET
TCP/IP and the Internet share a history that goes back multiple decades. The technical success of
the Internet is due largely to the elegant and flexible design of TCP/IP and its open and
nonproprietary protocol suite. In turn, the leverage provided by the Internet has helped TCP/IP
prevail over several competing protocol suites that were favored at one time or another for
political or commercial reasons.
The progenitor of the modern Internet was a research network called ARPANET, established in
1969 by the U.S. Department of Defense. By the end of the 1980s the network was no longer a
research project and we transitioned to the commercial Internet. Today’s Internet is a collection
of private networks owned by Internet service providers (ISPs) that interconnect at many so-
called peering points.
Who runs the Internet?
Oversight of the Internet and the Internet protocols has long been a cooperative and open effort,
but its exact structure has changed as the Internet has evolved into a public utility and a driving
force in the world economy. Current Internet governance is split roughly into administrative,
technical, and political wings, but the boundaries between these functions are often vague. The
major players are listed below:

      ICANN, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers: if any one
      group can be said to be in charge of the Internet, this is probably it. It’s the only
      group with any sort of actual enforcement capability. ICANN controls the allocation
      of Internet addresses and domain names, along with various other snippets such as
      protocol port numbers. It is organized as a nonprofit corporation headquartered in
      California. (icann.org)
      ISOC, the Internet Society: ISOC is an open-membership organization that represents
      Internet users. Although it has educational and policy functions, it’s best known as
      the umbrella organization for the technical development of the Internet. In particular,
      it is the parent organization of the Internet Engineering Task Force (ietf.org), which
      oversees most technical work. ISOC is an international nonprofit organization with
      offices in Washington, D.C. and Geneva. (isoc.org)
      IGF, the Internet Governance Forum: a relative newcomer, the IGF was created by
      the United Nations in 2006 to establish a home for international and policy-oriented
      discussions related to the Internet. It’s currently structured as a yearly conference
      series, but its importance is likely to grow over time as governments attempt to exert
      more control over the operation of the Internet. (intgovforum.org)

Of these groups, ICANN has the toughest job: establishing itself as the authority in charge of the
Internet, undoing the mistakes of the past, and foreseeing the future, all while keeping users,
governments, and business interests happy.
Network standards and documentation
If your eyes haven’t glazed over just from reading the title of this section, you’ve probably
already had several cups of coffee. Nonetheless, accessing the Internet’s authoritative technical
documentation is a crucial skill for system administrators, and it’s more entertaining than it
sounds.
The technical activities of the Internet community are summarized in documents known as
Requests for Comments or RFCs. Protocol standards, proposed changes, and informational
bulletins all usually end up as RFCs. RFCs start their lives as Internet Drafts, and after lots of
email wrangling and IETF meetings they either die or are promoted to the RFC series. Anyone
who has comments on a draft or proposed RFC is encouraged to reply. In addition to
standardizing the Internet protocols, the RFC mechanism sometimes just documents or explains
aspects of existing practice.
RFCs are numbered sequentially; currently, there are about 8,200. RFCs also have descriptive
titles (e.g., Algorithms for Synchronizing Network Clocks), but to forestall ambiguity they are
usually cited by number. Once distributed, the contents of an RFC are never changed. Updates
are distributed as new RFCs with their own reference numbers. Updates may either extend and
clarify existing RFCs or supersede them entirely.
RFCs are available from numerous sources, but rfc-editor.org is dispatch central and will always
have the most up-to-date information. Look up the status of an RFC at rfc-editor.org before
investing the time to read it; it may no longer be the most current document on that subject.

The Internet standards process itself is detailed in RFC2026. Another useful meta-RFC is
RFC5540, 40 Years of RFCs, which describes some of the cultural and technical context of the
RFC system.
Don’t be scared away by the wealth of technical detail found in RFCs. Most contain
introductions, summaries, and rationales that are useful for system administrators even when the
technical details are not. Some RFCs are specifically written as overviews or general
introductions. RFCs might not be the gentlest way to learn about a topic, but they are
authoritative, concise, and free.
Not all RFCs are full of boring technical details. Here are some of our favorites on the lighter
side (usually written on April 1st):

      RFC1149 – Standard for Transmission of IP Datagrams on Avian Carriers
      RFC1925 – The Twelve Networking Truths

      RFC3251 – Electricity over IP
      RFC4041 – Requirements for Morality Sections in Routing Area Drafts
      RFC6214 – Adaptation of RFC1149 for IPv6
      RFC6921 – Design Considerations for Faster-Than-Light Communication

      RFC7511 – Scenic Routing for IPv6

In addition to being assigned its own serial number, an RFC can also be assigned an FYI (For
Your Information) number, a BCP (Best Current Practice) number, or a STD (Standard) number.
FYIs, STDs, and BCPs are subseries of the RFCs that include documents of special interest or
importance.
FYIs are introductory or informational documents intended for a broad audience. They can be a
good place to start research on an unfamiliar topic if you can find one that’s relevant.
Unfortunately, this series has languished recently and not many of the FYIs are up to date.
BCPs document recommended procedures for Internet sites. They consist of administrative
suggestions and for system administrators are often the most valuable of the RFC subseries.
STDs document Internet protocols that have completed the IETF’s review and testing process
and have been formally adopted as standards.

RFCs, FYIs, BCPs, and STDs are numbered sequentially within their own series, so a document
can bear several different identifying numbers. For example, RFC1713, Tools for DNS
Debugging, is also known as FYI27.
13.2 NETWORKING BASICS
Now that we’ve provided a bit of context, let’s look at the TCP/IP protocols themselves. TCP/IP
is a protocol “suite,” a set of network protocols designed to work smoothly together. It includes
several components, each defined by a standards-track RFC or series of RFCs:

      IP, the Internet Protocol, which routes data packets from one machine to another
      (RFC791)
      ICMP, the Internet Control Message Protocol, which defines several kinds of low-
      level support for IP, including error messages, routing assistance, and debugging help
      (RFC792)

      ARP, the Address Resolution Protocol, which translates IP addresses to hardware
      addresses (RFC826; ARP can be used with other protocol suites, but it’s an integral
      part of the way TCP/IP works on most LAN media.)
      UDP, the User Datagram Protocol, which implements unverified, one-way data
      delivery (RFC768)
      TCP, the Transmission Control Protocol, which implements reliable, full duplex,
      flow-controlled, error-corrected conversations (RFC793)

These protocols are arranged in a hierarchy or “stack”, with the higher-level protocols making
use of the protocols beneath them. TCP/IP is conventionally described as a five-layer system (as
shown in Exhibit A), but the actual TCP/IP protocols inhabit only three of these layers.

Exhibit A: TCP/IP layering model
IPv4 and IPv6
The version of TCP/IP that has been in widespread use for nearly five decades is protocol
revision 4, aka IPv4. It uses 4-byte IP addresses. A modernized version, IPv6, expands the IP
address space to 16 bytes and incorporates several other lessons learned from the use of IPv4. It
removes several features of IP that experience has shown to be of little value, making the
protocol potentially faster and easier to implement. IPv6 also integrates security and
authentication into the basic protocol.
Operating systems and network devices have supported IPv6 for a long time. Google reports
statistics about its clients’ use of IPv6 at google.com/ipv6. As of March 2017, the fraction of
peers using IPv6 to contact Google sites has risen to about 14% world-wide. In the United States,
it’s over 30%.
Those numbers look healthy, but in fact they’re perhaps a bit deceptive because most mobile
devices default to IPv6 when they’re on the carrier’s data network, and there are a lot of phones
out there. Home and enterprise networks remain overwhelmingly centered on IPv4.
The development and deployment of IPv6 were to a large extent motivated by the concern that
the world was running out of 4-byte IPv4 address space. And indeed that concern proved well
founded: at this point, only Africa has any remaining IPv4 addresses still available for
assignment (see ipv4.potaroo.net for details). The Asia-Pacific region was the first to run out of
addresses (on April 19, 2011).

Given that we’ve already lived through the IPv4 apocalypse and have used up all our IPv4
addresses, how is it that the world continues to rely predominantly on IPv4?
For the most part, we’ve learned to make more efficient use of the IPv4 addresses that we have.
Network Address Translation (NAT; see this page) lets entire networks of machines hide behind
a single IPv4 address. Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR; see this page) flexibly subdivides
networks and promotes efficient backbone routing. Contention for IPv4 addresses still exists, but
like broadcast spectrum, it tends to be reallocated in economic rather than technological ways
these days.
The underlying issue that limits IPv6’s adoption is that IPv4 support remains mandatory for a
device to be a functional citizen of the Internet. For example, here are a few major web sites that
as of 2017 are still not reachable through IPv6: Amazon, Reddit, eBay, IMDB, Hotmail, Tumblr,
MSN, Apple, The New York Times, Twitter, Pinterest, Bing, WordPress, Dropbox, craigslist,
Stack Overflow. We could go on, but you get the drift.
This list consists of sites whose primary web addresses are not associated with any IPv6
addresses (AAAA records) in DNS. Microsoft Bing’s presence on the list is particularly
interesting given that it’s one of a handful of major sites showcased in materials for the World
IPv6 Launch marketing campaign of 2012 (tag line: “This time it is for real”). We don’t know
the full story behind this situation, but Bing evidently supported IPv6 at one point, then later
decided it wasn’t worth the trouble. See worldipv6launch.org.
Your choice is not between IPv4 and IPv6; it’s between supporting IPv4 alone and supporting
both IPv4 and IPv6. When all the services listed above—and scores more in the second tier—
have added IPv6 support, then you can reasonably consider adopting IPv6 instead of IPv4. Until
then, it doesn’t seem unreasonable to ask IPv6 to justify the effort of its implementation by
providing better performance, security, or features. Or perhaps, by opening the door to a world of
IPv6-only services that simply can’t be accessed through IPv4.

Unfortunately, those services don’t exist, and IPv6 doesn’t actually offer any of those benefits.
Yes, it’s an elegant and well-designed protocol that improves on IPv4. And yes, it is in some
ways easier to administer than IPv4 and requires fewer hacks (e.g., less need for NAT). But in
the end, it’s just a cleaned-up version of IPv4 with a larger address space. The fact that you must
manage it alongside IPv4 eliminates any potential efficiency gain. IPv6’s raison d’être remains
the millennial fear of IPv4 address exhaustion, and to date, the effects of that exhaustion just
haven’t been painful enough to motivate widespread migration to IPv6.
We’ve been publishing this book for a long time, and over the last few editions, IPv6 has always
seemed like it was one more update away from meriting coverage as a primary technology. 2017
brings an uncanny sense of deja vu, with IPv6 looming ever brighter on the horizon but still
solving no immediate problems and offering few specific incentives to convert. IPv6 is the future
of networking, and evidently, it always will be.
The arguments in favor of actually deploying IPv6 inside your network remain largely
attitudinal: It will have to be done at some point. IPv6 is superior from an engineering standpoint.
You need to develop IPv6 expertise so that you’re not caught flat-footed when the IPv6 rapture
finally arrives. All the cool kids are doing it.
We say: sure, go ahead, support IPv6 if you feel like it. That’s a responsible and forward-
thinking path. It’s civic-minded, too—your adoption of IPv6 hastens the day when IPv6 is all we
have to deal with. But if you don’t feel like diving into IPv6, that’s fine too. You’ll have years of
warning before there’s any real need to transition.

Of course, none of these comments apply if your organization offers public services on the
Internet. In that case, it’s your solemn duty to implement IPv6. Don’t screw things up for the rest
of us by continuing to impede IPv6’s adoption. Do you want to be Google, or do you want to be
Microsoft Bing?
There’s also an argument to be made for IPv6 in data centers where direct connectivity to the
outside world of IPv4 is not needed. In these limited environments, you may indeed have the
option to migrate to IPv6 and leave IPv4 behind, thereby simplifying your infrastructure.
Internet-facing servers can speak IPv4 even as they route all internal and back-end traffic over
IPv6.
A couple of points:
      IPv6 has been production-ready for a long time. Implementation bugs aren’t a major
      concern. Expect it to work as reliably as IPv4.
      From a hardware standpoint, IPv6 support should be considered mandatory for all
      new device acquisitions. It’s doubtful that you could find any piece of enterprise-
      grade networking gear that doesn’t support IPv6 these days, but a lot of consumer-
      grade equipment remains IPv4-only.

In this book, we focus on IPv4 as the mainstream version of TCP/IP. IPv6-specific material is
explicitly marked. Fortunately for sysadmins, IPv4 and IPv6 are highly analogous. If you
understand IPv4, you already know most of what you need to know about IPv6. The main
difference between the versions lies in their addressing schemes. In addition to longer addresses,
IPv6 introduces a few additional addressing concepts and some new notation. But that’s about it.
Packets and encapsulation
TCP/IP supports a variety of physical networks and transport systems, including Ethernet, token
ring, MPLS (Multiprotocol Label Switching), wireless Ethernet, and serial-line-based systems.
Hardware is managed within the link layer of the TCP/IP architecture, and higher-level protocols
do not know or care about the specific hardware being used.
Data travels on a network in the form of packets, bursts of data with a maximum length imposed
by the link layer. Each packet consists of a header and a payload. The header tells where the
packet came from and where it’s going. It can also include checksums, protocol-specific
information, or other handling instructions. The payload is the data to be transferred.
The name of the primitive data unit depends on the layer of the protocol. At the link layer it is
called a frame, at the IP layer a packet, and at the TCP layer a segment. In this book, we use
“packet” as a generic term that encompasses these various cases.
As a packet travels down the protocol stack (from TCP or UDP transport to IP to Ethernet to the
physical wire) in preparation for being sent, each protocol adds its own header information. Each
protocol’s finished packet becomes the payload part of the packet generated by the next protocol.
This nesting is known as encapsulation. On the receiving machine, the encapsulation is reversed
as the packet travels back up the protocol stack.

For example, a UDP packet being transmitted over Ethernet contains three different wrappers or
envelopes. On the Ethernet wire, it is framed with a simple header that lists the source and next-
hop destination hardware addresses, the length of the frame, and the frame’s checksum (CRC).
The Ethernet frame’s payload is an IP packet, the IP packet’s payload is a UDP packet, and the
UDP packet’s payload is the data being transmitted. Exhibit B shows the components of such a
frame.

Exhibit B: A typical network packet
Ethernet framing
One of the main chores of the link layer is to add headers to packets and to put separators
between them. The headers contain each packet’s link-layer addressing information and
checksums, and the separators ensure that receivers can tell where one packet stops and the next
one begins. The process of adding these extra bits is known generically as framing.
The link layer is divided into two parts: MAC, the Media Access Control sublayer, and LLC, the
Logical Link Control sublayer. The MAC sublayer deals with the media and transmits packets
onto the wire. The LLC sublayer handles the framing.
Today, a single standard for Ethernet framing is in common use: DIX Ethernet II. In the distant
past, several slightly different standards based on IEEE 802.2 were also used. You might still run
across vestigial references to framing choices in network documentation, but you can now ignore
this issue.
Maximum transfer unit
The size of packets on a network can be limited both by hardware specifications and by protocol
conventions. For example, the payload of a standard Ethernet frame is traditionally 1,500 bytes.
The size limit is associated with the link-layer protocol and is called the maximum transfer unit
or MTU. Table 13.1 shows some typical values for the MTU.

Table 13.1: MTUs for various types of network

IPv4 splits packets to conform to the MTU of a particular network link. If a packet is routed
through several networks, one of the intermediate networks might have a smaller MTU than the
network of origin. In this case, an IPv4 router that forwards the packet onto the small-MTU
network further subdivides the packet in a process called fragmentation.
Fragmentation of in-flight packets is an unwelcome chore for a busy router, so IPv6 largely
removes this feature. Packets can still be fragmented, but the originating host must do the work
itself. All IPv6 networks are required to support an MTU of at least 1,280 bytes at the IP layer, so
IPv6 senders also have the option of limiting themselves to packets of this size.

IPv4 senders can discover the lowest-MTU link through which a packet must pass by setting the
packet’s “do not fragment” flag. If the packet reaches an intermediate router that cannot forward
the packet without fragmenting it, the router returns an ICMP error message to the sender. The
ICMP packet includes the MTU of the network that’s demanding smaller packets, and this MTU
then becomes the governing packet size for communication with that destination.
IPv6 path MTU discovery works similarly, but since intermediate routers are never allowed to
fragment IPv6 packets, all IPv6 packets act as if they had a “do not fragment” flag enabled. Any
IPv6 packet that’s too large to fit into a downstream pipe causes an ICMP message to be returned
to the sender.
The TCP protocol automatically does path MTU discovery, even in IPv4. UDP is not so nice and
is happy to shunt extra work to the IP layer.
IPv4 fragmentation problems can be insidious. Although path MTU discovery should
automatically resolve MTU conflicts, an administrator must occasionally intervene. If you are
using a tunneled architecture for a virtual private network, for example, you should look at the
size of the packets that are traversing the tunnel. They are often 1,500 bytes to start with, but
once the tunneling header is added, they become 1,540 bytes or so and must be fragmented.
Setting the MTU of the link to a smaller value averts fragmentation and increases the overall
performance of the tunneled network. Consult the ifconfig or ip-link man page to see how to set
an interface’s MTU.
13.3 PACKET ADDRESSING
Like letters or email messages, network packets must be properly addressed to reach their
destinations. Several addressing schemes are used in combination:

      MAC (Media Access Control) addresses for use by hardware
      IPv4 and IPv6 network addresses for use by software

      Hostnames for use by people
Hardware (MAC) addressing
Each of a host’s network interfaces usually has one link-layer MAC address that distinguishes it
from other machines on the physical network, plus one or more IP addresses that identify the
interface on the global Internet. This last part bears repeating: IP addresses identify network
interfaces, not machines. (To users the distinction is irrelevant, but administrators must know the
truth.)
The lowest level of addressing is dictated by network hardware. For example, Ethernet devices
are assigned a unique 6-byte hardware address at the time of manufacture. These addresses are
traditionally written as a series of 2-digit hex bytes separated by colons; for example,
00:50:8d:9a:3b:df.
Token ring interfaces have a similar address that is also six bytes long. Some point-to-point
networks (such as PPP) need no hardware addresses at all; the identity of the destination is
specified as the link is established.
A 6-byte Ethernet address is divided into two parts. The first three bytes identify the
manufacturer of the hardware, and the last three bytes are a unique serial number that the
manufacturer assigns. Sysadmins can sometimes identify the brand of machine that is trashing a
network by looking up the 3-byte identifier in a table of vendor IDs. The 3-byte codes are
actually IEEE Organizationally Unique Identifiers (OUIs), so you can look up them up directly in
the IEEE’s database at

  standards.ieee.org/regauth/oui
Of course, the relationships among the manufacturers of chipsets, components, and systems are
complex, so the vendor ID embedded in a MAC address can be misleading, too.
In theory, Ethernet hardware addresses are permanently assigned and immutable. However,
many network interfaces let you override the hardware address and set one of your own
choosing. This feature can be handy if you have to replace a broken machine or network card and
for some reason must use the old MAC address (e.g., all your switches filter it, or your DHCP
server hands out addresses according to MAC addresses, or your MAC address is also a software
license key). Spoofable MAC addresses are also helpful if you need to infiltrate a wireless
network that uses MAC-based access control. But for simplicity, it’s generally advisable to
preserve the uniqueness of MAC addresses.
IP addressing

     See this page for more details about NAT and private address spaces.

At the next level up from the hardware, Internet addressing (more commonly known as IP
addressing) is used. IP addresses are hardware independent. Within any particular network
context, an IP address identifies a specific and unique destination. However, it’s not quite
accurate to say that IP addresses are globally unique because several special cases muddy the
water: NAT uses one interface’s IP address to handle traffic for multiple machines; IP private
address spaces are addresses that multiple sites can use at once, as long as the addresses are not
visible to the Internet; anycast addressing shares one IP address among several machines.

     See this page for more information about ARP.

The mapping from IP addresses to hardware addresses is implemented at the link layer of the
TCP/IP model. On networks such as Ethernet that support broadcasting (that is, networks that
allow packets to be addressed to “all hosts on this physical network”), senders use the ARP
protocol to discover mappings without assistance from a system administrator. In IPv6, an
interface’s MAC address is often used as part of the IP address, making the translation between
IP and hardware addressing virtually automatic.
Hostname “addressing”
IP addresses are sequences of numbers, so they are hard for people to remember. Operating
systems allow one or more hostnames to be associated with an IP address so that users can type
rfc-editor.org instead of 4.31.198.49. This mapping can be set up in several ways, ranging from a
static file (/etc/hosts) to the LDAP database system to DNS, the world-wide Domain Name
System. Keep in mind that hostnames are really just a convenient shorthand for IP addresses, and
as such, they refer to network interfaces rather than computers.

    See Chapter 16 for more information about DNS.
Ports
IP addresses identify a machine’s network interfaces, but they are not specific enough to address
individual processes or services, many of which might be actively using the network at once.
TCP and UDP extend IP addresses with a concept known as a port, a 16-bit number that
supplements an IP address to specify a particular communication channel. Valid ports are in the
range 1–65,535.
Standard services such as SMTP, SSH, and HTTP associate themselves with “well known” ports
defined in /etc/services. Here are some typical entries from the services file:

The services file is part of the infrastructure. You should never need to modify it, although you
can do so if you want to add a nonstandard service. You can find a full list of assigned ports at
iana.org/assignments/port-numbers.
Although both TCP and UDP have ports, and those ports have the same sets of potential values,
the port spaces are entirely separate and unrelated. Firewalls must be configured separately for
each of these protocols.
To help prevent impersonation of system services, UNIX systems restrict programs from binding
to port numbers under 1,024 unless they are run as root or have an appropriate Linux capability.
Anyone can communicate with a server running on a low port number; the restriction applies
only to the program listening on the port.
Today, the privileged port system is as much a nuisance as it is a bulwark against malfeasance. In
many cases, it’s more secure to run standard services on unprivileged ports as nonroot users and
to forward network traffic to these high-numbered ports through a load balancer or some other
type of network appliance. This practice limits the proliferation of unnecessary root privileges
and adds an additional layer of abstraction to your infrastructure.
Address types
The IP layer defines several broad types of address, some of which have direct counterparts at the
link layer:

      Unicast – addresses that refer to a single network interface
      Multicast – addresses that simultaneously target a group of hosts
      Broadcast – addresses that include all hosts on the local subnet
      Anycast – addresses that resolve to any one of a group of hosts

Multicast addressing facilitates applications such as video conferencing for which the same set of
packets must be sent to all participants. The Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP)
constructs and manages sets of hosts that are treated as one multicast destination.
Multicast is largely unused on today’s Internet, but it’s slightly more mainstream in IPv6. IPv6
broadcast addresses are really just specialized forms of multicast addressing.
Anycast addresses bring load balancing to the network layer by allowing packets to be delivered
to whichever of several destinations is closest in terms of network routing. You might expect that
they’d be implemented similarly to multicast addresses, but in fact they are more like unicast
addresses.
Most of the implementation details for anycast support are handled at the level of routing rather
than through IP. The novelty of anycast addressing is really just the relaxation of the traditional
requirement that IP addresses identify unique destinations. Anycast addressing is formally
described for IPv6, but the same tricks can be applied to IPv4, too—for example, as is done for
root DNS name servers.
13.4 IP ADDRESSES: THE GORY DETAILS
With the exception of multicast addresses, Internet addresses consist of a network portion and a
host portion. The network portion identifies a logical network to which the address refers, and the
host portion identifies a node on that network. In IPv4, addresses are 4 bytes long and the
boundary between network and host portions is set administratively. In IPv6, addresses are 16
bytes long and the network portion and host portion are always 8 bytes each.
IPv4 addresses are written as decimal numbers, one for each byte, separated by periods; for
example, 209.85.171.147. The leftmost byte is the most significant and is always part of the
network portion.

When 127 is the first byte of an address, it denotes the “loopback network,” a fictitious network
that has no real hardware interface and only one host. The loopback address 127.0.0.1 always
refers to the current host. Its symbolic name is “localhost”. (This is another small violation of IP
address uniqueness since every host thinks 127.0.0.1 is a different computer.)
IPv6 addresses and their text-formatted equivalents are a bit more complicated. They’re
discussed in the section IPv6 addressing.
An interface’s IP address and other parameters are set with the ip address (Linux) or ifconfig
(FreeBSD) command. Details on configuring a network interface start here.
IPv4 address classes
Historically, IP addresses had an inherent “class” that depended on the first bits of the leftmost
byte. The class determined which bytes of the address were in the network portion and which
were in the host portion. Today, an explicit mask identifies the network portion, and the
boundary can fall between any two adjacent bits, not just between bytes. However, the traditional
classes are still used as defaults when no explicit division is specified.
Classes A, B, and C denote regular IP addresses. Classes D and E are multicasting and research
addresses. Table 13.2 describes the characteristics of each class. The network portion of an
address is denoted by N, and the host portion by H.

Table 13.2: Historical IPv4 address classes

It’s unusual for a single physical network to have thousands of computers attached to it, so class
A and class B addresses (which allow for 16,777,214 hosts and 65,534 hosts per network,
respectively) are really quite wasteful. For example, the 127 class A networks use up half the
available 4-byte address space. Who knew that IPv4 address space would become so precious!
IPv4 subnetting
To make better use of these addresses, you can now reassign part of the host portion to the
network portion by specifying an explicit 4-byte (32-bit) “subnet mask” or “netmask” in which
the 1s correspond to the desired network portion and the 0s correspond to the host portion. The
1s must be leftmost and contiguous. At least eight bits must be allocated to the network part and
at least two bits to the host part. Ergo, there are really only 22 possible values for an IPv4
netmask.
For example, the four bytes of a class B address would normally be interpreted as N.N.H.H. The
implicit netmask for class B is therefore 255.255.0.0 in decimal notation. With a netmask of
255.255.255.0, however, the address would be interpreted as N.N.N.H. Use of the mask turns a
single class B network address into 256 distinct class-C-like networks, each of which can support
254 hosts.

    See this page for more information about ip and ifconfig.

Netmasks are assigned with the ip or ifconfig command as each network interface is set up. By
default, these commands use the inherent class of an address to figure out which bits are in the
network part. When you set an explicit mask, you simply override this behavior.

Netmasks that do not end at a byte boundary can be annoying to decode and are often written as
/XX, where XX is the number of bits in the network portion of the address. This is sometimes
called CIDR (Classless Inter-Domain Routing; see this page) notation. For example, the network
address 128.138.243.0/26 refers to the first of four networks whose first bytes are 128.138.243.
The other three networks have 64, 128, and 192 as their fourth bytes. The netmask associated
with these networks is 255.255.255.192 or 0xFFFFFFC0; in binary, it’s 26 ones followed by 6
zeros. Exhibit C breaks out these numbers in a bit more detail.

Exhibit C: Netmask base conversion

A /26 network has 6 bits left (32 – 26 = 6) to number hosts. 26 is 64, so the network has 64
potential host addresses. However, it can only accommodate 62 actual hosts because the all-0 and
all-1 host addresses are reserved (they are the network and broadcast addresses, respectively).
In our 128.138.243.0/26 example, the extra two bits of network address obtained by subnetting
can take on the values 00, 01, 10, and 11. The 128.138.243.0/24 network has thus been divided
into four /26 networks:

      128.138.243.0/26 (0 in decimal is 00000000 in binary)
      128.138.243.64/26 (64 in decimal is 01000000 in binary)

      128.138.243.128/26 (128 in decimal is 10000000 in binary)
      128.138.243.192/26 (192 in decimal is 11000000 in binary)

The boldfaced bits of the last byte of each address are the bits that belong to the network portion
of that byte.
Tricks and tools for subnet arithmetic
It’s confusing to do all this bit twiddling in your head, but some tricks can make it simpler. The
number of hosts per network and the value of the last byte in the netmask always add up to 256:
  last netmask byte = 256 – net size
For example, 256 – 64 = 192, which is the final byte of the netmask in the preceding example.
Another arithmetic fact is that the last byte of an actual network address (as opposed to a
netmask) must be evenly divisible by the number of hosts per network. We see this in action in
the 128.138.243.0/26 example, where the last bytes of the networks are 0, 64, 128, and 192—all
divisible by 64.
Given an IP address (say, 128.138.243.100), we cannot tell without the associated netmask what
the network address and broadcast address will be. Table 13.3 shows the possibilities for /16 (the
default for a class B address), /24 (a plausible value), and /26 (a reasonable value for a small
network).

Table 13.3: Example IPv4 address decodings

The network address and broadcast address steal two hosts from each network, so it would seem
that the smallest meaningful network would have four possible hosts: two real hosts—usually at
either end of a point-to-point link—and the network and broadcast addresses. To have four
values for hosts requires two bits in the host portion, so such a network would be a /30 network
with netmask 255.255.255.252 or 0xFFFFFFFC. However, a /31 network is treated as a special
case (see RFC3021) and has no network or broadcast address; both of its two addresses are used
for hosts, and its netmask is 255.255.255.254.
A handy web site called the IP Calculator by Krischan Jodies (jodies.de/ipcalc) helps with
binary/hex/mask arithmetic. IP Calculator displays everything you might need to know about a
network address and its netmask, broadcast address, hosts, etc.
A command-line version of the tool, ipcalc, is also available. It’s in the standard repositories for
Debian, Ubuntu, and FreeBSD.
          Red Hat and CentOS include a similar but unrelated program that’s also called ipcalc.
          However, it’s relatively useless because it only understands default IP address classes.
Here’s some sample ipcalc output, munged a bit to help with formatting:
The output includes both easy-to-understand versions of the addresses and “cut and paste”
versions. Very useful.
If a dedicated IP calculator isn’t available, the standard utility bc makes a good backup utility
since it can do arithmetic in any base. Set the input and output bases with the ibase and obase
directives. Set the obase first; otherwise, it’s interpreted relative to the new ibase.
CIDR: Classless Inter-Domain Routing
Like subnetting, of which it is a direct extension, CIDR relies on an explicit netmask to define
the boundary between the network and host parts of an address. But unlike subnetting, CIDR
allows the network portion to be made smaller than would be implied by an address’s implicit
class. A short CIDR mask can have the effect of aggregating several networks for purposes of
routing. Hence, CIDR is sometimes referred to as supernetting.

    CIDR is defined in RFC4632.

CIDR simplifies routing information and imposes hierarchy on the routing process. Although
CIDR was intended as only an interim solution along the road to IPv6, it has proved to be
sufficiently powerful to handle the Internet’s growth problems for more than two decades.
For example, suppose that a site has been given a block of eight class C addresses numbered
192.144.0.0 through 192.144.7.0 (in CIDR notation, 192.144.0.0/21). Internally, the site could
use them as

      1 network of length /21 with 2,046 hosts, netmask 255.255.248.0

      8 networks of length /24 with 254 hosts each, netmask 255.255.255.0
      16 networks of length /25 with 126 hosts each, netmask 255.255.255.128
      32 networks of length /26 with 62 hosts each, netmask 255.255.255.192

and so on. But from the perspective of the Internet, it’s not necessary to have 32, 16, or even 8
routing table entries for these addresses. They all refer to the same organization, and all the
packets go to the same ISP. A single routing entry for 192.144.0.0/21 suffices. CIDR makes it
easy to sub-allocate portions of addresses and thus increases the number of available addresses
manyfold.
Inside your network, you can mix and match regions of different subnet lengths as long as all the
pieces fit together without overlaps. This is called variable length subnetting. For example, an
ISP with the 192.144.0.0/21 allocation could define some /30 networks for point-to-point
customers, some /24s for large customers, and some /27s for smaller folks.
All the hosts on a network must be configured with the same netmask. You can’t tell one host
that it is a /24 and another host on the same network that it is a /25.
Address allocation
Only network numbers are formally assigned; sites must define their own host numbers to form
complete IP addresses. You can subdivide the address space that has been assigned to you into
subnets however you like.
Administratively, ICANN (the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers) has
delegated blocks of addresses to five regional Internet registries, and these regional authorities
are responsible for doling out subblocks to ISPs within their regions. These ISPs in turn divide up
their blocks and hand out pieces to individual clients. Only large ISPs should ever have to deal
directly with one of the ICANN-sponsored address registries.
Table 13.4 lists the regional registration authorities.

Table 13.4: Regional Internet registries

The delegation from ICANN to regional registries and then to national or regional ISPs has
allowed for further aggregation in the backbone routing tables. ISP customers who have been
allocated address space within the ISP’s block do not need individual routing entries on the
backbone. A single entry for the aggregated block that points to the ISP suffices.
Private addresses and network address translation (NAT)
Another factor that has mitigated the effect of the IPv4 address crisis is the use of private IP
address spaces, described in RFC1918. These addresses are used by your site internally but are
never shown to the Internet (or at least, not intentionally). A border router translates between
your private address space and the address space assigned by your ISP.
RFC1918 sets aside 1 class A network, 16 class B networks, and 256 class C networks that will
never be globally allocated and can be used internally by any site. Table 13.5 shows the options.
(The “CIDR range” column shows each range in the more compact CIDR notation; it does not
add additional information.)

Table 13.5: IP addresses reserved for private use

The original idea was that sites would choose an address class from among these options to fit
the size of their organizations. But now that CIDR and subnetting are universal, it probably
makes the most sense to use the class A address (subnetted, of course) for all new private
networks.

To allow hosts that use these private addresses to talk to the Internet, the site’s border router runs
a system called NAT (Network Address Translation). NAT intercepts packets addressed with
these internal addresses and rewrites their source addresses, using a valid external IP address and
perhaps a different source port number. It also maintains a table of the mappings it has made
between internal and external address/port pairs so that the translation can be performed in
reverse when answering packets arrive from the Internet.
Many garden-variety “NAT” gateways actually perform Port Address Translation, aka PAT: they
use a single external IP address and multiplex connections for many internal clients onto the port
space of that single address. For example, this is the default configuration for most of the mass-
market routers used with cable modems. In practice, NAT and PAT are similar in terms of their
implementation, and both systems are commonly referred to as NAT.
A site that uses NAT must still request a small section of address space from its ISP, but most of
the addresses thus obtained are used for NAT mappings and are not assigned to individual hosts.
If the site later wants to choose another ISP, only the border router and its NAT configuration
need be updated, not the configurations of the individual hosts.
Large organizations that use NAT and RFC1918 addresses must institute some form of central
coordination so that all hosts, independently of their department or administrative group, have
unique IP addresses. The situation can become complicated when one company that uses
RFC1918 address space acquires or merges with another company that’s doing the same thing.
Parts of the combined organization must often renumber.
It is possible to have a UNIX or Linux box perform the NAT function, but most sites prefer to
delegate this task to their routers or network connection devices. See the vendor-specific sections
later in this chapter for details. (Of course, many routers now run embedded Linux kernels. Even
so, these dedicated systems are still generally more reliable and more secure than general-
purpose computers that also forward packets.)

An incorrect NAT configuration can let private-address-space packets escape onto the Internet.
The packets might get to their destinations, but answering packets won’t be able to get back.
CAIDA, an organization that collects operational data from the Internet backbone, finds that
0.1% to 0.2% of the packets on the backbone have either private addresses or bad checksums.
This sounds like a tiny percentage, but it represents thousands of packets every minute on a busy
circuit. See caida.org for other interesting statistics and network measurement tools.
One issue raised by NAT is that an arbitrary host on the Internet cannot initiate connections to
your site’s internal machines. To get around this limitation, NAT implementations let you
preconfigure externally visible “tunnels” that connect to specific internal hosts and ports. Many
routers also support the Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) standards promoted by Microsoft, one
feature of which allows interior hosts to set up their own dynamic NAT tunnels. This can be
either a godsend or a security risk, depending on your perspective. You can easily disable the
feature at the router if you so desire.
Another NAT-related issue is that some applications embed IP addresses in the data portion of
packets; these applications are foiled or confused by NAT. Examples include some media
streaming systems, routing protocols, and FTP commands. NAT sometimes breaks VPNs, too.
NAT hides interior structure. This secrecy feels like a security win, but the security folks say
NAT doesn’t really help for security and does not replace the need for a firewall. Unfortunately,
NAT also foils attempts to measure the size and topology of the Internet. See RFC4864, Local
Network Protection for IPv6, for a good discussion of both the real and illusory benefits of NAT
in IPv4.
IPv6 addressing
IPv6 addresses are 128 bits long. These long addresses were originally intended to solve the
problem of IP address exhaustion. But now that they’re here, they are being exploited to help
with issues of routing, mobility, and locality of reference.
The boundary between the network portion and the host portion of an IPv6 address is fixed at
/64, so there can be no disagreement or confusion about how long an address’s network portion
“really” is. Stated another way, true subnetting no longer exists in the IPv6 world, although the
term “subnet” lives on as a synonym for “local network.” Even though network numbers are
always 64 bits long, routers needn’t pay attention to all 64 bits when making routing decisions.
They can route packets by prefix, just as they do under CIDR.

IPv6 address notation
The standard notation for IPv6 addresses divides the 128 bits of an address into 8 groups of 16
bits each, separated by colons. For example,

  2607:f8b0:000a:0806:0000:0000:0000:200e
This is a real IPv6 address, so don’t use it on your own systems, even for experimentation.
RFC3849 suggests that documentation and examples show IPv6 addresses within the prefix
block 2001:db8::/32. But we wanted to show a real example that’s routed on the Internet
backbone.
Each 16-bit group is represented by 4 hexadecimal digits. This is different from IPv4 notation, in
which each byte of the address is represented by a decimal (base 10) number.
A couple of notational simplifications help limit the amount of typing needed to represent IPv6
addresses. First, you needn’t include leading zeros within a group. 000a in the third group above
can be written simply as a, and 0806 in the fourth group can be written as 806. Groups with a
value of 0000 should be represented as 0. Application of this rule reduces the address above to
the following string:

  2607:f8b0:a:806:0:0:0:200e
Second, you can replace any number of contiguous, zero-valued, 16-bit groups with a double
colon:
  2607:f8b0:a:806::200e
The :: can be used only once within an address. However, it can appear as the first or last
component. For example, the IPv6 loopback address (analogous to 127.0.0.1 in IPv4) is ::1,
which is equivalent to 0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1.

The original specification for IPv6 addresses, RFC4921, documented these notational
simplifications but did not require their use. As a result, there can be multiple RFC491-compliant
ways to write a given IPv6 address, as illustrated by the several versions of the example address
above.
This polymorphousness makes searching and matching difficult because addresses must be
normalized before they can be compared. That’s a problem: we can’t expect standard data-
wrangling software such as spreadsheets, scripting languages, and databases to know about the
details of IPv6 notation.

RFC5952 updates RFC4921 to make the notational simplifications mandatory. It also adds a few
more rules to ensure that every address has only a single text representation:

      Hex digits a–f must be represented by lowercase letters.
      The :: element cannot replace a single 16-bit group. (Just use :0:.)
      If there is a choice of groups to replace with ::, the :: must replace the longest
      possible sequence of zeros.

You will still see RFC5952-noncompliant addresses out in the wild, and nearly all networking
software accepts them, too. However, we strongly recommend following the RFC5952 rules in
your configurations, recordkeeping, and software.

IPv6 prefixes
IPv4 addresses were not designed to be geographically clustered in the manner of phone numbers
or zip codes, but clustering was added after the fact in the form of the CIDR conventions. (Of
course, the relevant “geography” is really routing space rather than physical location.) CIDR was
so technically successful that hierarchical subassignment of network addresses is now assumed
throughout IPv6.
Your IPv6 ISP obtains blocks of IPv6 prefixes from one of the regional registries listed in Table
13.4. The ISP in turn assigns you a prefix that you prepend to the local parts of your addresses,
usually at your border router. Organizations are free to set delegation boundaries wherever they
wish within the address spaces assigned to them.
Whenever an address prefix is represented in text form, IPv6 adopts CIDR notation to represent
the length of the prefix. The general pattern is
  IPv6-address/prefix-length-in-decimal

The IPv6-address portion is as outlined in the previous section. It must be a full-length 128-bit
address. In most cases, the address bits beyond the prefix are set to zero. However, it’s
sometimes appropriate to specify a complete host address along with a prefix length; the intent
and meaning are usually clear from context.
The IPv6 address shown in the previous section leads to a Google server. The 32-bit prefix that’s
routed on the North American Internet backbone is
  2607:f8b0::/32
In this case, the address prefix was assigned by ARIN directly to Google, as you can verify by
looking up the prefix at arin.net. There is no intervening ISP. Google is responsible for
structuring the remaining 32 bits of the network number as it sees fit. Most likely, several
additional layers of prefixing are used within the Google infrastructure.

In this case, the prefix lengths of the ARIN-assigned address block and the backbone routing
table entry are the same, but that is not always true. The allocation prefix determines an
administrative boundary, whereas the routing prefix relates to route-space locality.

Automatic host numbering
A machine’s 64-bit interface identifier (the host portion of the IPv6 address) can be automatically
derived from the interface’s 48-bit MAC (hardware) address with the algorithm known as
“modified EUI-64,” documented in RFC4291.
Specifically, the interface identifier is just the MAC address with the two bytes 0xFFFE inserted
in the middle and one bit complemented. The bit you will flip is the 7th most significant bit of the
first byte; in other words, you XOR the first byte with 0x02. For example, on an interface with
MAC address 00:1b:21:30:e9:c7, the autogenerated interface identifier would be
021b:21ff:fe30:e9c7. The underlined digit is 2 instead of 0 because of the flipped bit.

This scheme allows for automatic host numbering, which is a nice feature for sysadmins since
only the network portion of addresses need be managed.
That the MAC address can be seen at the IP layer has both good and bad implications. The good
part is that host number configuration can be completely automatic. The bad part is that the
manufacturer of the interface card is encoded in the first half of the MAC address (see this page),
so you inevitably give up some privacy. Prying eyes and hackers with code for a particular
architecture will be helped along. The IPv6 standards point out that sites are not required to use
MAC addresses to derive host IDs; they can use whatever numbering system they want.
Virtual servers have virtual network interfaces. The MAC addresses associated with these
interfaces are typically randomized, which all but guarantees uniqueness within a particular local
context.

Stateless address autoconfiguration
The autogenerated host numbers described in the previous section combine with a couple of
other simple IPv6 features to enable automatic network configuration for IPv6 interfaces. The
overall scheme is known as SLAAC, for StateLess Address AutoConfiguration.
SLAAC configuring for an interface begins by assigning an address on the “link-local network,”
which has the fixed network address fe80::/64. The host portion of the address is set from the
MAC address of the interface, as described above.
IPv6 does not have IPv4-style broadcast addresses per se, but the link-local network serves
roughly the same purpose: it means “this physical network.” Routers never forward packets that
were sent to addresses on this network.
Once the link-local address for an interface has been set, the IPv6 protocol stack sends an ICMP
Router Solicitation packet to the “all routers” multicast address. Routers respond with ICMP
Router Advertisement packets that list the IPv6 network numbers (prefixes, really) in use on the
network.

If one of these networks has its “autoconfiguration OK” flag set, the inquiring host assigns an
additional address to its interface that combines the network portion advertised by the router with
the autogenerated host portion constructed with the modified EUI-64 algorithm. Other fields in
the Router Advertisement allow a router to identify itself as an appropriate default gateway and
to communicate the network’s MTU.

     See this page for more information about DHCP.

The end result is that a new host becomes a full citizen of the IPv6 network without the need for
any server (other than the router) to be running on the network and without any local
configuration. Unfortunately, the system does not address the configuration of higher-level
software such as DNS, so you may still want to run a traditional DHCPv6 server, too.
You will sometimes see IPv6 network autoconfiguration associated with the name Neighbor
Discovery Protocol. Although RFC4861 is devoted to the Neighbor Discovery Protocol, the term
is actually rather vague. It covers the use and interpretation of a variety of ICMPv6 packet types,
some of which are only peripherally related to discovering network neighbors. From a technical
perspective, the relationship is that the SLAAC procedure described above uses some, but not all,
of the ICMPv6 packet types defined in RFC4861. It’s clearer to just call it SLAAC or “IPv6
autoconfiguration” and to reserve “neighbor discovery” for the IP-to-MAC mapping process
described starting here.

IPv6 tunneling
Various schemes have been proposed to ease the transition from IPv4 to IPv6, mostly focusing
on ways to tunnel IPv6 traffic through the IPv4 network to compensate for gaps in IPv6 support.
The two tunneling systems in common use are called 6to4 and Teredo; the latter, named after a
family of wood-boring shipworms, can be used on systems behind a NAT device.

IPv6 information sources
Here are some useful sources of additional IPv6 information:

      worldipv6launch.com – A variety of IPv6 propaganda
      RFC3587 – IPv6 Global Unicast Address Format
RFC4291 – IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture
13.5 ROUTING
Routing is the process of directing a packet through the maze of networks that stand between its
source and its destination. In the TCP/IP system, it is similar to asking for directions in an
unfamiliar country. The first person you talk to might point you toward the right city. Once you
were a bit closer to your destination, the next person might be able to tell you how to get to the
right street. Eventually, you get close enough that someone can identify the building you’re
looking for.
Routing information takes the form of rules (“routes”), such as “To reach network A, send
packets through machine C.” There can also be a default route that tells what to do with packets
bound for a network to which no explicit route exists.

Routing information is stored in a table in the kernel. Each table entry has several parameters,
including a mask for each listed network. To route a packet to a particular address, the kernel
picks the most specific of the matching routes—that is, the one with the longest mask. If the
kernel finds no relevant route and no default route, then it returns a “network unreachable” ICMP
error to the sender.
The word “routing” is commonly used to mean two distinct things:

      Looking up a network address in the routing table as part of the process of forwarding
      a packet toward its destination
      Building the routing table in the first place

In this section we examine the forwarding function and look at how routes can be manually
added to or deleted from the routing table. We defer the more complicated topic of routing
protocols that build and maintain the routing table until Chapter 15.
Routing tables
You can examine a machine’s routing table with ip route show on Linux or netstat -r on
FreeBSD. Although netstat on Linux is on its way out, it still exists and continues to work. We
use netstat for the examples below just to avoid having to show two different versions of the
output. The ip version contains similar content, but its format is somewhat different.
Use netstat -rn to avoid DNS lookups and present all information numerically, which is
generally more useful. Here is a short example of an IPv4 routing table to give you a better idea
of what routes look like:

This host has two network interfaces: 132.236.227.93 (eth0) on the network 132.236.227.0/24
and 132.236.212.1 (eth1) on the network 132.236.212.0/26.
The destination field is usually a network address, although you can also add host-specific routes
(their genmask is 255.255.255.255 since all bits are consulted). An entry’s gateway field must
contain the full IP address of a local network interface or adjacent host; on Linux kernels it can
be 0.0.0.0 to invoke the default gateway.
For example, the fourth route in the table above says that to reach the network
132.236.220.64/26, packets must be sent to the gateway 132.236.212.6 through interface eth1.
The second entry is a default route; packets not explicitly addressed to any of the three networks
listed (or to the machine itself) are sent to the default gateway host, 132.236.227.1.
A host can route packets only to gateway machines that are reachable through a directly
connected network. The local host’s job is limited to moving packets one hop closer to their
destinations, so it is pointless to include information about nonadjacent gateways in the local
routing table. Each gateway that a packet visits makes a fresh next-hop routing decision by
consulting its own local routing database. (The IPv4 source routing feature is an exception to this
rule; see this page.)
Routing tables can be configured statically, dynamically, or with a combination of the two
approaches. A static route is one that you enter explicitly with the ip (Linux) or route (FreeBSD)
command. Static routes remain in the routing table as long as the system is up; they are often set
up at boot time from one of the system startup scripts. For example, the Linux commands
add the fourth and second routes displayed by netstat -rn above. (The first and third routes in
that display were added automatically when the eth0 and eth1 interfaces were configured.) The
equivalent FreeBSD commands are similar:

The final route is also added at boot time. It configures the loopback interface, which prevents
packets sent from the host to itself from going out on the network. Instead, they are transferred
directly from the network output queue to the network input queue inside the kernel.
In a stable local network, static routing is an efficient solution. It is easy to manage and reliable.
However, it requires that the system administrator know the topology of the network accurately
at boot time and that the topology not change often.
Most machines on a local area network have only one way to get out to the rest of the network,
so the routing problem is easy. A default route added at boot time suffices to point toward the
way out. Hosts that use DHCP (see this page) to get their IP addresses can also obtain a default
route with DHCP.

For more complicated network topologies, dynamic routing is required. Dynamic routing is
implemented by a daemon process that maintains and modifies the routing table. Routing
daemons on different hosts communicate to discover the topology of the network and to figure
out how to reach distant destinations. Several routing daemons are available. See Chapter 15, IP
Routing, for details.
ICMP redirects
Although IP generally does not concern itself with the management of routing information, it
does define a naïve damage control feature called an ICMP redirect. When a router forwards a
packet to a machine on the same network from which the packet was originally received,
something is clearly wrong. Since the sender, the router, and the next-hop router are all on the
same network, the packet could have been forwarded in one hop rather than two. The router can
conclude that the sender’s routing tables are inaccurate or incomplete.
In this situation, the router can notify the sender of its problem by sending an ICMP redirect
packet. In effect, a redirect says, “You should not be sending packets for host xxx to me; you
should send them to host yyy instead.”
In theory, the recipient of a redirect can adjust its routing table to fix the problem. In practice,
redirects contain no authentication information and are therefore untrustworthy. Dedicated
routers usually ignore redirects, but most UNIX and Linux systems accept them and act on them
by default. You’ll need to consider the possible sources of redirects in your network and disable
their acceptance if they could pose a problem.
     Under Linux, the variable accept_redirects in the /proc hierarchy controls the acceptance
     of ICMP redirects. See this page for instructions on examining and resetting this variable.

      On FreeBSD the parameters net.inet.icmp.drop_redirect and net.inet6.icmp6.rediraccept
      control the acceptance of ICMP redirects. Set them to 1 and 0, respectively, in the file
/etc/sysctl.conf to ignore redirects. (To activate the new settings, reboot or run sudo
/etc/rc.d/sysctl reload.)
13.6 IPV4 ARP AND IPV6 NEIGHBOR DISCOVERY
Although IP addresses are hardware-independent, hardware addresses must still be used to
actually transport data across a network’s link layer. (An exception is for point-to-point links,
where the identity of the destination is sometimes implicit.) IPv4 and IPv6 use separate but eerily
similar protocols to discover the hardware address associated with a particular IP address.
IPv4 uses ARP, the Address Resolution Protocol, defined in RFC826. IPv6 uses parts of the
Neighbor Discovery Protocol defined in RFC4861. These protocols can be used on any kind of
network that supports broadcasting or all-nodes multicasting, but they are most commonly
described in terms of Ethernet.

If host A wants to send a packet to host B on the same Ethernet, it uses ARP or ND to discover
B’s hardware address. If B is not on the same network as A, host A uses the routing system to
determine the next-hop router along the route to B and then uses ARP or ND to find that router’s
hardware address. These protocols can only be used to find the hardware addresses of machines
that are directly connected to the sending host’s local networks.
Every machine maintains a table in memory called the ARP or ND cache which contains the
results of recent queries. Under normal circumstances, many of the addresses a host needs are
discovered soon after booting, so ARP and ND do not account for a lot of network traffic.
These protocols work by broadcasting or multicasting a packet of the form “Does anyone know
the hardware address for IP address X?” The machine being searched for recognizes its own IP
address and replies, “Yes, that’s the IP address assigned to one of my network interfaces, and the
corresponding MAC address is 08:00:20:00:fb:6a.”
The original query includes the IP and MAC addresses of the requester so that the machine being
sought can reply without issuing a query of its own. Thus, the two machines learn each other’s
address mappings with only one exchange of packets. Other machines that overhear the
requester’s initial broadcast can record its address mapping, too.

     On Linux, the ip neigh command examines and manipulates the caches created by ARP and
     ND, adds or deletes entries, and flushes or prints the table. ip neigh show displays the
contents of the caches.
     On FreeBSD, the arp command manipulates the ARP cache and the ndp command gives
     access to the ND cache.
These commands are generally useful only for debugging and for situations that involve special
hardware. For example, if two hosts on a network are using the same IP address, one has the right
ARP or ND table entry and one is wrong. You can use the cache information to track down the
offending machine.
Inaccurate cache entries can be a sign that someone with access to your local network is
attempting to hijack network traffic. This type of attack is known generically as ARP spoofing or
ARP cache poisoning.
13.7 DHCP: THE DYNAMIC HOST CONFIGURATION PROTOCOL

     DHCP is defined in RFCs 2131, 2132, and 3315.

When you plug a device or computer into a network, it usually obtains an IP address for itself on
the local network, sets up an appropriate default route, and connects itself to a local DNS server.
The Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) is the hidden Svengali that makes this magic
happen.
The protocol lets a DHCP client “lease” a variety of network and administrative parameters from
a central server that is authorized to distribute them. The leasing paradigm is particularly
convenient for PCs that are turned off when not in use and for networks that must support
transient guests such as laptops.

Leasable parameters include

      IP addresses and netmasks
      Gateways (default routes)
      DNS name servers
      Syslog hosts
      WINS servers, X font servers, proxy servers, NTP servers
      TFTP servers (for loading a boot image)

There are dozens more—see RFC2132 for IPv4 and RFC3315 for IPv6. Real-world use of the
more exotic parameters is rare, however.
Clients must report back to the DHCP server periodically to renew their leases. If a lease is not
renewed, it eventually expires. The DHCP server is then free to assign the address (or whatever
was being leased) to a different client. The lease period is configurable, but it’s usually quite long
(hours or days).
Even if you want each host to have its own permanent IP address, DHCP can save you time and
suffering because it concentrates configuration information on the DHCP server rather than
requiring it to be distributed to individual hosts. Once the server is up and running, clients can
use DHCP to obtain their network configurations at boot time. The clients needn’t know that
they’re receiving a static configuration.
DHCP software
ISC, the Internet Systems Consortium, maintains a nice open source reference implementation of
DHCP. Major versions 2, 3, and 4 of ISC’s software are all in common use, and all these
versions work fine for basic service. Version 3 supports backup DHCP servers, and version 4
supports IPv6. Server, client, and relay agents are all available from isc.org.
Vendors all package some version of the ISC software, although you may have to install the
server portion explicitly. The server package is called dhcp on Red Hat and CentOS, isc-dhcp-
server on Debian and Ubuntu, and isc-dhcp43-server on FreeBSD. Make sure you’re installing
the software you intend, as many systems package multiple implementations of both the server
and client sides of DHCP.
It’s best not to tamper with the client side of DHCP, since that part of the code is relatively
simple and comes preconfigured and ready to use. Changing the client side of DHCP is not
trivial.
However, if you need to run a DHCP server, we recommend the ISC package over vendor-
specific implementations. In a typical heterogeneous network environment, administration is
greatly simplified by standardizing on a single implementation. The ISC software is a reliable,
open source solution that builds without incident on most systems.

Another option to consider is Dnsmasq, a server that implements DHCP service in combination
with a DNS forwarder. It’s a tidy package that runs on pretty much any system. The project home
page is thekelleys.org.uk/dnsmasq/doc.html.
DHCP server software is also built into most routers. Configuration is usually more painful than
on a UNIX- or Linux-based server, but reliability and availability might be higher.
In the next few sections, we briefly discuss the DHCP protocol, explain how to set up the ISC
server that implements it, and review some client configuration issues.
DHCP behavior
DHCP is a backward-compatible extension of BOOTP, a protocol originally devised to help
diskless workstations boot. DHCP generalizes the parameters that can be supplied and adds the
concept of a lease period for assigned values.
A DHCP client begins its interaction with a DHCP server by broadcasting a “Help! Who am I?”
message. IPv4 clients initiate conversations with the DHCP server by using the generic all-1s
broadcast address. The clients don’t yet know their subnet masks and therefore can’t use the
subnet broadcast address. IPv6 uses multicast addressing instead of broadcasting.
If a DHCP server is present on the local network, it negotiates with the client to supply an IP
address and other networking parameters. If there is no DHCP server on the local net, servers on
different subnets can receive the initial broadcast message through a separate piece of DHCP
software that acts as a relay agent.
When the client’s lease time is half over, it attempts to renew its lease. The server is obliged to
keep track of the addresses it has handed out, and this information must persist across reboots.
Clients are supposed to keep their lease state across reboots too, although many do not. The goal
is to maximize stability in network configuration. In theory, all software should be prepared for
network configurations to change at a moment’s notice, but some software still makes
unwarranted assumptions about the continuity of the network.
ISC’s DHCP software
ISC’s server daemon is called dhcpd, and its configuration file is dhcpd.conf, usually found in
/etc or /etc/dhcp3. The format of the config file is a bit fragile; leave out a semicolon and you
may receive a cryptic, unhelpful error message.
When setting up a new DHCP server, you must also make sure that an empty lease database file
has been created. Check the summary at the end of the man page for dhcpd to find the correct
location for the lease file on your system. It’s usually somewhere underneath /var.
To set up the dhcpd.conf file, you need the following information:

      The subnets for which dhcpd should manage IP addresses, and the ranges of
      addresses to dole out
      A list of static IP address assignments you want to make (if any), along with the
      MAC (hardware) addresses of the recipients
      The initial and maximum lease durations, in seconds
      Any other options the server should pass to DHCP clients: netmask, default route,
      DNS domain, name servers, etc.

The dhcpd man page outlines the configuration process, and the dhcpd.conf man page covers
the exact syntax of the config file. In addition to setting up your configuration, make sure dhcpd
is started automatically at boot time. (See Chapter 2, Booting and System Management Daemons,
for instructions.) It’s helpful to make startup of the daemon conditional on the existence of the
dhcpd.conf file if your system doesn’t automatically do this for you.
Below is a sample dhcpd.conf file from a Linux box with two interfaces, one internal and one
that connects to the Internet. This machine performs NAT translation for the internal network
(see this page) and leases out a range of 10 IP addresses on this network as well.
Every subnet must be declared, even if no DHCP service is provided on it, so this dhcpd.conf
file contains a dummy entry for the external interface. It also includes a host entry for one
particular machine that needs a fixed address.
     See Chapter 16 for more information about DNS.

Unless you make static IP address assignments such as the one for gandalf above, you need to
consider how your DHCP configuration interacts with DNS. The easy option is to assign a
generic name to each dynamically leased address (e.g., dhcp1.synack.net) and allow the names of
individual machines to float along with their IP addresses. Alternatively, you can configure
dhcpd to update the DNS database as it hands out addresses. The dynamic update solution is
more complicated, but it has the advantage of preserving each machine’s hostname.
ISC’s DHCP relay agent is a separate daemon called dhcrelay. It’s a simple program with no
configuration file of its own, although vendors often add a startup harness that feeds it the
appropriate command-line arguments for your site. dhcrelay listens for DHCP requests on local
networks and forwards them to a set of remote DHCP servers that you specify. It’s handy both
for centralizing the management of DHCP service and for provisioning backup DHCP servers.
ISC’s DHCP client is similarly configuration free. It stores status files for each connection in the
directory /var/lib/dhcp or /var/lib/dhclient. The files are named after the interfaces they
describe. For example, dhclient-eth0.leases would contain all the networking parameters that
dhclient had set up on behalf of the eth0 interface.
13.8 SECURITY ISSUES
We address the topic of security in a chapter of its own (Chapter 27), but several security issues
relevant to IP networking merit discussion here. In this section, we briefly look at a few
networking features that have acquired a reputation for causing security problems, and we
recommend ways to minimize their impact. The details of our example systems’ default behavior
on these issues (and the appropriate methods for changing them) vary considerably and are
discussed in the system-specific material starting here.
IP forwarding
A UNIX or Linux system that has IP forwarding enabled can act as a router. That is, it can accept
third party packets on one network interface, match them to a gateway or destination host on
another interface, and retransmit the packets.
Unless your system has multiple network interfaces and is actually supposed to function as a
router, it’s best to turn this feature off. Hosts that forward packets can sometimes be coerced into
compromising security by making external packets appear to have come from inside your
network. This subterfuge can help an intruder’s packets evade network scanners and packet
filters.
It is perfectly acceptable for a host to have network interfaces on multiple subnets and to use
them for its own traffic without forwarding third party packets.
ICMP redirects
ICMP redirects (see this page) can maliciously reroute traffic and tamper with your routing
tables. Most operating systems listen to ICMP redirects and follow their instructions by default.
It would be bad if all your traffic were rerouted to a competitor’s network for a few hours,
especially while backups were running! We recommend that you configure your routers (and
hosts acting as routers) to ignore and perhaps log ICMP redirect attempts.
Source routing
IPv4’s source routing mechanism lets you specify an explicit series of gateways for a packet to
transit on the way to its destination. Source routing bypasses the next-hop routing algorithm
that’s normally run at each gateway to determine how a packet should be forwarded.
Source routing was part of the original IP specification; it was intended primarily to facilitate
testing. It can create security problems because packets are often filtered according to their
origin. If someone can cleverly route a packet to make it appear to have originated within your
network instead of the Internet, it might slip through your firewall. We recommend that you
neither accept nor forward source-routed packets.
Despite the Internet’s dim view of IPv4 source routing, it somehow managed to sneak its way
into IPv6 as well. However, this IPv6 feature was deprecated by RFC5095 in 2007. Compliant
IPv6 implementations are now required to reject source-routed packets and return an error
message to the sender. Linux and FreeBSD both follow the RFC5095 behavior, as do
commercial routers.
Even so, IPv6 source routing may be poised to stage a mini-comeback in the form of “segment
routing,” a feature that has now been integrated into the Linux kernel. See
lwn.net/Articles/722804 for a discussion of this technology.
Broadcast pings and other directed broadcasts
Ping packets addressed to a network’s broadcast address (instead of to a particular host address)
are typically delivered to every host on the network. Such packets have been used in denial-of-
service attacks; for example, the so-called Smurf attacks. (The “Smurf attacks” Wikipedia article
has details.)
Broadcast pings are a form of “directed broadcast” in that they are packets sent to the broadcast
address of a distant network. The default handling of such packets has been gradually changing.
For example, versions of Cisco’s IOS up through 11.x forwarded directed broadcast packets by
default, but IOS releases since 12.0 do not. It is usually possible to convince your TCP/IP stack
to ignore broadcast packets that come from afar, but since this behavior must be set on each
interface, the task can be nontrivial at a large site.
IP spoofing
The source address on an IP packet is normally filled in by the kernel’s TCP/IP implementation
and is the IP address of the host from which the packet was sent. However, if the software
creating the packet uses a raw socket, it can fill in any source address it likes. This is called IP
spoofing and is usually associated with some kind of malicious network behavior. The machine
identified by the spoofed source IP address (if it is a real address at all) is often the victim in the
scheme. Error and return packets can disrupt or flood the victim’s network connections. Packet
spoofing from a large set of external machines is called a “distributed denial-of-service attack.”
Deny IP spoofing at your border router by blocking outgoing packets whose source address is not
within your address space. This precaution is especially important if your site is a university
where students like to experiment and might be tempted to carry out digital vendettas.
If you are using private address space internally, you can filter at the same time to catch any
internal addresses escaping to the Internet. Such packets can never be answered (because they
lack a backbone route) and always indicate that your site has some kind of internal configuration
error.
In addition to detecting outbound packets with bogus source addresses, you must also protect
against an attacker’s forging the source address on external packets to fool your firewall into
thinking that they originated on your internal network. A heuristic known as “unicast reverse
path forwarding” (uRPF) helps to address this problem. It makes IP gateways discard packets
that arrive on an interface different from the one on which they would be transmitted if the
source address were the destination. It’s a quick sanity check that uses the normal IP routing
table as a way to validate the origin of network packets. Dedicated routers implement uRPF, but
so does the Linux kernel. On Linux, it’s enabled by default.

If your site has multiple connections to the Internet, it might be perfectly reasonable for inbound
and outbound routes to be different. In this situation, you’ll have to turn off uRPF to make your
routing work properly. If your site has only one way out to the Internet, then turning on uRPF is
usually safe and appropriate.
Host-based firewalls
Traditionally, a network packet filter or firewall connects your local network to the outside world
and controls traffic according to a site-wide policy. Unfortunately, Microsoft has warped
everyone’s perception of how a firewall should work with its notoriously insecure Windows
systems. The last few Windows releases all come with their own personal firewalls, and they
complain bitterly if you try to turn off the firewall.
Our example systems all include packet filtering software, but you should not infer from this that
every UNIX or Linux machine needs its own firewall. The packet filtering features are there
primarily to allow these machines to serve as network gateways.
However, we don’t recommend using a workstation as a firewall. Even with meticulous
hardening, full-fledged operating systems are too complex to be fully trustworthy. Dedicated
network equipment is more predictable and more reliable—even if it secretly runs Linux.
Even sophisticated software solutions like those offered by Check Point (whose products run on
UNIX, Linux, and Windows hosts) are not as secure as a dedicated device such as Cisco’s
Adaptive Security Appliance series. The software-only solutions are nearly the same price, to
boot.

A more thorough discussion of firewall-related issues begins here.
Virtual private networks
Many organizations that have offices in several locations would like to have all those locations
connected to one big private network. Such organizations can use the Internet as if it were a
private network by establishing a series of secure, encrypted “tunnels” among their various
locations. A network that includes such tunnels is known as a virtual private network or VPN.
VPN facilities are also needed when employees must connect to your private network from their
homes or from the field. A VPN system doesn’t eliminate every possible security issue relating
to such ad hoc connections, but it’s secure enough for many purposes.

     See this page for more information about IPsec.

Some VPN systems use the IPsec protocol, which was standardized by the IETF in 1998 as a
relatively low-level adjunct to IP. Others, such as OpenVPN, implement VPN security on top of
TCP by using Transport Layer Security (TLS), the successor to the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL).
TLS is also on the IETF’s standards track, although it hasn’t yet been fully adopted as of this
writing (2017).

A variety of proprietary VPN implementations are also available. These systems generally don’t
interoperate with one another or with the standards-based VPN systems, but that’s not
necessarily a major drawback if all the endpoints are under your control.
The TLS-based VPN solutions seem to be the marketplace winners at this point. They are just as
secure as IPsec and considerably less complicated. Having a free implementation in the form of
OpenVPN doesn’t hurt either.
For users at home and at large, a common paradigm is for them to download a small Java or
executable component through their web browser. This component then implements VPN
connectivity back to the enterprise network. The mechanism is convenient for users, but be aware
that the browser-based systems differ widely in their implementations: some offer VPN service
through a pseudo-network-interface, while others forward only specific ports. Still others are
little more than glorified web proxies.
Be sure you understand the underlying technology of the solutions you’re considering, and don’t
expect the impossible. True VPN service (that is, full IP-layer connectivity through a network
interface) requires administrative privileges and software installation on the client, whether that
client is a Windows system or a Linux laptop. Check browser compatibility too, since the voodoo
involved in implementing browser-based VPN solutions often doesn’t translate among browsers.
13.9 BASIC NETWORK CONFIGURATION
Only a few steps are involved in adding a new machine to an existing local area network, but
every system does it slightly differently. Systems with a GUI installed typically include a control
panel for network configuration, but these visual tools address only simple scenarios. On a
typical server, you just enter the network configuration directly into text files.
Before bringing up a new machine on a network that is connected to the Internet, secure it
(Chapter 27, Security) so that you are not inadvertently inviting attackers onto your local
network.

Adding a new machine to a local network goes like this:
   1. Assign a unique IP address and hostname.
   2. Configure network interfaces and IP addresses.
   3. Set up a default route and perhaps fancier routing.

   4. Point to a DNS name server to allow access to the rest of the Internet.
If you rely on DHCP for basic provisioning, most of the configuration chores for a new machine
are performed on the DHCP server rather than on the new machine itself. New OS installations
typically default to configuration through DHCP, so new machines may require no network
configuration at all. Refer to the DHCP section starting here for general information.
After any change that might affect startup, always reboot to verify that the machine comes up
correctly. Six months later when the power has failed and the machine refuses to boot, it’s hard
to remember what change you made that might have caused the problem.
The process of designing and installing a physical network is touched on in Chapter 14, Physical
Networking. If you are dealing with an existing network and have a general idea of how it is set
up, it may not be necessary for you to read too much more about the physical aspects of
networking unless you plan to extend the existing network.

In this section, we review the various issues involved in manual network configuration. This
material is general enough to apply to any UNIX or Linux system. In the vendor-specific sections
starting here, we address the unique twists that separate the various vendors’ systems.
As you work through basic network configuration on any machine, you’ll find it helpful to test
your connectivity with basic tools such as ping and traceroute. See Network troubleshooting for
a description of these tools.
Hostname and IP address assignment

     See Chapter 16 for more information about DNS.

Administrators have various heartfelt theories about how the mapping from hostnames to IP
addresses is best maintained: through the hosts file, LDAP, the DNS system, or perhaps some
combination of those options. The conflicting goals are scalability, consistency, and
maintainability versus a system that is flexible enough to allow machines to boot and function
when not all services are available.
Another consideration when you’re designing your addressing system is the possible need to
renumber your hosts in the future. Unless you are using RFC1918 private addresses (see this
page), your site’s IP addresses might change when you switch ISPs. Such a transition becomes
daunting if you must visit each host on the network to reconfigure its address. To expedite
renumbering, you can use hostnames in configuration files and confine address mappings to a
few centralized locations such as the DNS database and your DHCP configuration files.
The /etc/hosts file is the oldest and simplest way to map names to IP addresses. Each line starts
with an IP address and continues with the various symbolic names by which that address is
known.
Here is a typical /etc/hosts file for the host lollipop:

A minimalist version would contain only the first three lines. localhost is commonly the first
entry in the /etc/hosts file; this entry is unnecessary on many systems, but it doesn’t hurt to
include it. You can freely intermix IPv4 and IPv6 addresses.
Because /etc/hosts contains only local mappings and must be maintained on each client system,
it’s best reserved for mappings that are needed at boot time (e.g., the host itself, the default
gateway, and name servers). Use DNS or LDAP to find mappings for the rest of the local
network and the rest of the world. You can also use /etc/hosts to specify mappings that you do
not want the rest of the world to know about and therefore do not publish in DNS. (You can also
use a split DNS configuration to achieve this goal; see this page.)
The hostname command assigns a hostname to a machine. hostname is typically run at boot
time from one of the startup scripts, which obtains the name to be assigned from a configuration
file. (Of course, each system does this slightly differently. See the system-specific sections
beginning here for details.) The hostname should be fully qualified: that is, it should include both
the hostname and the DNS domain name, such as anchor.cs.colorado.edu.
At a small site, you can easily dole out hostnames and IP addresses by hand. But when many
networks and many different administrative groups are involved, it helps to have some central
coordination to ensure uniqueness. For dynamically assigned networking parameters, DHCP
takes care of the uniqueness issues.
Network interface and IP configuration
A network interface is a piece of hardware that can potentially be connected to a network. The
actual hardware varies widely. It can be an RJ-45 jack with associated signaling hardware for
wired Ethernet, a wireless radio, or even a virtual piece of hardware that connects to a virtual
network.
Every system has at least two network interfaces: a virtual loopback interface and at least one
real network card or port. On PCs with multiple Ethernet jacks, a separate network interface
usually controls each jack. (These interfaces quite often have hardware different from that of
each other as well.)
On most systems, you can see all the network interfaces with ip link show (Linux) or ifconfig -a
(FreeBSD), whether or not the interfaces have been configured or are currently running. Here’s
an example from an Ubuntu system:

Interface naming conventions vary. Current versions of Linux try to ensure that interface names
don’t change over time, so the names are somewhat arbitrary (e.g., enp0s5). FreeBSD and older
Linux kernels use a more traditional driver + instance number scheme, resulting in names like
em0 or eth0.
Network hardware often has configurable options that are specific to its media type and have
little to do with TCP/IP per se. One common example of this is modern-day Ethernet, wherein an
interface card might support 10, 100, 1000, or even 10000 Mb/s in either half-duplex or full-
duplex mode. Most equipment defaults to autonegotiation mode, in which both the card and its
upstream connection (usually a switch port) try to guess what the other wants to use.
Historically, autonegotiation worked about as well as a blindfolded cowpoke trying to rope a
calf. Modern network devices play better together, but autonegotiation is still a possible source of
failure. High packet loss rates (especially for large packets) are a common artifact of failed
autonegotiation.

If you manually configure a network link, turn off autonegotiation on both sides. It makes
intuitive sense that you might be able to manually configure one side of the link and then let the
other side automatically adapt to those settings. But alas, that is not how Ethernet
autoconfiguration actually works. All participants must agree that the network is either
automatically or manually configured.
The exact method by which hardware options like autonegotiation are set varies widely, so we
defer discussion of those details to the system-specific sections starting here.
Above the level of interface hardware, every network protocol has its own configuration. IPv4
and IPv6 are the only protocols you might normally want to configure, but it’s important to
understand that configurations are defined per interface/protocol pair. In particular, IPv4 and
IPv6 are completely separate worlds, each of which has its own configuration.

IP configuration is largely a matter of setting an IP address for the interface. IPv4 also needs to
know the subnet mask (“netmask”) for the attached network so that it can distinguish the network
and host portions of addresses. At the level of network traffic in and out of an interface, IPv6
does not use netmasks; the network and host portions of an IPv6 address are of fixed size.
In IPv4, you can set the broadcast address to any IP address that’s valid for the network to which
the host is attached. Some sites have chosen weird values for the broadcast address in the hope of
avoiding certain types of denial-of-service attacks that use broadcast pings, but this is risky and
probably overkill. Failure to properly configure every machine’s broadcast address can lead to
broadcast storms, in which packets travel from machine to machine until their TTLs expire.
A better way to avoid problems with broadcast pings is to prevent your border routers from
forwarding them and to tell individual hosts not to respond to them. IPv6 no longer has
broadcasting at all; it’s been replaced with various forms of multicasting.
You can assign more than one IP address to an interface. In the past it was sometimes helpful to
do this to allow one machine to host several web sites; however, the need for this feature has
been superseded by the HTTP Host header and the SNI feature of TLS. See this page for details.
Routing configuration
This book’s discussion of routing is divided among several sections in this chapter and Chapter
15, IP Routing. Although most of the basic information about routing is found here and in the
sections about the ip route (Linux) and route (FreeBSD) commands, you might find it helpful to
read the first few sections of Chapter 15 if you need more information.
Routing is performed at the IP layer. When a packet bound for some other host arrives, the
packet’s destination IP address is compared with the routes in the kernel’s routing table. If the
address matches a route in the table, the packet is forwarded to the next-hop gateway IP address
associated with that route.
There are two special cases. First, a packet may be destined for some host on a directly connected
network. In this case, the “next-hop gateway” address in the routing table is one of the local
host’s own interfaces, and the packet is sent directly to its destination. This type of route is added
to the routing table for you by the ifconfig or ip address command when you configure a
network interface.
Second, it may be that no route matches the destination address. In this case, the default route is
invoked if one exists. Otherwise, an ICMP “network unreachable” or “host unreachable”
message is returned to the sender.

Many local area networks have only one way out, so all they need is a single default route that
points to the exit. On the Internet backbone, the routers do not have default routes. If there is no
routing entry for a destination, that destination cannot be reached.
Each ip route (Linux) or route (FreeBSD) command adds or removes one route. Here are two
prototypical commands:

These commands add a route to the 192.168.45.128/25 network through the gateway router zulu-
gw.atrust.net, which must be either an adjacent host or one of the local host’s own interfaces.
Naturally, the hostname zulu-gw.atrust.net must be resolvable to an IP address. Use a numeric IP
address if your DNS server is on the other side of the gateway!
Destination networks were traditionally specified with separate IP addresses and netmasks, but
all routing-related commands now understand CIDR notation (e.g., 128.138.176.0/20). CIDR
notation is clearer and relieves you of the need to fuss over some of the system-specific syntax
issues.
Some other tricks:

      To inspect existing routes, use the command netstat -nr, or netstat -r if you want to
      see names instead of numbers. Numbers are often better if you are debugging, since
the name lookup may be the thing that is broken. An example of netstat output is
shown here. On Linux, ip route show is the officially blessed command for seeing
routes. However, we find its output less clear than netstat’s.
Use the keyword default instead of an address or network name to set the system’s
default route. This mnemonic is identical to 0.0.0.0/0, which matches any address and
is less specific than any real routing destination.

Use ip route del (Linux) or route del (FreeBSD) to remove entries from the routing
table.
Run ip route flush (Linux) or route flush (FreeBSD) to initialize the routing table
and start over.
IPv6 routes are set up similarly to IPv4 routes; include the -6 option to route to tell it
that you’re setting an IPv6 routing entry. ip route can normally recognize IPv6 routes
on its own (by inspecting the format of the addresses), but it accepts the -6 argument,
too.
/etc/networks maps names to network numbers, much like the hosts file maps
hostnames to IP addresses. Commands such as ip and route that expect a network
number can accept a name if it is listed in the networks file. Network names can also
be listed in DNS; see RFC1101.
DNS configuration
To configure a machine as a DNS client, you need only set up the /etc/resolv.conf file. DNS
service is not strictly required, but it’s hard to imagine a situation in which you’d want to
eliminate it completely.
The resolv.conf file lists the DNS domains that should be searched to resolve names that are
incomplete (that is, not fully qualified, such as anchor instead of anchor.cs.colorado.edu) and the
IP addresses of the name servers to contact for name lookups. A sample is shown below; for
more details, see this page.

/etc/resolv.conf should list the “closest” stable name server first. Servers are contacted in order,
and the timeout after which the next server in line is tried can be quite long. You can have up to
three nameserver entries. If possible, you should always have more than one.

If the local host obtains the addresses of its DNS servers through DHCP, the DHCP client
software stuffs these addresses into the resolv.conf file for you when it obtains the leases. Since
DHCP configuration is the default for most systems, you generally need not configure the
resolv.conf file manually if your DHCP server has been set up correctly.
Many sites use Microsoft’s Active Directory DNS server implementation. That works fine with
the standard UNIX and Linux resolv.conf; there’s no need to do anything differently.
System-specific network configuration
On early UNIX systems, you configured the network by editing the system startup scripts and
directly changing the commands they contained. Modern systems have read-only scripts; they
cover a variety of configuration scenarios and choose among them by reusing information from
other system files or consulting configuration files of their own.
Although this separation of configuration and implementation is a good idea, every system does
it a little bit differently. The format and use of the /etc/hosts and /etc/resolv.conf files are
relatively consistent among UNIX and Linux systems, but that’s about all you can count on for
sure.
Most systems offer some sort of GUI interface for basic configuration tasks, but the mapping
between the visual interface and the configuration files behind the scenes is often unclear. In
addition, the GUIs tend to ignore advanced configurations, and they are relatively inconvenient
for remote and automated administration.
In the next sections, we pick apart some of the variations among our example systems, describe
what’s going on under the hood, and cover the details of network configuration for each of our
supported operating systems. In particular, we cover

      Basic configuration
      DHCP client configuration
      Dynamic reconfiguration and tuning
      Security, firewalls, filtering, and NAT configuration

Keep in mind that most network configuration happens at boot time, so there’s some overlap
between the information here and the information presented in Chapter 2, Booting and System
Management Daemons.
13.10 LINUX NETWORKING
Linux developers love to tinker, and they often implement features and algorithms that aren’t yet
accepted standards. One example is the Linux kernel’s addition of pluggable congestion-control
algorithms in release 2.6.13. The several options include variations for lossy networks, high-
speed WANs with lots of packet loss, satellite links, and more. The standard TCP “reno”
mechanism (slow start, congestion avoidance, fast retransmit, and fast recovery) is still used by
default. A variant might be more appropriate for your environment (but probably not). See
lwn.net/Articles/701165 for some hints on when to consider the use of alternate congestion
control algorithms.
     After any change to a file that controls network configuration at boot time, you may need
     either to reboot or to bring the network interface down and then up again for your change to
take effect. You can use ifdown interface and ifup interface for this purpose on most Linux
systems.
NetworkManager
Linux support for mobile networking was relatively scattershot until the advent of
NetworkManager in 2004. It consists of a service that’s run continuously, along with a system
tray app for configuring individual network interfaces. In addition to various kinds of wired
network, NetworkManager also handles transient wireless networks, wireless broadband, and
VPNs. It continually assesses the available networks and shifts service to “preferred” networks as
they become available. Wired networks are most preferred, followed by familiar wireless
networks.
This system represented quite a change for Linux network configuration. In addition to being
more fluid than the traditional static configuration, it’s also designed to be run and managed by
users rather than system administrators. NetworkManager has been widely adopted by Linux
distributions, including all our examples, but in an effort to avoid breaking existing scripts and
setups, it’s usually made available as a sort of “parallel universe” of network configuration in
addition to whatever traditional network configuration was used in the past.
Debian and Ubuntu run NetworkManager by default, but keep the statically configured network
interfaces out of the NetworkManager domain. Red Hat and CentOS don’t run NetworkManager
by default at all.
NetworkManager is primarily of use on laptops, since their network environment may change
frequently. For servers and desktop systems, NetworkManager isn’t necessary and may in fact
complicate administration. In these environments, it should be ignored or configured out.
ip: manually configure a network
Linux systems formerly used the same basic commands for network configuration and status
checking as traditional UNIX: ifconfig, route, and netstat. These are still available on most
distributions, but active development has moved on to the iproute2 package, which features the
commands ip (for most everyday network configuration, including routing) and ss (for
examining the state of network sockets, roughly replacing netstat).
If you’re accustomed to the traditional commands, it’s worth the effort to transition your brain to
ip. The legacy commands won’t be around forever, and although they cover the common
configuration scenarios, they don’t give access to the full feature set of the Linux networking
stack. ip is cleaner and more regular.
ip takes a second argument for you to specify what kind of object you want to configure or
examine. There are many options, but the common ones are ip link for configuring network
interfaces, ip address for binding network addresses to interfaces, and ip route for changing or
printing the routing table. You can abbreviate ip arguments, so ip ad is the same as ip address.
We show full names for clarity.
Most objects understand list or show to print out a summary of their current status, so ip link
show prints a list of network interfaces, ip route show dumps the current routing table, and ip
address show lists all assigned IP addresses.

The man pages for ip are divided by subcommand. For example, to see detailed information
about interface configuration, run man ip-link. You can also run ip link help to see a short cheat
sheet.
The UNIX ifconfig command conflates the concept of interface configuration with the concept of
configuring the settings for a particular network protocol. In fact, several protocols can run on a
given network interface (the prime example being simultaneous IPv4 and IPv6), and each of
those protocols can support multiple addresses, so ip’s distinction between ip link and ip
address is actually quite smart. Most of what system administrators traditionally think of as
“interface configuration” really has to do with setting up IPv4 and IPv6.
ip accepts a -4 or -6 argument to target IPv4 or IPv6 explicitly, but it’s rarely necessary to
specify these options. ip guesses the right mode just by looking at the format of the addresses
you provide.
Basic configuration of an interface looks like this:

In this case the broadcast clause is superfluous because that would be the default value anyway,
given the netmask. But this is how you would set it if you needed to.
Of course, in daily life you won’t normally be setting up network addresses by hand. The next
sections describe how our example distributions handle static configuration of the network from
the perspective of configuration files.
Debian and Ubuntu network configuration
           As shown in Table 13.6, Debian and Ubuntu configure the network in /etc/hostname
           and /etc/network/interfaces, with a bit of help from the file /etc/network/options.

Table 13.6: Ubuntu network configuration files in /etc

The hostname is set in /etc/hostname. The name in this file should be fully qualified; its value is
used in a variety of contexts, some of which require qualification.
The IP address, netmask, and default gateway are set in /etc/network/interfaces. A line starting
with the iface keyword introduces each interface. The iface line can be followed by indented lines
that specify additional parameters. For example,

The ifup and ifdown commands read this file and bring the interfaces up or down by calling
lower-level commands (such as ip) with the appropriate parameters. The auto clause specifies the
interfaces to be brought up at boot time or whenever ifup -a is run.

The inet keyword in the iface line is the address family, IPv4. To configure IPv6 as well, include an
inet6 configuration.

The keyword static is called a “method” and specifies that the IP address and netmask for enp0s5
are directly assigned. The address and netmask lines are required for static configurations. The gateway
line specifies the address of the default network gateway and is used to install a default route.
To configure interfaces with DHCP, just specify that in the interfaces file:
Red Hat and CentOS network configuration
          Red Hat and CentOS’s network configuration revolves around /etc/sysconfig. Table
          13.7 shows the various configuration files.

Table 13.7: Red Hat network configuration files in /etc/sysconfig

You set the machine’s hostname in /etc/sysconfig/network, which also contains lines that
specify the machine’s DNS domain and default gateway. (Essentially, this file is where you
specify all interface-independent network settings.)
For example, here is a network file for a host with a single Ethernet interface:

Interface-specific data is stored in /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-ifname, where ifname is
the name of the network interface. These configuration files set the IP address, netmask, network,
and broadcast address for each interface. They also include a line that specifies whether the
interface should be configured “up” at boot time.

A generic machine has files for an Ethernet interface (eth0) and for the loopback interface (lo).
For example,

and
are the ifcfg-eth0 and ifcfg-lo files for the machine redhat.toadranch.com described in the
network file above.
A DHCP-based setup for eth0 is even simpler:

After changing configuration information in /etc/sysconfig, run ifdown ifname followed by ifup
ifname for the appropriate interface. If you reconfigure multiple interfaces at once, you can use
the command sysctl restart network to reset networking.
Lines in network-scripts/route-ifname are passed as arguments to ip route when the
corresponding interface is configured. For example, the line

sets a default route. This isn’t really an interface-specific configuration, but for clarity, it should
go in the file that corresponds to the interface on which you expect default-routed packets to be
transmitted.
Linux network hardware options
The ethtool command queries and sets a network interface’s media-specific parameters such as
link speed and duplex. It replaces the old mii-tool command, but some systems still include both.
If ethtool is not installed by default, it’s usually included in an optional package of its own (also
called ethtool).
You can query the status of an interface just by naming it. For example, this eth0 interface (a
generic NIC on a PC motherboard) has autonegotiation enabled and is currently running at full
speed:

To lock this interface to 100 Mb/s full duplex, use the command

If you are trying to determine whether autonegotiation is reliable in your environment, you may
also find ethtool -r helpful. It forces the parameters of the link to be renegotiated immediately.
Another useful option is -k, which shows what protocol-related tasks are assigned to the network
interface rather than being performed by the kernel. Most interfaces can calculate checksums,
and some can assist with segmentation as well. Unless you believe that a network interface is not
doing these tasks reliably, it’s always better to offload them. You can use ethtool -K in
combination with various suboptions to force or disable specific types of offloading. (The -k
option shows current values and the -K option sets them.)
Any changes you make with ethtool are transient. If you want them to be enforced consistently,
make sure that ethtool gets run as part of the system’s network configuration. It’s best to do this
as part of the per-interface configuration; if you just arrange to have some ethtool commands run
at boot time, your configuration will not properly cover cases in which the interfaces are restarted
without a reboot of the system.
         On Red Hat and CentOS systems, you can include an ETHTOOL_OPTS= line in the
         configuration file for the interface underneath /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts. The
ifup command passes the entire line as arguments to ethtool.

          In Debian and Ubuntu, you can run ethtool commands directly from the configuration
          for a particular network in /etc/network/interfaces.
Linux TCP/IP options
Linux puts a representation of each tunable kernel variable into the /proc virtual filesystem. See
Tuning Linux kernel parameters for general information about the /proc mechanism.
The networking variables are under /proc/sys/net/ipv4 and /proc/sys/net/ipv6. We formerly
showed a complete list here, but there are too many to list these days.
The ipv4 directory includes a lot more parameters than does the ipv6 directory, but that’s mostly
because IP-version-independent protocols such as TCP and UDP confine their parameters to the
ipv4 directory. A prefix such as tcp_ or udp_ tells you which protocol the parameter relates to.
The conf subdirectories within ipv4 and ipv6 contain parameters that are set per interface. They
include subdirectories all and default and a subdirectory for each interface (including the
loopback). Each subdirectory has the same set of files.

If you change a variable in the conf/enp0s5 subdirectory, for example, your change applies to
that interface only. If you change the value in the conf/all directory, you might expect it to set the
corresponding value for all existing interfaces, but this is not what happens. Each variable has its
own rules for accepting changes via all. Some values are ORed with the current values, some are
ANDed, and still others are MAXed or MINed. As far as we are aware, there is no
documentation for this process except in the kernel source code, so the whole debacle is probably
best avoided. Just confine your modifications to individual interfaces.
If you change a variable in the conf/default directory, the new value propagates to any interfaces
that are later configured. On the other hand, it’s nice to keep the defaults unmolested as reference
information; they make a nice sanity check if you want to undo other changes.
The /proc/sys/net/ipv4/neigh and /proc/sys/net/ipv6/neigh directories also contain a
subdirectory for each interface. The files in each subdirectory control ARP table management
and IPv6 neighbor discovery for that interface. Here is the list of variables; the ones starting with
gc (for garbage collection) determine how ARP table entries are timed out and discarded.
To see the value of a variable, use cat. To set it, you can use echo redirected to the proper
filename, but the sysctl command (which is just a command interface to the same variables) is
often easier.
For example, the command

shows that this variable’s value is 0, meaning that broadcast pings are not ignored. To set it to 1
(and avoid falling prey to Smurf-type denial of service attacks), run

from the /proc/sys/net directory. (If you try this command in the form sudo echo 1 >
icmp_echo_ignore_broadcasts, you just generate a “permission denied” message—your shell
attempts to open the output file before it runs sudo. You want the sudo to apply to both the echo
command and the redirection. Ergo, you must create a root subshell in which to execute the
entire command.)
You can also use the sysctl command to achieve the same configuration:

sysctl variable names are pathnames relative to /proc/sys. Dots are the traditional separator, but
sysctl also accepts slashes if you prefer them.
You are typically logged in over the same network you are tweaking as you adjust these
variables, so be careful! You can mess things up badly enough to require a reboot from the
console to recover, which might be inconvenient if the system happens to be in Point Barrow,
Alaska, and it’s January. Test-tune these variables on your desktop system before you even think
of tweaking a production machine.
To change any of these parameters permanently (or more accurately, to reset them every time the
system boots), add the appropriate variables to /etc/sysctl.conf, which is read by the sysctl
command at boot time. For example, the line

in the /etc/sysctl.conf file turns off IP forwarding on this host.
Some of the options under /proc are better documented than others. Your best bet is to look at
the man page for the protocol in question in section 7 of the manuals. For example, man 7 icmp
documents six of the eight available options. (You must have man pages for the Linux kernel
installed to see man pages about protocols.)
You can also look at the ip-sysctl.txt file in the kernel source distribution for some good
comments. If you don’t have kernel source installed, just Google for ip-sysctl-txt to reach the
same document.
Security-related kernel variables
Table 13.8 shows Linux’s default behavior with regard to various touchy network issues. For a
brief description of the implications of these behaviors, see this page. We recommend that you
verify the values of these variables so that you do not answer broadcast pings, do not listen to
routing redirects, and do not accept source-routed packets. These should be the defaults on
current distributions except for accept_redirects.

Table 13.8: Default security-related network behaviors in Linux
13.11 FREEBSD NETWORKING
      As a direct descendant of the BSD lineage, FreeBSD remains something of a reference
      implementation of TCP/IP. It lacks many of the elaborations that complicate the Linux
networking stack. From the standpoint of system administrators, FreeBSD network configuration
is simple and direct.
ifconfig: configure network interfaces
ifconfig enables or disables a network interface, sets its IP address and subnet mask, and sets
various other options and parameters. It is usually run at boot time with command-line
parameters taken from config files, but you can also run it by hand to make changes on the fly.
Be careful if you are making ifconfig changes and are logged in remotely—many a sysadmin has
been locked out this way and had to drive in to fix things.
An ifconfig command most commonly has the form

For example, the command

sets the IPv4 address and netmask associated with the interface em0 and readies the interface for
use.
interface identifies the hardware interface to which the command applies. The loopback interface
is named lo0. The names of real interfaces vary according to their hardware drivers. ifconfig -a
lists the system’s network interfaces and summarizes their current settings.
The family parameter tells ifconfig which network protocol (“address family”) you want to
configure. You can set up multiple protocols on an interface and use them all simultaneously, but
they must be configured separately. The main options here are inet for IPv4 and inet6 for IPv6;
inet is assumed if you omit the parameter.
The address parameter specifies the interface’s IP address. A hostname is also acceptable here,
but the hostname must be resolvable to an IP address at boot time. For a machine’s primary
interface, this means that the hostname must appear in the local hosts file, since other name
resolution methods depend on the network having been initialized.

The keyword up turns the interface on; down turns it off. When an ifconfig command assigns an
IP address to an interface, as in the example above, the up parameter is implicit and need not be
mentioned by name.
For subnetted networks, you can specify a CIDR-style netmask as shown in the example above,
or you can include a separate netmask argument. The mask can be specified in dotted decimal
notation or as a 4-byte hexadecimal number beginning with 0x.
The broadcast option specifies the IP broadcast address for the interface, expressed in either hex
or dotted quad notation. The default broadcast address is one in which the host part is set to all
1s. In the ifconfig example above, the autoconfigured broadcast address is 192.168.1.61.
FreeBSD network hardware configuration
FreeBSD does not have a dedicated command analogous to Linux’s ethertool. Instead, ifconfig
passes configuration information down to the network interface driver through the media and
mediaopt clauses. The legal values for these options vary with the hardware. To find the list,
read the man page for the specific driver.
For example, an interface named em0 uses the “em” driver. man 4 em shows that this is the
driver for certain types of Intel-based wired Ethernet hardware. To force this interface to gigabit
mode using four-pair cabling (the typical configuration), the command would be

You can include these media options along with other configuration clauses for the interface.
FreeBSD boot-time network configuration
FreeBSD’s static configuration system is mercifully simple. All the network parameters live in
/etc/rc.conf, along with other system-wide settings. Here’s a typical configuration:

Each network interface has its own ifconfig_* variable. The value of the variable is simply passed
to ifconfig as a series of command-line arguments. The defaultrouter clause identifies a default
network gateway.

To obtain the system’s networking configuration from a DHCP server, use the following token:

This form is magic and is not passed on to ifconfig, which wouldn’t know how to interpret a
DHCP argument. Instead, it makes the startup scripts run the command dhclient em0. To
modify the operational parameters of the DHCP system (timeouts and such), set them in
/etc/dhclient.conf. The default version of this file is empty except for comments, and you
shouldn’t normally need to modify it.
If you modify the network configuration, you can run service netif restart to repeat the initial
configuration procedure. If you changed the defaultrouter parameter, also run service routing
restart.
FreeBSD TCP/IP configuration
FreeBSD’s kernel-level networking options are controlled similarly to those of Linux (see this
page), except that there’s no /proc hierarchy you can go rooting around in. Instead, run sysctl -ad
to list the available parameters and their one-line descriptions. There are a lot of them (5,495 on
FreeBSD 11), so you need to grep for likely suspects such as “redirect” or “^net”.
Table 13.9 lists a selection of security-related parameters.

Table 13.9: Default security-related network parameters in FreeBSD

The blackhole options are potentially useful on systems that you want to shield from port scanners,
but they do change the standard behaviors of UDP and TCP. You might also want to disable
acceptance of ICMP redirects for both IPv4 and IPv6.

You can set parameters in the running kernel with sysctl. For example,

To have the parameter set at boot time, list it in /etc/sysctl.conf.
13.12 NETWORK TROUBLESHOOTING
Several good tools are available for debugging a network at the TCP/IP layer. Most give low-
level information, so you must understand the main ideas of TCP/IP and routing to use them.
In this section, we start with some general troubleshooting strategy. We then cover several
essential tools, including ping, traceroute, tcpdump, and Wireshark. We don’t discuss the arp,
ndp, ss, or netstat commands in this chapter, though they, too, are useful debugging tools.

Before you attack your network, consider these principles:

      Make one change at a time. Test each change to make sure that it had the effect you
      intended. Back out any changes that have an undesired effect.
      Document the situation as it was before you got involved, and document every
      change you make along the way.
      Start at one end of a system or network and work through the system’s critical
      components until you reach the problem. For example, you might start by looking at
      the network configuration on a client, work your way up to the physical connections,
      investigate the network hardware, and finally, check the server’s physical
      connections and software configuration.
      Or, use the layers of the network to negotiate the problem. Start at the “top” or
      “bottom” and work your way through the protocol stack.

This last point deserves a bit more discussion. As described here, the architecture of TCP/IP
defines several layers of abstraction at which components of the network can function. For
example, HTTP depends on TCP, TCP depends on IP, IP depends on the Ethernet protocol, and
the Ethernet protocol depends on the integrity of the network cable. You can dramatically reduce
the amount of time spent debugging a problem if you first figure out which layer is misbehaving.

Ask yourself questions like these as you work up or down the stack:

      Do you have physical connectivity and a link light?
      Is your interface configured properly?
      Do your ARP tables show other hosts?
      Is there a firewall on your local machine?
      Is there a firewall anywhere between you and the destination?
      If firewalls are involved, do they pass ICMP ping packets and responses?
      Can you ping the localhost address (127.0.0.1)?
      Can you ping other local hosts by IP address?

      Is DNS working properly?
      Can you ping other local hosts by hostname?
      Can you ping hosts on another network?
      Do high-level services such as web and SSH servers work?

      Did you really check the firewalls?

If a machine hangs at boot time, boots very slowly, or hangs on inbound SSH connections, DNS
should be a prime suspect. Most systems use an approach to name resolution that’s configurable
in /etc/nsswitch.conf. If the system runs nscd, the name service caching daemon, that component
deserves some suspicion as well. If nscd crashes or is misconfigured, name lookups are affected.
Use the getent command to check whether your resolver and name servers are working properly
(e.g., getent hosts google.com).
Once you’ve identified where the problem lies and have a fix in mind, step back to consider the
effect that your subsequent tests and prospective fixes will have on other services and hosts.
ping: check to see if a host is alive
The ping command and its IPv6 twin ping6 are embarrassingly simple, but in many situations
they are the only commands you need for network debugging. They send an ICMP
ECHO_REQUEST packet to a target host and wait to see if the host answers back.
You can use ping to check the status of individual hosts and to test segments of the network.
Routing tables, physical networks, and gateways are all involved in processing a ping, so the
network must be more or less working for ping to succeed. If ping doesn’t work, you can be
pretty sure that nothing more sophisticated will work either.
However, this rule does not apply to networks or hosts that block ICMP echo requests with a
firewall. (Recent versions of Windows block ping requests by default.) Make sure that a firewall
isn’t interfering with your debugging before you conclude that the target host is ignoring a ping.
You might consider disabling a meddlesome firewall for a short period of time to facilitate
debugging.
If your network is in bad shape, chances are that DNS is not working. Simplify the situation by
using numeric IP addresses when pinging, and use ping’s -n option to prevent ping from
attempting to do reverse lookups on IP addresses—these lookups also trigger DNS requests.

Be aware of the firewall issue if you’re using ping to check your Internet connectivity, too. Some
well-known sites answer ping packets and others don’t. We’ve found google.com to be a
consistent responder.
Most versions of ping run in an infinite loop unless you supply a packet count argument. Once
you’ve had your fill of pinging, type the interrupt character (usually <Control-C>) to get out.
Here’s an example:

The output for beast shows the host’s IP address, the ICMP sequence number of each response
packet, and the round trip travel time. The most obvious thing that the output above tells you is
that the server beast is alive and connected to the network.
The ICMP sequence number is a particularly valuable piece of information. Discontinuities in the
sequence indicate dropped packets. They’re normally accompanied by a message for each
missing packet.
Despite the fact that IP does not guarantee the delivery of packets, a healthy network should drop
very few of them. Lost-packet problems are important to track down because they tend to be
masked by higher-level protocols. The network may appear to function correctly, but it will be
slower than it ought to be, not only because of the retransmitted packets but also because of the
protocol overhead needed to detect and manage them.

To track down the cause of disappearing packets, first run traceroute (see the next section) to
discover the route that packets are taking to the target host. Then ping the intermediate gateways
in sequence to discover which link is dropping packets. To pin down the problem, you need to
send a fair number of packets. The fault generally lies on the link between the last gateway you
can ping without loss of packets and the gateway beyond that.
The round trip time reported by ping can afford insight into the overall performance of a path
through a network. Moderate variations in round trip time do not usually indicate problems.
Packets may occasionally be delayed by tens or hundreds of milliseconds for no apparent reason;
that’s just the way IP works. You should see a fairly consistent round trip time for the majority of
packets, with occasional lapses. Many of today’s routers implement rate-limited or low-priority
responses to ICMP packets, which means that a router may defer responding to your ping if it is
already dealing with a lot of other traffic.
The ping program can send echo request packets of any size, so by using a packet larger than the
MTU of the network (1,500 bytes for Ethernet), you can force fragmentation. This practice helps
you identify media errors or other low-level issues such as problems with a congested network or
VPN. You specify the desired packet size in bytes with the -s flag:

Note that even a simple command like ping can have dramatic effects. In 1998, the so-called
Ping of Death attack crashed large numbers of UNIX and Windows systems. It was launched
simply by transmission of an overly large ping packet. When the fragmented packet was
reassembled, it filled the receiver’s memory buffer and crashed the machine. The Ping of Death
issue has long since been fixed, but keep in mind several other caveats regarding ping.
First, it’s hard to distinguish the failure of a network from the failure of a server with only the
ping command. In an environment where ping tests normally work, a failed ping just tells you
that something is wrong.
It’s also worth noting that a successful ping does not guarantee much about the target machine’s
state. Echo request packets are handled within the IP protocol stack and do not require a server
process to be running on the probed host. A response guarantees only that a machine is powered
on and has not experienced a kernel panic. You’ll need higher-level methods to verify the
availability of individual services such as HTTP and DNS.
traceroute: trace IP packets
traceroute, originally written by Van Jacobson, uncovers the sequence of gateways through
which an IP packet travels to reach its destination. All modern operating systems come with
some version of traceroute. Even Windows has it, but the command is spelled tracert (extra
history points if you can guess why).
The syntax is simply

Most of the variety of options are not important in daily use. As usual, the hostname can be
specified as either a DNS name or an IP address. The output is simply a list of hosts, starting with
the first gateway and ending at the destination. For example, a traceroute from our host jaguar to
our host nubark produces the following output:

From this output we can tell that jaguar is three hops away from nubark, and we can see which
gateways are involved in the connection. The round trip time for each gateway is also shown—
three samples for each hop are measured and displayed. A typical traceroute between Internet
hosts often includes more than 15 hops, even if the two sites are just across town.
traceroute works by setting the time-to-live field (TTL, actually “hop count to live”) of an
outbound packet to an artificially low number. As packets arrive at a gateway, their TTL is
decreased. When a gateway decreases the TTL to 0, it discards the packet and sends an ICMP
“time exceeded” message back to the originating host.

     See this page for more information about reverse DNS lookups.

The first three traceroute packets above have their TTL set to 1. The first gateway to see such a
packet (lab-gw in this case) determines that the TTL has been exceeded and notifies jaguar of the
dropped packet by sending back an ICMP message. The sender’s IP address in the header of the
error packet identifies the gateway, and traceroute looks up this address in DNS to find the
gateway’s hostname.
To identify the second-hop gateway, traceroute sends out a second round of packets with TTL
fields set to 2. The first gateway routes the packets and decreases their TTL by 1. At the second
gateway, the packets are then dropped and ICMP error messages are generated as before. This
process continues until the TTL is equal to the number of hops to the destination host and the
packets reach their destination successfully.
Most routers send their ICMP messages from the interface “closest” to the destination. If you run
traceroute backward from the destination host, you may see different IP addresses being used to
identify the same set of routers. You might also discover that packets flowing in the reverse
direction take a completely different path, a configuration known as asymmetric routing.

Since traceroute sends three packets for each value of the TTL field, you may sometimes
observe an interesting artifact. If an intervening gateway multiplexes traffic across several routes,
the packets might be returned by different hosts; in this case, traceroute simply prints them all.
Let’s look at a more interesting example from a host in Switzerland to caida.org at the San Diego
Supercomputer Center:

This output shows that packets travel inside Init Seven’s network for a long time. Sometimes we
can guess the location of the gateways from their names. Init Seven’s core stretches all the way
from Zurich (zur) to Frankfurt (fra), Amsterdam (ams), London (lon), and finally, Los Angeles (lax).
Here, the traffic transfers to cenic.net, which delivers the packets to the caida.org host within the
network of the San Diego Supercomputer Center (sdsc) in La Jolla, CA.

At hop 8, we see a star in place of one of the round trip times. This notation means that no
response (error packet) was received in response to the probe. In this case, the cause is probably
congestion, but that is not the only possibility. traceroute relies on low-priority ICMP packets,
which many routers are smart enough to drop in preference to “real” traffic. A few stars
shouldn’t send you into a panic.
If you see stars in all the time fields for a given gateway, no “time exceeded” messages came
back from that machine. Perhaps the gateway is simply down. Sometimes, a gateway or firewall
is configured to silently discard packets with expired TTLs. In this case, you can still see through
the silent host to the gateways beyond. Another possibility is that the gateway’s error packets are
slow to return and that traceroute has stopped waiting for them by the time they arrive.
Some firewalls block ICMP “time exceeded” messages entirely. If such a firewall lies along the
path, you won’t get information about any of the gateways beyond it. However, you can still
determine the total number of hops to the destination because the probe packets eventually get all
the way there.
Also, some firewalls may block the outbound UDP datagrams that traceroute sends to trigger
the ICMP responses. This problem causes traceroute to report no useful information at all. If
you find that your own firewall is preventing you from running traceroute, make sure the
firewall has been configured to pass UDP ports 33434–33534 as well as ICMP ECHO (type 8)
packets.

A slow link does not necessarily indicate a malfunction. Some physical networks have a naturally
high latency; UMTS/EDGE/GPRS wireless networks are a good example. Sluggishness can also
be a sign of high load on the receiving network. Inconsistent round trip times would support such
a hypothesis.
You may occasionally see the notation !N instead of a star or round trip time. The notation
indicates that the current gateway sent back a “network unreachable” error, meaning that it
doesn’t know how to route your packet. Other possibilities include !H for “host unreachable” and
!P for “protocol unreachable.” A gateway that returns any of these error messages is usually the
last hop you can get to. That host often has a routing problem (possibly caused by a broken
network link): either its static routes are wrong or dynamic protocols have failed to propagate a
usable route to the destination.
If traceroute doesn’t seem to be working for you or is working slowly, it may be timing out
while trying to resolve the hostnames of gateways through DNS. If DNS is broken on the host
you are tracing from, use traceroute -n to request numeric output. This option disables hostname
lookups; it may be the only way to get traceroute to function on a crippled network.
traceroute needs root privileges to operate. To be available to normal users, it must be installed
setuid root. Several Linux distributions include the traceroute command but turn off the setuid
bit. Depending on your environment and needs, you can either turn the setuid bit back on or give
interested users access to the command through sudo.

Recent years have seen the introduction of several new traceroute-like utilities that can bypass
ICMP-blocking firewalls. See the PERTKB Wiki for an overview of these tools at
goo.gl/fXpMeu. We especially like mtr, which has a top-like interface and shows a sort of live
traceroute. Neat!
When debugging routing issues, look at your site from the perspective of the outside world.
Several web-based route tracing services let you do this sort of inverse traceroute right from a
browser window. Thomas Kernen maintains a list of these services at traceroute.org.
Packet sniffers
tcpdump and Wireshark belong to a class of tools known as packet sniffers. They listen to
network traffic and record or print packets that meet criteria of your choice. For example, you
can inspect all packets sent to or from a particular host, or TCP packets related to one particular
network connection.
Packet sniffers are useful both for solving problems that you know about and for discovering
entirely new problems. It’s a good idea to take an occasional sniff of your network to make sure
the traffic is in order.
Packet sniffers need to be able to intercept traffic that the local machine would not normally
receive (or at least, pay attention to), so the underlying network hardware must allow access to
every packet. Broadcast technologies such as Ethernet work fine, as do most other modern local
area networks.

     See this page for more information about network switches.

Since packet sniffers need to see as much of the raw network traffic as possible, they can be
thwarted by network switches, which by design try to limit the propagation of “unnecessary”
packets. However, it can still be informative to try out a sniffer on a switched network. You may
discover problems related to broadcast or multicast packets. Depending on your switch vendor,
you may be surprised at how much traffic you can see. Even if you don’t see other systems’
network traffic, a sniffer can be helpful when you are tracking down problems that involve the
local host.
In addition to having access to all network packets, the interface hardware must transport those
packets up to the software layer. Packet addresses are normally checked in hardware, and only
broadcast/multicast packets and those addressed to the local host are relayed to the kernel. In
“promiscuous mode,” an interface lets the kernel read all packets on the network, even the ones
intended for other hosts.
Packet sniffers understand many of the packet formats used by standard network services, and
they can print these packets in human-readable form. This capability makes it easier to track the
flow of a conversation between two programs. Some sniffers print the ASCII contents of a packet
in addition to the packet header and so are useful for investigating high-level protocols.
Since some protocols send information (and even passwords) across the network as cleartext,
take care not to invade the privacy of your users. On the other hand, nothing quite dramatizes the
need for cryptographic security like the sight of a plaintext password captured in a network
packet.
Sniffers read data from a raw network device, so they must run as root. Although this root
limitation serves to decrease the chance that normal users will listen in on your network traffic, it
is really not much of a barrier. Some sites choose to remove sniffer programs from most hosts to
reduce the chance of abuse. If nothing else, you should check your systems’ interfaces to be sure
they are not running in promiscuous mode without your knowledge or consent.

tcpdump: command-line packet sniffer
tcpdump, yet another amazing network tool by Van Jacobson, runs on most systems. tcpdump
has long been the industry-standard sniffer, and most other network analysis tools read and write
trace files in tcpdump format, also known as libpcap format.
By default, tcpdump tunes in on the first network interface it comes across. If it chooses the
wrong interface, you can force an interface with the -i flag. If DNS is broken or you just don’t
want tcpdump doing name lookups, use the -n option. This option is important because slow
DNS service can cause the filter to start dropping packets before they can be dealt with by
tcpdump.
The -v flag increases the information you see about packets, and -vv gives you even more data.
Finally, tcpdump can store packets to a file with the -w flag and can read them back in with the -
r flag.
Note that tcpdump -w saves only packet headers by default. This default makes for small dumps,
but the most helpful and relevant information may be missing. So, unless you are sure you need
only headers, use the -s option with a value on the order of 1560 (actual values are MTU-
dependent) to capture whole packets for later inspection.

As an example, the following truncated output comes from the machine named nubark. The filter
specification host bull limits the display of packets to those that directly involve the machine
bull, either as source or as destination.

The first packet shows bull sending a DNS lookup request about atrust.com to nubark. The
response is the IP address of the machine associated with that name, which is 66.77.122.161.
Note the time stamp on the left and tcpdump’s understanding of the application-layer protocol
(in this case, DNS). The port number on bull is arbitrary and is shown numerically (41537), but
since the server port number (53) is well known, tcpdump shows its symbolic name, domain.

Packet sniffers can produce an overwhelming amount of information—overwhelming not only
for you but also for the underlying operating system. To avoid this problem on busy networks,
tcpdump lets you specify complex filters. For example, the following filter collects only
incoming web traffic from one subnet:
The tcpdump man page contains several good examples of advanced filtering along with a
complete listing of primitives.

Wireshark and TShark: tcpdump on steroids
tcpdump has been around since approximately the dawn of time, but a newer open source
package called Wireshark (formerly known as Ethereal) has been gaining ground rapidly.
Wireshark is under active development and incorporates more functionality than most
commercial sniffing products. It’s an incredibly powerful analysis tool and should be included in
every networking expert’s tool kit. It’s also an invaluable learning aid.
Wireshark includes both a GUI interface (wireshark) and a command-line interface (tshark).
It’s available as a core package on most operating systems. If it’s not in your system’s core
repository, check wireshark.org, which hosts the source code and a variety of precompiled
binaries.
Wireshark can read and write trace files in the formats used by many other packet sniffers.
Another handy feature is that you can click on any packet in a TCP conversation and ask
Wireshark to reassemble (splice together) the payload data of all the packets in the stream. This
feature is useful if you want to examine the data transferred during a complete TCP exchange,
such as a connection on which an email message is transmitted across the network.
Wireshark’s capture filters are functionally identical to tcpdump’s since Wireshark uses the
same underlying libpcap library. Watch out, though—one important gotcha with Wireshark is
the added feature of “display filters,” which affect what you see rather than what’s actually
captured by the sniffer. The display filter syntax is more powerful than the libpcap syntax
supported at capture time. The display filters do look somewhat similar, but they are not the
same.

     See this page for more information about SANs.

Wireshark has built-in dissectors for a wide variety of network protocols, including many used to
implement SANs. It breaks packets into a structured tree of information in which every bit of the
packet is described in plain English.
A note of caution regarding Wireshark: although it has lots of neat features, it has also required
many security updates over the years. Run a current copy, and do not leave it running indefinitely
on sensitive machines; it might be a potential route of attack.
13.13 NETWORK MONITORING
Chapter 28, Monitoring, describes several general-purpose platforms that can help structure the
ongoing oversight of your systems and networks. These systems accept data from a variety of
sources, summarize it in a way that illuminates ongoing trends, and alert administrators to
problems that require immediate attention.
The network is a key component of any computing environment, so it’s often one of the first
parts of the infrastructure to benefit from systematic monitoring. If you don’t feel quite ready to
commit to a single monitoring platform for all your administrative needs, the packages outlined
in this section are good options for small-scale monitoring that’s focused on the network.
SmokePing: gather ping statistics over time
Even healthy networks drop an occasional packet. On the other hand, networks should not drop
packets regularly, even at a low rate, because the impact on users can be disproportionately
severe. Because high-level protocols often function even in the presence of packet loss, you
might never notice dropped packets unless you’re actively monitoring for them.
SmokePing, an open source tool by Tobias Oetiker, can help you develop a more comprehensive
picture of your networks’ behavior. SmokePing sends several ping packets to a target host at
regular intervals. It shows the history of each monitored link through a web front end and can
send alarms when things go amiss. You can get a copy from oss.oetiker.ch/smokeping.
Exhibit D shows a SmokePing graph. The vertical axis is the round trip time of pings, and the
horizontal axis is time (weeks). The black line from which the gray spikes stick up indicates the
median round trip time. The spikes themselves are the transit times of individual packets. Since
the gray in this graph appears only above the median line, the great majority of packets must be
traveling at close to the median speed, with just a few being delayed. This is a typical finding.

Exhibit D: Sample SmokePing graph

The stair-stepped shape of the median line indicates that the baseline transit time to this
destination has changed several times during the monitoring period. The most likely hypotheses
to explain this observation are either that the host is reachable by several routes or that it is
actually a collection of several hosts that have the same DNS name but multiple IP addresses.
iPerf: track network performance
Ping-based tools are helpful for verifying reachability, but they’re not really powerful enough to
analyze and track network performance. Enter iPerf. The latest version, iPerf3, has an extensive
set of features that administrators can use to fine tune network settings for maximum
performance.
Here, we look only at iPerf’s throughput monitoring. At the most basic level, iPerf opens a
connection (TCP or UDP) between two servers, passes data between them, and records how long
the process took.
Once you’ve installed iperf on both machines, start the server side.

Then, on the machine you want to test from, transfer some data as shown here.

iPerf returns great instantaneous data for tracking bandwidth. It’s particularly helpful for
assessing the effect of changes to kernel parameters that control the network stack, such as
changes to the maximum transfer unit (MTU); see this page for more details.
Cacti: collect and graph data
Cacti, available from cacti.net, offers several attractive features. It uses a separate package,
RRDtool, as its back end, in which it stores monitoring data in the form of zero-maintenance,
statically sized databases.
Cacti stores only enough data to create the graphs you want. For example, Cacti could store one
sample every minute for a day, one sample every hour for a week, and one sample every week
for a year. This consolidation scheme lets you maintain important historical context without
having to store unimportant details or spend time on database administration.
Cacti can record and graph any SNMP variable (see this page), as well as many other
performance metrics. You’re free to collect whatever data you want. When combined with the
NET-SNMP agent, Cacti generates a historical perspective on almost any system or network
resource.
Exhibit E shows some examples of graphs created by Cacti. These graphs show the load average
on a device over a period of multiple weeks along with a day’s traffic on a network interface.

Exhibit E: Examples of Cacti graphs

Cacti sports easy web-based configuration as well as all the other built-in benefits of RRDtool,
such as low maintenance and beautiful graphing. See the RRDtool home page at rrdtool.org for
links to the current versions of RRDtool and Cacti, as well as dozens of other monitoring tools.
13.14 FIREWALLS AND NAT
We do not recommend the use of Linux, UNIX, or Windows systems as firewalls because of the
insecurity inherent in running a full-fledged, general-purpose operating system. However, all
operating systems have firewall features, and a hardened system is a workable substitute for
organizations that don’t have the budget for a high-dollar firewall appliance. Likewise, a Linux
or UNIX firewall is a fine option for a security-savvy home user with a penchant for tinkering.
(That said, many consumer-oriented networking devices, such as Linksys’s router products, use
Linux and iptables at their core.)
If you are set on using a general-purpose computer as a firewall, make sure that it’s up to date
with respect to security configuration and patches. A firewall machine is an excellent place to put
into practice all the recommendations found in Chapter 27, Security. (The section that starts here
discusses packet-filtering firewalls in general. If you are not familiar with the basic concept of a
firewall, it would probably be wise to read that section before continuing.)

Microsoft has largely succeeded in convincing the world that every computer needs its own built-
in firewall. However, that’s not really true. In fact, machine-specific firewalls can lead to no end
of inconsistent behavior and mysterious network problems if they are not managed in synchrony
with site-wide standards.
Two main schools of thought deal with the issue of machine-specific firewalls. The first school
considers them superfluous. According to this view, firewalls belong on gateway routers, where
they can protect an entire network through the application of one consistent (and consistently
applied) set of rules.
The second school considers machine-specific firewalls an important component of a “defense in
depth” security plan. Although gateway firewalls are theoretically sufficient to control network
traffic, they can be compromised, routed around, or administratively misconfigured. Therefore,
it’s prudent to implement the same network traffic restrictions through multiple, redundant
firewall systems.
If you do choose to implement machine-specific firewalls, you need a system for deploying them
in a consistent and easily updatable way. The configuration management systems described in
Chapter 23 are excellent candidates for this task. Don’t rely on manual configuration; it’s just too
vulnerable to entropy.
Linux iptables: rules, chains, and tables
     Version 2.4 of the Linux kernel introduced an all-new packet-handling engine, called
     Netfilter, along with a command-line tool, iptables, to manage it. An even newer system,
nftables, has been available since kernel version 3.13 from 2014. It’s an elaboration of the
Netfilter system that’s configured with the nft command rather than the iptables command. We
don’t discuss nftables in this book, but it’s worth evaluating at sites that run current kernels.
           iptables configuration can be rather fiddly. Debian and Ubuntu include a simple front
           end, ufw, that facilitates common operations and configurations. It’s worth checking
out if your needs don’t stray far from the mainstream.
iptables applies ordered “chains” of rules to network packets. Sets of chains make up “tables”
and are used for handling specific kinds of traffic.
For example, the default iptables table is named “filter”. Chains of rules in this table are used for
packet-filtering network traffic. The filter table contains three default chains: FORWARD,
INPUT, and OUTPUT. Each packet handled by the kernel is passed through exactly one of these
chains.

Rules in the FORWARD chain are applied to all packets that arrive on one network interface and
need to be forwarded to another. Rules in the INPUT and OUTPUT chains are applied to traffic
addressed to or originating from the local host, respectively. These three standard chains are
usually all you need for firewalling between two network interfaces. If necessary, you can define
a custom configuration to support more complex accounting or routing scenarios.
In addition to the filter table, iptables includes the “nat” and “mangle” tables. The nat table
contains chains of rules that control Network Address Translation (here, “nat” is the name of the
iptables table and “NAT” is the name of the generic address translation scheme). The section
Private addresses and network address translation (NAT) discusses NAT, and an example of the
nat table in action is shown here. Later in this section, we use the nat table’s PREROUTING
chain for antispoofing packet filtering.
The mangle table contains chains that modify or alter the contents of network packets outside the
context of NAT and packet filtering. Although the mangle table is handy for special packet
handling, such as resetting IP time-to-live values, it is not typically used in most production
environments. We discuss only the filter and nat tables in this section, leaving the mangle table to
the adventurous.

iptables rule targets
Each rule that makes up a chain has a “target” clause that determines what to do with matching
packets. When a packet matches a rule, its fate is in most cases sealed; no additional rules are
checked. Although many targets are defined internally to iptables, it is possible to specify
another chain as a rule’s target.
The targets available to rules in the filter table are ACCEPT, DROP, REJECT, LOG, ULOG,
REDIRECT, RETURN, MIRROR, and QUEUE. When a rule results in an ACCEPT, matching
packets are allowed to proceed on their way. DROP and REJECT both drop their packets; DROP
is silent, and REJECT returns an ICMP error message. LOG gives you a simple way to track
packets as they match rules, and ULOG expands logging.
REDIRECT shunts packets to a proxy instead of letting them go on their merry way. For
example, you might use this feature to force all your site’s web traffic to go through a web cache
such as Squid. RETURN terminates user-defined chains and is analogous to the return statement
in a subroutine call. The MIRROR target swaps the IP source and destination addresses before
sending the packet. Finally, QUEUE hands packets to local user programs through a kernel
module.

iptables firewall setup
Before you can use iptables as a firewall, you must enable IP forwarding and make sure that
various iptables modules have been loaded into the kernel. For more information on enabling IP
forwarding, see Linux TCP/IP options or Security-related kernel variables. Packages that install
iptables generally include startup scripts to achieve this enabling and loading.
A Linux firewall is usually implemented as a series of iptables commands contained in an rc
startup script. Individual iptables commands usually take one of the following forms:

The first form (-F) flushes all prior rules from the chain. The second form (-P) sets a default
policy (aka target) for the chain. We recommend that you use DROP for the default chain target.
The third form (-A) appends the current specification to the chain. Unless you specify a table
with the -t argument, your commands apply to chains in the filter table. The -i parameter applies
the rule to the named interface, and -j identifies the target. iptables accepts many other clauses,
some of which are shown in Table 13.10.

Table 13.10: Command-line flags for iptables filters
A complete example
Below, we break apart a complete example. We assume that the eth1 interface goes to the
Internet and that the eth0 interface goes to an internal network. The eth1 IP address is
128.138.101.4, the eth0 IP address is 10.1.1.1, and both interfaces have a netmask of
255.255.255.0. This example uses stateless packet filtering to protect the web server with IP
address 10.1.1.2, which is the standard method of protecting Internet servers. Later in the
example, we show how to use stateful filtering to protect desktop users.
Our first set of rules initializes the filter table. First, all chains in the table are flushed, then the
INPUT and FORWARD chains’ default target is set to DROP. As with any other network
firewall, the most secure strategy is to drop any packets you have not explicitly allowed.

Since rules are evaluated in order, we put our busiest rules at the front. However, we’re careful to
ensure that reordering the rules for performance doesn’t modify functionality.
The first rule allows all connections through the firewall that originate from within the trusted
net. The next three rules in the FORWARD chain allow connections through the firewall to
network services on 10.1.1.2. Specifically, we allow SSH (port 22), HTTP (port 80), and HTTPS
(port 443) through to our web server.

The only TCP traffic we allow to our firewall host (10.1.1.1) is SSH, which is useful for
managing the firewall itself. The second rule listed below allows loopback traffic, which stays
local to the host. Administrators get nervous when they can’t ping their default route, so the third
rule here allows ICMP ECHO_REQUEST packets from internal IP addresses.
For any IP host to work properly on the Internet, certain types of ICMP packets must be allowed
through the firewall. The following eight rules allow a minimal set of ICMP packets to the
firewall host, as well as to the network behind it.

     See this page for more information about IP spoofing.

We next add rules to the PREROUTING chain in the nat table. Although the nat table is not
intended for packet filtering, its PREROUTING chain is particularly useful for antispoofing
filtering. If we put DROP entries in the PREROUTING chain, they need not be present in the
INPUT and FORWARD chains, since the PREROUTING chain is applied to all packets that
enter the firewall host. It’s cleaner to put the entries in a single place rather than to duplicate
them.

Finally, we end both the INPUT and FORWARD chains with a rule that forbids all packets not
explicitly permitted. Although we already enforced this behavior with the iptables -P commands,
the LOG target lets us see who is knocking on our door from the Internet.

Optionally, we could set up IP NAT to disguise the private address space used on the internal
network. See this page for more information about NAT.
One of the most powerful features that Netfilter brings to Linux firewalling is stateful packet
filtering. Instead of allowing specific incoming services, a firewall for clients connecting to the
Internet needs to allow incoming responses to the client’s requests. The simple stateful
FORWARD chain below allows all traffic to leave our network but allows only incoming traffic
that’s related to connections initiated by our hosts.

Certain kernel modules must be loaded to enable iptables to track complex network sessions
such as those of FTP and IRC. If these modules are not loaded, iptables simply disallows those
connections. Although stateful packet filters can increase the security of your site, they also add
to the complexity of the network and can reduce performance. Be sure you need stateful
functionality before implementing it in your firewall.
Perhaps the best way to debug your iptables rulesets is to use iptables -L -v. These options tell
you how many times each rule in your chains has matched a packet. We often add temporary
iptables rules with the LOG target when we want more information about the packets that get
matched. You can often solve trickier problems by using a packet sniffer such as tcpdump.

Linux NAT and packet filtering
Linux traditionally implements only a limited form of Network Address Translation (NAT) that
is more properly called Port Address Translation, or PAT. Instead of using a range of IP
addresses as a true NAT implementation would, PAT multiplexes all connections onto a single
address. The details and differences aren’t of much practical importance.
iptables implements NAT as well as packet filtering. In earlier versions of Linux this
functionality was a bit of a mess, but iptables makes a much cleaner separation between the
NAT and filtering features. Of course, if you use NAT to let local hosts access the Internet, you
must use a full complement of firewall filters as well.
To make NAT work, enable IP forwarding in the kernel by setting the kernel variable
/proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward to 1. Additionally, insert the appropriate kernel modules:

Many other modules track connections; see the net/netfilter subdirectory underneath
/lib/modules for a more complete list and enable the ones you need.
The iptables command to route packets using NAT is of the form

This example is for the same host as the filtering example in the previous section, so eth1 is the
interface connected to the Internet. The eth1 interface does not appear directly in the command
line above, but its IP address is the one that appears as the argument to --to. The eth0 interface is
the one connected to the internal network.
To Internet hosts, it appears that all packets from hosts on the internal network have eth1’s IP
address. The host that implements NAT receives incoming packets, looks up their true
destinations, rewrites them with the appropriate internal network IP address, and sends them on
their merry way.
IPFilter for UNIX systems
IPFilter, an open source package developed by Darren Reed, supplies NAT and stateful firewall
services on a variety of systems, including Linux and FreeBSD. You can use IPFilter as a
loadable kernel module (which is recommended by the developers) or include it statically in the
kernel.
     IPFilter is mature and feature-complete. The package has an active user community and a
     history of continuous development. It is capable of stateful tracking even for stateless
protocols such as UDP and ICMP.
IPFilter reads filtering rules from a configuration file (usually /etc/ipf/ipf.conf or /etc/ipf.conf)
rather than obliging you to run a series of commands as does iptables. An example of a simple
rule that could appear in ipf.conf is

This rule blocks all inbound traffic (i.e., network activity received by the system) on all network
interfaces. Certainly secure, but not particularly useful!
Table 13.11 shows some of the possible conditions that can appear in an ipf rule.

Table 13.11: Commonly used ipf conditions

IPFilter evaluates rules in the sequence in which they are presented in the configuration file. The
last match is binding. For example, inbound packets traversing the following filter will always
pass:

The block rule matches all packets, but so does the pass rule, and pass is the last match. To force a
matching rule to apply immediately and make IPFilter skip subsequent rules, use the quick
keyword:

An industrial-strength firewall typically contains many rules, so liberal use of quick is important in
order to maintain the performance of the firewall. Without it, every packet is evaluated against
every rule, and this wastefulness is costly.
Perhaps the most common use of a firewall is to control access to and from a specific network or
host, often with respect to a specific port. IPFilter has powerful syntax to control traffic at this
level of granularity. In the following rules, inbound traffic is permitted to the 10.0.0.0/24 network
on TCP ports 80 and 443 and on UDP port 53.

The keep state keywords deserve special attention. IPFilter can keep track of connections by noting
the first packet of new sessions. For example, when a new packet arrives addressed to port 80 on
10.0.0.10, IPFilter makes an entry in the state table and allows the packet through. It also allows
the reply from the web server even though the first rule explicitly blocks all outbound traffic.
keep state is also useful for devices that offer no services but that must initiate connections. The
following ruleset permits all conversations that are initiated by 192.168.10.10. It blocks all
inbound packets except those related to connections that have already been initiated.

The keep state keywords work for UDP and ICMP packets, too, but since these protocols are
stateless, the mechanics are slightly more ad hoc: IPFilter permits responses to a UDP or an
ICMP packet for 60 seconds after the inbound packet is seen by the filter. For example, if a UDP
packet from 10.0.0.10, port 32,000, is addressed to 192.168.10.10, port 53, a UDP reply from
192.168.10.10 will be permitted until 60 seconds have passed. Similarly, an ICMP echo reply
(ping response) is permitted after an echo request has been entered in the state table.

     See this page for more information about NAT.

IPFilter uses the map keyword (in place of pass and block) to provide NAT services. In the following
rule, traffic from the 10.0.0.0/24 network is mapped to the current routable address on the em0
interface.
The filter must be reloaded if the address of em0 changes, as might happen if em0 leases a
dynamic IP address through DHCP. For this reason, IPFilter’s NAT features are best used at sites
that have a static IP address on the Internet-facing interface.
Table 13.12 lists the command-line tools that come with the IPFilter package.

Table 13.12: IPFilter commands

Of the commands in Table 13.12, ipf is the most commonly used. ipf accepts a rule file as input
and adds correctly parsed rules to the kernel’s filter list. ipf adds rules to the end of the filter
unless you use the -Fa argument, which flushes all existing rules. For example, to flush the
kernel’s existing set of filters and load the rules from ipf.conf, use the following syntax:

IPFilter relies on pseudo-device files in /dev for access control, and by default only root can edit
the filter list. We recommend leaving the default permissions in place and using sudo to maintain
the filter.

Use ipf’s -v flag when loading the rules file to debug syntax errors and other problems in the
configuration.
13.15 CLOUD NETWORKING
One of the interesting features of the cloud is that you get to define the networking environment
in which your virtual servers live. Ultimately, of course, cloud servers live on physical computers
that are connected to real network hardware. However, that doesn’t necessarily mean that virtual
servers running on the same node are networked together. The combination of virtualization
technology and programmable network switching equipment gives platform providers great
flexibility to define the networking model they export to clients.
AWS’s virtual private cloud (VPC)
VPC, the software-defined network technology for Amazon Web Services, creates private
networks within the broader AWS network. VPC was first introduced in 2009 as a bridge
between an on-premises data center and the cloud, opening up many hybrid use cases for
enterprise organizations. Today, VPC is a central feature of AWS, and a default VPC is included
for all accounts. EC2 instances for newer AWS accounts must be created within a VPC, and most
new AWS services launch with native VPC support. (Longtime users gripe that AWS services
are incomplete until they support VPC.)
The central features of VPC include

      An IPv4 address range selected from the RFC1918 private address space, expressed
      in CIDR notation (for example, 10.110.0.0/16 for the addresses 10.110.0.0-
      10.110.255.255; VPC has also recently added support for IPv6)
      Subnets to segment the VPC address space into smaller subnetworks
      Routing tables that determine where to send traffic

      Security groups that act as firewalls for EC2 instances
      Network Access Control Lists (NACLs) to isolate subnets from each other

You can create as many VPCs as you need, and no other AWS customer has access to network
traffic within your VPCs. Depending on the state of your account, AWS may initially limit you
to 5 VPCs. However, you can request a higher limit if you need it.
VPCs within the same region can be peered, creating private routes between separate networks.
VPCs in different regions can be connected with software VPN tunnels over the Internet, or with
expensive, custom, direct connections to AWS data centers over private circuits that you must
lease from a telco.
VPCs can be as small as a /28 network or as large as a /16. It’s important to plan ahead because
the size cannot be adjusted after the VPC is created. Choose an address space that is large enough
to accommodate future growth, but also ensure that it does not conflict with other networks that
you may wish to connect.

Subnets and routing tables
Like traditional networks, VPCs are divided into subnets. Public subnets are for servers that must
talk directly to clients on the Internet. They are akin to traditional DMZs. Private subnets are
inaccessible from the Internet and are intended for trusted or sensitive systems.

     See this page for more information about DMZs.
VPC routing is simpler than routing for a traditional hardware network because the cloud does
not simulate physical topology. Every accessible destination is reachable in one logical hop.
In the world of physical networking, every device has a routing table that tells it how to route
outbound network packets. But in VPC, routing tables are also an abstract entity that’s defined
through the AWS web console or its command-line equivalent. Every VPC subnet has an
associated VPC routing table. When instances are created on a subnet, their routing tables are
initialized from the VPC template.

The simplest routing table contains only a default static route for reaching other instances within
the same VPC. You can add additional routes to access the Internet, on-premises networks
(through VPN connections), or other VPCs (through peering connections).
A component called an Internet Gateway connects VPCs to the Internet. This entity is transparent
to the administrator and is managed by AWS. However, you need to create one and attach it to
your VPC if instances are to have Internet connectivity. Hosts in public subnets can access the
Internet Gateway directly.
Instances in private subnets cannot be reached from the Internet even if they are assigned public
IP addresses, a fact that results in much confusion for new users. For outbound access, they must
hop through a NAT gateway on a public subnet. VPC offers a managed NAT feature which saves
you the overhead of running your own gateway, but it incurs an additional hourly cost. The NAT
gateway is a potential bottleneck for applications that have high throughput requirements, so it’s
better to locate the servers for such applications on public subnets, avoiding NAT.
AWS’s implementation of IPv6 does not have NAT, and all instances set up for IPv6 receive
“public” (i.e., routable) IPv6 addresses. You make IPv6 subnets private by connecting them
through an egress-only Internet Gateway (aka eigw) which blocks inbound connections. The
gateway is stateful, so external hosts can talk to servers on the private IPv6 network as long as
the AWS server initiates the connection.

To understand the network routing for an instance, you’ll find it more informative to review the
VPC routing table for its subnet than to look at the instance’s actual routing table (such as might
be displayed by netstat -r or ip route show when logged in to the instance). The VPC version
identifies gateways (“targets”) by their AWS identifiers, which makes the table easy to parse at a
glance.
In particular, you can easily distinguish public subnets from private subnets by looking at the
VPC routing table. If the default gateway (i.e., the target associated with the address 0.0.0.0/0) is
an Internet Gateway (an entity named igw-something), then that subnet is public. If the default
gateway is a NAT device (a route target prefixed by an instance ID, i-something, or nat-
something), then the subnet is private.
Table 13.13 shows an example routing table for a private subnet.
Table 13.13: Example VPC routing table for a private subnet

VPCs are regional, but subnets are restricted to a single availability zone. To build highly
available systems, create at least one subnet per zone and distribute instances evenly among all
the subnets. A typical design puts load balancers or other proxies in public subnets and restricts
web, application, and database servers to private subnets.

Security groups and NACLs
Security groups are firewalls for EC2 instances. Security group rules dictate which source
addresses are allowed for ICMP, UDP, and TCP traffic (ingress rules), and which ports on other
systems can be accessed by instances (egress rules). Security groups deny all connections by
default, so any rules you add allow additional traffic.
All EC2 instances belong to at least one security group, but they may be in as many as five. To
be perfectly accurate, security groups are associated with network interfaces, and an instance can
have more than one network interface. So we should really say that the maximum number of
security groups is the number of network interfaces times five.

The more security groups an instance belongs to, the more confusing it can be to determine
precisely what traffic is and is not allowed. We prefer that each instance be in only one security
group, even if that configuration results in some duplicate rules among groups.
When adding rules to security groups, always consider the principle of least privilege. Opening
ports unnecessarily presents a security risk, especially for systems that have public, routable IP
addresses. For example, a web server may only need ports 22 (SSH, used for management and
control of the system), 80 (HTTP), and 443 (HTTPS).
In addition, all hosts should accept the ICMP packets used to implement path MTU discovery.
Failure to admit these packets can lower network bandwidth considerably, so we find puzzling
AWS’s decision to block them by default. See goo.gl/WrETNq (deep link into
docs.aws.amazon.com) for the steps to enable these packets.
Most security groups have granular inbound rules but allow all outbound traffic, as shown in
Table 13.14. This configuration is convenient since you don’t need to think about what outside
connectivity your systems have. However, it’s easier for attackers to set up shop if they can
retrieve tools and communicate with their external control systems. The most secure networks
have both inbound and outbound restrictions.
Table 13.14: Typical security group rules

Much like access control lists on a firewall device, NACLs control traffic among subnets. Unlike
security groups, NACLs are stateless: they don’t distinguish between new and existing
connections. They are similar in concept to NACLs on a hardware firewall. NACLs allow all
traffic by default. In the wild, we see security groups used far more often than NACLs.

A sample VPC architecture
Exhibit F depicts two VPCs, each with public and private subnets. Network 2 hosts an Elastic
Load Balancer in its public subnets. The ELB acts as a proxy for some autoscaling EC2 instances
that live in the private subnet and protects those instances from the Internet. Service 2 in Network
2 may need access to Service 1 hosted in Network 1, and they can communicate privately
through VPC peering.

Exhibit F: Peered VPCs with public and private subnets

Architecture diagrams like Exhibit F communicate dense technical details more clearly than
written prose. We maintain diagrams like this one for every application we deploy.

Creating a VPC with Terraform
VPCs are composed of many resources, each of which has its own settings and options. The
interdependencies among these objects are complex. It’s possible to create and manage almost
everything by using the CLI or web console, but that approach requires that you keep all the
minutiae in your head. Even if you can keep all the moving parts straight during the initial setup,
it’s difficult to track your work over time.
Terraform, a tool from HashiCorp, creates and manages cloud resources. For example, Terraform
can create a VPC, launch instances, and then initialize those instances by running scripts or other
configuration management tools. Terraform configuration is expressed in HashiCorp
Configuration Language (HCL), a declarative format that looks similar to JSON but adds
variable interpolation and comments. The file can be tracked in revision control, so it’s simple to
update and adapt.

The example below shows a Terraform configuration for a simple VPC with one public subnet.
We think it’s rather self-documenting, intelligible even to a neophyte:
The Terraform documentation is the authoritative syntax reference. You’ll find many example
configurations like this one in the Terraform GitHub repository and elsewhere on the Internet.
Run terraform apply to have Terraform create this VPC. It examines the current directory (by
default) for .tf files and processes each of them, assembling an execution plan and then invoking
API calls in the appropriate order. You can set the AWS API credentials in the configuration file
or through the AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID and AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY environment variables, as we
have done here.
time measures how long it takes to create all the resources in the configuration (about 4.5
seconds). The <computed> values indicate that Terraform chose defaults because we didn’t specify
those settings explicitly.
The state of all resources created by Terraform is saved in a file called terraform.tfstate. This
file must be preserved so that Terraform knows which resources are under its control. In the
future, Terraform will discover the managed resources on its own.
We can clean up the VPC just as easily:
Terraform is cloud-agnostic, so it can manage resources for AWS, GCP, DigitalOcean, Azure,
Docker, and other providers.
How do you know when to use Terraform and when to use the CLI? If you’re building
infrastructure for a team or project, or if you’ll need to make changes and repeat the build later,
use Terraform. If you need to fire off a quick instance as a test, if you need to inspect the details
of a resource, or if you need to access the API from a shell script, use the CLI.
Google Cloud Platform networking
On the Google Cloud Platform, networking is functionally part of the platform, as opposed to
being represented as a distinct service. GCP private networks are global: an instance in the us-
east1 region can communicate with another instance in europe-west1 over the private network, a
fact that makes it easy to build global network services. Network traffic among instances in the
same zone is free, but there is a fee for traffic between zones or regions.
New projects have a default network with the 10.240.0.0/16 address range. You can create up to
five separate networks per project, and instances are members of exactly one network. Many
sites use this network architecture to isolate test and development from production systems.
Networks can be subdivided by region with subnetworks, a relatively recent addition to GCP that
functions differently from subnets on AWS. The global network does not need to be part of a
single IPv4 prefix range, and there can be multiple prefixes per region. GCP configures all the
routing for you, so instances on different CIDR blocks within the same network can still reach
each other. Exhibit G demonstrates this topology.

Exhibit G: A multiregion private GCP network with subnetworks

There is no concept of a subnetwork being public or private; instead, instances that don’t need to
accept inbound traffic from the Internet can simply not have a public, Internet-facing address.
Google offers static external IP addresses that you can borrow for use in DNS records without
fear that they will be assigned to another customer. When an instance does have an external
address, you still won’t see it if you run ip addr show; Google handles the address translation for
you.
By default, firewall rules in a GCP network apply to all instances. To restrict rules to a smaller
set of instances, you can tag instances and filter the rules according to the tags. The default,
global firewall rules deny everything except the following:

      ICMP traffic for 0/0
      RDP (remote desktop for Windows, TCP port 3389) for 0/0

      SSH (TCP port 22) for 0/0
      All ports and protocols for the internal network (10.240.0.0/16 by default)

When it comes to decisions that impact security, we always come back to the principle of least
privilege. In this case, we recommend narrowing these default rules to block RDP entirely, allow
SSH only from your own source IPs, and further restrict traffic within the GCP network. You
might also want to block ICMP, but be aware that you need to allow ICMP packets of type 3,
code 4 to enable path MTU discovery.
DigitalOcean networking
DigitalOcean does not have a private network, or at least, not one similar to those of GCP and
AWS. Droplets can have private interfaces that communicate over an internal network within the
same region. However, that network is shared with all other DigitalOcean customers in the same
region. This is a slight improvement over using the Internet, but firewalls and in-transit
encryption become hard requirements.
We can examine a booted DigitalOcean droplet with the tugboat CLI:

The output includes an IPv6 address in addition to public and private IPv4 addresses.
On the instance, we can further explore by looking at the addresses on the local interfaces.
The public address is assigned directly to the eth0 interface, not translated by the provider as on
other cloud platforms. Each interface also has an IPv6 address, so it’s possible to serve traffic
through IPv4 and IPv6 simultaneously.
13.16 RECOMMENDED READING
History
COMER, DOUGLAS E. Internetworking with TCP/IP Volume 1: Principles, Protocols, and
Architectures (6th Edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2013.
Doug Comer’s Internetworking with TCP/IP series was for a long time the standard reference for
the TCP/IP protocols. The books are designed as undergraduate textbooks and are a good
introductory source of background material.

SALUS, PETER H. Casting the Net, From ARPANET to INTERNET and Beyond. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley Professional, 1995.
This is a lovely history of the ARPANET as it grew into the Internet, written by a historian who
has been hanging out with UNIX people long enough to sound like one of them.
An excellent collection of documents about the history of the Internet and its various
technologies can be found at isoc.org/internet/history.
Classics and bibles
STEVENS, W. RICHARD. UNIX Network Programming. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
1990.
STEVENS, W. RICHARD, BILL FENNER, AND ANDREW M. RUDOFF. UNIX Network Programming,
Volume 1, The Sockets Networking API (3rd Edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-Wesley,
2003.
STEVENS, W. RICHARD. UNIX Network Programming, Volume 2: Interprocess Communications
(2nd Edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-Wesley, 1999.
The UNIX Network Programming books are the student’s bibles in networking classes that
involve programming. If you need only the Berkeley sockets interface, the original edition is still
a fine reference. If you need the STREAMS interface too, then the third edition, which includes
IPv6, is a good bet. All three are clearly written in typical Rich Stevens style.

TANENBAUM, ANDREW S., AND DAVID J. WETHERALL. Computer Networks (5th Edition). Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR, 2011.
Computer Networks was the first networking text, and it is still a classic. It contains a thorough
description of all the nitty-gritty details going on at the physical and link layers of the protocol
stack. The latest edition includes coverage of wireless networks, gigabit Ethernet, peer-to-peer
networks, voice over IP, cellular networks, and more.
Protocols
FALL, KEVIN R., AND W. RICHARD STEVENS. TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume One: The Protocols (2nd
Edition). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2011.
WRIGHT, GARY R., AND W. RICHARD STEVENS. TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume Two: The
Implementation. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995.
The books in the TCP/IP Illustrated series are an excellent and thorough guide to the TCP/IP
protocol stack.
HUNT, CRAIG. TCP/IP Network Administration (3rd Edition). Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media,
2002. Like other books in the nutshell series, this book is directed at administrators of UNIX
systems. Half the book is about TCP/IP, and the rest deals with higher-level UNIX facilities such
as email and remote login.

FARREL, ADRIAN. The Internet and Its Protocols: A Comparative Approach. San Francisco, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2004.
KOZIERAK, CHARLES M. The TCP/IP Guide: A Comprehensive, Illustrated Internet Protocols
Reference. San Francisco, CA: No Starch Press, 2005.
DONAHUE, GARY A. Network Warrior: Everything You Need to Know That Wasn’t on the CCNA
Exam. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2015.
