14 Physical Networking

Regardless of whether your systems live in a data center, a cloud, or an old missile silo, one
element they have in common is the need to communicate on a network. The ability to move data
quickly and reliably is essential in every environment. If there’s one area in which UNIX
technology has touched human lives and influenced other operating systems, it’s in the practical
realization of large-scale packetized data transport.
Networks are following the same trail blazed by servers in that the physical and logical views of
the network are increasingly separated by a virtualization layer that has its own configuration.
That sort of setup is standard in the cloud, but even physical data centers often include a layer of
software-defined networking (SDN) these days.
Administrators interact with real-world network hardware less frequently than they once did, but
familiarity with traditional networking remains a crucial skill. Virtualized networks closely
emulate physical networks in their features, terminology, architecture, and topology.
Many link-layer technologies have been promoted over the years, but Ethernet has emerged as
the clear and decisive winner. Now that Ethernet is found on everything from game consoles to
refrigerators, a thorough understanding of this technology is critical to success as a system
administrator.

Obviously, the speed and reliability of your network have a direct effect on your organization’s
productivity. But today, networking has become so pervasive that the state of the network affects
even such basic interactions as the ability to make telephone calls. A poorly designed network is
a personal and professional embarrassment that can lead to catastrophic social effects. It can also
be expensive to fix.
At least four major factors contribute to success:

      Development of a reasonable network design

      Selection of high-quality hardware
      Proper installation and documentation
      Competent ongoing operations and maintenance

This chapter focuses on understanding, installing, and operating Ethernet networks in an
enterprise environment.
14.1 ETHERNET: THE SWISS ARMY KNIFE OF NETWORKING
Having captured over 95% of the world-wide local area network (LAN) market, Ethernet can be
found just about everywhere in its many forms. It started as Bob Metcalfe’s Ph.D. thesis at MIT
but is now described in a variety of IEEE standards.
Ethernet was originally specified at 3 Mb/s (megabits per second), but it moved to 10 Mb/s
almost immediately. Once a 100 Mb/s standard was finalized in 1994, it became clear that
Ethernet would evolve rather than be replaced. This realization touched off a race to build
increasingly faster versions of Ethernet, and that race continues today. Table 14.1 highlights the
evolution of the various Ethernet standards. We have omitted a few of the less popular Ethernet
standards that cropped up along the way.

Table 14.1: The evolution of Ethernet
Ethernet signaling
The underlying model used by Ethernet can be described as a polite dinner party at which guests
(computers) don’t interrupt each other but rather wait for a lull in the conversation (no traffic on
the network cable) before speaking. If two guests start to talk at once (a collision) they both stop,
excuse themselves, wait a bit, and then one of them starts talking again.
The technical term for this scheme is CSMA/CD:

      Carrier Sense: you can tell whether anyone is talking.
      Multiple Access: everyone can talk.
      Collision Detection: you know when you interrupt someone else.

The actual delay after a collision is somewhat random. This convention avoids the scenario in
which two hosts simultaneously transmit to the network, detect the collision, wait the same
amount of time, and then start transmitting again, thus flooding the network with collisions. This
was not always true!

Today, the importance of the CSMA/CD conventions has been lessened by the advent of
switches, which typically limit the number of hosts to two in a given collision domain. (To
continue the “dinner party” analogy, you might think of this switched variant of Ethernet as
being akin to the scenes found in old movies where two people sit at opposite ends of a long,
formal dining table.)
Ethernet topology
The Ethernet topology is a branching bus with no loops. A packet can travel between two hosts
on the same network in only one way.
Three types of packets can be exchanged on a segment: unicast, multicast, and broadcast. Unicast
packets are addressed to only one host. Multicast packets are addressed to a group of hosts.
Broadcast packets are delivered to all hosts on a segment.
A “broadcast domain” is the set of hosts that receive packets destined for the hardware broadcast
address. Exactly one broadcast domain is defined for each logical Ethernet segment. Under the
early Ethernet standards and media (e.g., 10BASE5), physical segments and logical segments
were exactly the same because all the packets traveled on one big cable with host interfaces
strapped onto the side of it. Attaching a new computer involved boring a hole into the outer
sheath of the cable with a special drill to reach the center conductor. A “vampire tap” that bit into
the outer conductor was then clamped on with screws.
With the advent of switches, today’s logical segments usually consist of many physical segments
(possibly dozens or hundreds) to which only two devices are connected: a switch port and a host.
The switches are responsible for escorting multicast and unicast packets to the physical (or
wireless) segments on which the intended recipients reside. Broadcast traffic is forwarded to all
ports in a logical segment.

A single logical segment can consist of physical (or wireless) segments that operate at different
speeds. Hence, switches must have buffering and timing capabilities to let them smooth over any
potential timing conflicts.
Wireless networks are another common type of logical Ethernet segment. They behave more like
the traditional forms of Ethernet which share one cable among many hosts. See this page.
Unshielded twisted-pair cabling
Unshielded twisted pair (UTP) has historically been the preferred cable medium for Ethernet in
most office environments. Today, wireless networking has displaced UTP in many situations.
The general “shape” of a UTP network is illustrated in Exhibit A.

Exhibit A: A UTP installation

UTP wire is commonly broken down into eight classifications. The performance rating system
was first introduced by Anixter, a large cable supplier. These standards were formalized by the
Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) and are known today as Category 1 through
Category 8, with a few special variants such as Category 5e and Category 6a thrown in for good
measure.
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has also jumped into the exciting and
highly profitable world of cable classification. They promote standards that are exactly or
approximately equivalent to the higher-numbered TIA categories. For example, TIA Category 5
cable is equivalent to ISO Class D cable. For the geeks in the audience, Table 14.2 illustrates the
differences among the various modern-day classifications. This is good information to memorize
so you can impress your friends at parties.

Table 14.2: UTP cable characteristics
Category 5 cable can support 100 Mb/s and is “table stakes” for network wiring today. Category
5e, Category 6, and Category 6a cabling support 1 Gb/s and are the most common standard
currently in use for data cabling. Category 6a is the cable of choice for new installations because
it is particularly resistant to interference from older Ethernet signaling standards (e.g., 10BASE-
T), a problem that has plagued some Category 5/5e installations. Category 7 and Category 7a
cable are intended for 10 Gb/s use, and Category 8 rounds out the family at 40 Gb/s.
Faster standards require multiple pairs of UTP. Having multiple conductors transports data across
the link faster than any single pair can support. 100BASE-TX requires two pairs of Category 5
wire. 1000BASE-TX requires four pairs of Category 5e or Category 6/6a wire, and 10GBASE-
TX requires four pairs of Category 6a, 7, or 7a wire. All these standards are limited to 100 meters
in length.
Both PVC-coated and Teflon-coated wire are available. Your choice of jacketing should depend
on the environment in which the cable will be installed. Enclosed areas that feed into the
building’s ventilation system (“return air plenums”) typically require Teflon. PVC is less
expensive and easier to work with but produces toxic fumes if it catches fire, hence the need to
keep it out of air plenums. Check with your fire marshal or local fire department to determine the
requirements in your area.
For terminating the four-pair UTP cable at patch panels and RJ-45 wall jacks, we suggest you use
the TIA/EIA-568A RJ-45 wiring standard. This standard, which is compatible with other uses of
RJ-45 (e.g., RS-232), is a convenient way to keep the wiring at both ends of the connection
consistent, regardless of whether you can easily access the cable pairs themselves. Table 14.3
shows the pinouts.

Table 14.3: TIA/EIA-568A standard for wiring four-pair UTP to an RJ-45 jack
Existing building wiring might or might not be suitable for network use, depending on how and
when it was installed.
Optical fiber
Optical fiber is used in situations where copper cable is inadequate. Fiber carries signals farther
than copper and is also resistant to electrical interference. In cases where fiber isn’t absolutely
necessary, copper is normally preferred because it’s less expensive and easier to work with.
“Multimode” and “single mode” fiber are the two common types. Multimode fiber is typically
used for applications within a building or campus. It’s thicker than single-mode fiber and can
carry multiple rays of light; this feature permits the use of less expensive electronics (e.g., LEDs
as a light source).
Single-mode fiber is most often found in long-haul applications, such as intercity or interstate
connections. It can carry only a single ray of light and requires expensive precision electronics on
the endpoints.
A common strategy to increase the bandwidth across a fiber link is coarse wavelength division
multiplexing (CWDM). It’s a way to transmit multiple channels of data through a single fiber on
multiple wavelengths (colors) of light. Some of the faster Ethernet standards use this scheme
natively. However, it can also be employed to extend the capabilities of an existing dark fiber
link through the use of CWDM multiplexers.

TIA-598C recommends color-coding the common types of fiber, as shown in Table 14.4. The
key rule to remember is that everything must match. The fiber that connects the endpoints, the
fiber cross-connect cables, and the endpoint electronics must all be of the same type and size.
Note that although both OM1 and OM2 are colored orange, they are not interchangeable—check
the size imprint on the cables to make sure they match. You will experience no end of difficult-
to-isolate problems if you don’t follow this rule.

Table 14.4: Attributes of standard optical fibers

More than 30 types of connectors are used on the ends of optical fibers, and there is no real
rhyme or reason as to which connectors are used where. The connectors you need to use in a
particular case will most often be dictated by your equipment vendors or by your existing
building fiber plant. The good news is that conversion jumpers are fairly easy to obtain.
Ethernet connection and expansion
Ethernets can be connected through several types of devices. The options below are ranked by
approximate cost, with the cheapest options first. The more logic that a device uses to move bits
from one network to another, the more hardware and embedded software the device needs to
have and the more expensive it is likely to be.

Hubs
Devices from a bygone era, hubs are also referred to as concentrators or repeaters. They are
active devices that connect Ethernet segments at the physical layer. They require external power.
A hub retimes and retransmits Ethernet frames but does not interpret them; it has no idea where
packets are going or what protocol they are using. With the exception of extremely special cases,
hubs should no longer be used in enterprise networks; we discourage their use in residential
(consumer) networks as well. Switches make significantly more efficient use of network
bandwidth and are just as cheap these days.

Switches
Switches connect Ethernets at the link layer. They join two physical networks in a way that
makes them seem like one big physical network. Switches are the industry standard for
connecting Ethernet devices today.
Switches receive, regenerate, and retransmit packets in hardware. Switches use a dynamic
learning algorithm. They notice which source addresses come from one port and which from
another. They forward packets between ports only when necessary. At first all packets are
forwarded, but in a few seconds the switch has learned the locations of most hosts and can be
more selective.
Since not all packets are forwarded among networks, each segment of cable that connects to a
switch is less saturated with traffic than it would be if all machines were on the same cable.
Given that most communication tends to be localized, the increase in apparent bandwidth can be
dramatic. And since the logical model of the network is not affected by the presence of a switch,
few administrative consequences result from installing one.

Switches can sometimes become confused if your network contains loops. The confusion arises
because packets from a single host appear to be on two (or more) ports of the switch. A single
Ethernet cannot have loops, but as you connect several Ethernets with routers and switches, the
topology can include multiple paths to a host. Some switches can handle this situation by holding
alternative routes in reserve in case the primary route goes down. They prune the network they
see until the remaining sections present only one path to each node on the network. Some
switches can also handle duplicate links between the same two networks and route traffic in a
round robin fashion.
Switches must scan every packet to determine if it should be forwarded. Their performance is
usually measured by both the packet scanning rate and the packet forwarding rate. Many vendors
do not mention packet sizes in the performance figures they quote, and thus, actual performance
might be less than advertised.
Although Ethernet switching hardware is getting faster all the time, it is still not a reasonable
technology for connecting more than a hundred hosts in a single logical segment. Problems such
as “broadcast storms” often plague large switched networks since broadcast traffic must be
forwarded to all ports in a switched segment. To solve this problem, use a router to isolate
broadcast traffic between switched segments, thereby creating more than one logical Ethernet.

Choosing a switch can be difficult. The switch market is a highly competitive segment of the
computer industry, and it’s plagued with marketing claims that aren’t even partially true. When
selecting a switch vendor, rely on independent evaluations rather than on data supplied by
vendors themselves. In recent years, it has been common for one vendor to have the “best”
product for a few months but then completely destroy its performance or reliability when trying
to make improvements, thus elevating another manufacturer to the top of the heap.
In all cases, make sure that the backplane speed of the switch is adequate—that’s the number that
really counts at the end of a long day. A well-designed switch should have a backplane speed that
exceeds the sum of the speeds of all its ports.

VLAN-capable switches
Large sites can benefit from switches that partition their ports (through software configuration)
into subgroups called virtual local area networks or VLANs. A VLAN is a group of ports that
belong to the same logical segment, as if the ports were connected to their own dedicated switch.
Such partitioning increases the ability of the switch to isolate traffic, and that capability has
beneficial effects on both security and performance.

Traffic among VLANs is handled by a router, or in some cases, by a layer 3 routing module or
routing software layer within the switch. An extension of this system known as “VLAN
trunking” (such as is specified by the IEEE 802.1Q protocol) allows physically separate switches
to service ports on the same logical VLAN.
It’s important to note that VLANs alone provide little additional security. You must filter the
traffic among VLANs to reap any potential security benefit.

Routers
Routers (aka “layer 3 switches”) direct traffic at the network layer, layer 3 of the OSI network
model. They shuttle packets to their final destinations in accordance with the information in the
TCP/IP protocol headers. In addition to simply moving packets from one place to another,
routers can also perform other functions such as packet filtering (for security), prioritization (for
quality of service), and big-picture network topology discovery. See Chapter 15 for all the gory
details of how routing actually works.
Routers take one of two forms: fixed configuration and modular.

      Fixed configuration routers have network interfaces permanently installed at the
      factory. They are usually suitable for small, specialized applications. For example, a
      router with a T1 interface and an Ethernet interface might be a good choice to
      connect a small company to the Internet.
      Modular routers have a slot or bus architecture to which interfaces can be added by
      the end user. Although this approach is usually more expensive, it ensures greater
      flexibility down the road.

Depending on your reliability needs and expected traffic load, a dedicated router might or might
not be cheaper than a UNIX or Linux system configured to act as a router. However, a dedicated
router usually achieves superior performance and reliability. This is one area of network design
in which it’s usually advisable to spend extra money up front to avoid headaches later.
Autonegotiation
With the introduction of a variety of Ethernet standards came the need for devices to figure out
how their neighbors were configured and to adjust their settings accordingly. For example, the
network won’t work if one side of a link thinks the network is running at 1 Gb/s and the other
side of the link thinks it’s running at 10 Mb/s. The Ethernet autonegotiation feature of the IEEE
standards is supposed to detect and solve this problem. And in some cases, it does. In other cases,
it is easily misapplied and simply compounds the problem.
The two golden rules of autonegotiation are these:

      You must use autonegotiation on all interfaces capable of 1 Gb/s or above. It’s
      required by the standard.
      On interfaces limited to 100 Mb/s or below, you must either configure both ends of a
      link in autonegotiation mode, or you must manually configure the speed and duplex
      (half vs. full) on both sides. If you configure only one side in autonegotiation mode,
      that side will not (in most cases) “learn” how the other side has been configured. The
      result will be a configuration mismatch and poor performance.

To see how to set a network interface’s autonegotiation policy, see the system-specific sections
in the TCP/IP Networking chapter; they start on this page.
Power over Ethernet
Power over Ethernet (PoE) is an extension of UTP Ethernet (standardized as IEEE 802.3af) that
transmits power to devices over the same UTP cable that carries the Ethernet signal. It’s
especially handy for Voice over IP (VoIP) telephones or wireless access points (to name just two
examples) that need a relatively small amount of power in addition to a network connection.
The power supply capacity of PoE systems has been stratified into four classes that range from
3.84 to 25.5 watts. Never satisfied, the industry is currently working on a higher power standard
(802.3bt) that may provide more than 100 watts. Won’t it be convenient to operate an Easy-Bake
Oven off the network port in the conference room?
For those of you that are wondering: yes, it is possible to boot a small Linux system off a PoE
port. Perhaps the simplest option is a Raspberry Pi with an add-on Pi PoE Switch HAT board.
PoE has two ramifications that are significant for sysadmins:

      You need to be aware of PoE devices in your infrastructure so that you can plan the
      availability of PoE-capable switch ports accordingly. They are more expensive than
      non-PoE ports.

      The power budget for data closets that house PoE switches must include the wattage
      of the PoE devices. Note that you don’t have to budget the same amount of extra
      cooling for the closet because most of the heat generated by the consumption of PoE
      power is dissipated outside the closet (usually, in an office).
Jumbo frames
Ethernet is standardized for a typical packet size of 1,500 bytes (1,518 with framing), a value
chosen long ago when networks were slow and memory for buffers was scarce. Today, these
1,500-byte packets look shrimpy in the context of a gigabit Ethernet. Because every packet
consumes overhead and introduces latency, network throughput can be higher if larger packet
sizes are allowed.
Unfortunately, the original IEEE standards for the various types of Ethernet forbid large packets
because of interoperability concerns. But just as highway traffic often mysteriously flows faster
than the stated speed limit, king-size Ethernet packets are a common sight on today’s networks.
Egged on by customers, most manufacturers of network equipment have built support for large
frames into their gigabit products.
To use these so-called jumbo frames, all you need do is bump up your network interfaces’
MTUs. Throughput gains vary with traffic patterns, but large transfers over TCP (e.g., NFSv4 or
SMB file service) benefit the most. Expect a modest but measurable improvement on the order of
10%.
Be aware of these points, though:

      All network equipment on a subnet must support and use jumbo frames, including
      switches and routers. You cannot mix and match.

      Because jumbo frames are nonstandard, you usually have to enable them explicitly.
      Devices may accept jumbo frames by default, but they probably will not generate
      them.
      Since jumbo frames are a form of outlawry, there’s no universal consensus on exactly
      how large a jumbo frame can or should be. The most common value is 9,000 bytes, or
      9,018 bytes with framing. You’ll have to investigate your devices to determine the
      largest packet size they have in common. Frames larger than 9K or so are sometimes
      called “super jumbo frames,” but don’t be scared off by the extreme-sounding name.
      Larger is generally better, at least up to 64K or so.

We endorse the use of jumbo frames on gigabit Ethernets, but be prepared to do some extra
debugging if things go wrong. It’s perfectly reasonable to deploy new networks with the default
MTU and convert to jumbo frames later once the reliability of the underlying network has been
confirmed.
14.2 WIRELESS: ETHERNET FOR NOMADS
A wireless network consists of wireless access points (WAPs, or simply APs) and wireless
clients. WAPs can be connected to traditional wired networks (the typical configuration) or
wirelessly connected to other access points, a configuration known as a “wireless mesh.”
Wireless standards
The common wireless standards today are IEEE 802.11g, 802.11n, and 802.11ac. 802.11g
operates in the 2.4 GHz frequency band and affords LAN-like access at up to 54 Mb/s. Operating
range varies from 100 meters to 40 kilometers, depending on equipment and terrain.
802.11n delivers up to 600 Mb/s of bandwidth and can use both the 5 GHz frequency band and
the 2.4 GHz band (though 5 GHz is recommended for deployment). Typical operating range is
approximately double that of 802.11g.
The 600 Mb/s bandwidth of 802.11n is largely theoretical. In practice, bandwidth in the
neighborhood of 400 Mb/s is a more realistic expectation for an optimized configuration. The
environment and capabilities of client devices explain most of the difference between theoretical
and real-life throughput. When it comes to wireless, “your mileage may vary” always applies!
802.11ac is an extension of 802.11n with support for up to 1 Gb/s of multistation throughput.

All these standards are covered by the generic term “Wi-Fi.” In theory, the Wi-Fi label is
restricted to Ethernet implementations from the IEEE 802.11 family. However, that’s the only
kind of wireless Ethernet hardware you can actually buy, so all wireless Ethernet is Wi-Fi.
Today, 802.11g and 802.11n are commonplace. The transceivers are inexpensive and are built
into most laptops. Add-in cards are widely and cheaply available for desktop PCs, too.
Wireless client access
You can configure a UNIX or Linux box to connect to a wireless network as a client if you have
the right hardware and driver. Since most PC-based wireless cards are still designed for
Microsoft Windows, they might not come from the factory with FreeBSD or Linux drivers.
When attempting to add wireless connectivity to a FreeBSD or Linux system, you’ll likely need
these commands:

      ifconfig – configure a wireless network interface
      iwlist – list available wireless access points
      iwconfig – configure wireless connection parameters

      wpa_supplicant – authenticate to a wireless (or wired 802.1x) network

Unfortunately, the industry’s frantic scramble to sell low-cost hardware often means that getting
a wireless adapter to work correctly under UNIX or Linux might require hours of trial and error.
Plan ahead, or buy the same adapter that someone else on the Internet has had good luck with on
the same OS version you’re running.
Wireless infrastructure and WAPs
Everyone wants wireless everything everywhere, and a wide variety of products are available to
provide wireless service. But as with so many things, you get what you pay for. Inexpensive
devices often meet the needs of home users but fail to scale well in an enterprise environment.

Wireless topology
WAPs are usually dedicated appliances that consist of one or more radios and some form of
embedded network operating system, often a stripped-down version of Linux. A single WAP can
provide a connection point for multiple clients, but not for an unlimited number of clients. A
good rule of thumb is to serve no more than forty simultaneous clients from a single enterprise-
grade WAP. Any device that communicates through a wireless standard supported by your
WAPs can act as a client.
WAPs are configured to advertise one or more “service set identifiers,” aka SSIDs. The SSID
acts as the name of a wireless LAN and must be unique within a particular area. When a client
wants to connect to a wireless LAN, it listens to see what SSIDs are being advertised and lets the
user select from among these networks.

You can choose to name your SSID something helpful and easy to remember such as “Third
Floor Public,” or you can get creative. Some of our favorite SSID names are

      FBI Surveillance Van
      The Promised LAN
      IP Freely
      Get Off My LAN
      Virus Distribution Center
      Access Denied

Nothing better than geeks at play... In the simplest scenarios, a WAP advertises a single SSID,
your client connects to that SSID, and voila! You’re on the network.
However, few aspects of wireless networking are truly simple. What if your house or building is
too big to be served by a single WAP? Or what if you need to provide different networks to
different groups of users (such as employees vs. guests)? For these cases, you need to
strategically structure your wireless network.
You can use multiple SSIDs to break up groups of users or functions. Typically, you map them to
separate VLANs, which you can then route or filter as desired, just like wired networks.
The frequency spectrum allocated to 802.11 wireless is broken up into bands, commonly called
channels. Left on its own, a WAP selects a quiet radio channel to advertise an SSID. Clients and
the WAP then use that channel for communication, forming a single broadcast domain. Nearby
WAPs will likely choose other channels so as to maximize available bandwidth and minimize
interference.
The theory is that as clients move around the environment, they will dissociate from one WAP
when its signal becomes weak and connect to a closer WAP with a stronger signal. Theory and
reality often don’t cooperate, however. Many clients hold onto weak WAP signals with a death
grip and ignore better options.

In most situations, you should allow WAPs to automatically select their favorite channels. If you
must manually interfere with this process and are using 802.11b/g/n, consider selecting channel
1, 6, or 11. The spectrum allocated to these channels does not overlap, so combinations of these
channels create the greatest likelihood of a wide-open wireless highway. The default channels for
802.11a/ac don’t overlap at all, so just pick your favorite number.
Some WAPs have multiple antennas and take advantage of multiple-input, multiple-output
technology (MIMO). This practice can increase available bandwidth by exploiting multiple
transmitters and receivers to take advantage of signal offsets resulting from propagation delay.
The technology can provide a slight performance improvement in some situations, though
probably not as much improvement as the dazzling proliferation of antennas might lead you to
expect.
If you need a physically larger coverage area, then deploy multiple WAPs. If the area is
completely open, you can deploy them in a grid structure. If the physical plant includes walls and
other obstructions, you may want to invest in a professional wireless survey. The survey will
identify the best options for WAP placement given the physical attributes of your space.

Small money wireless
We like the products made by Ubiquiti (ubnt.com) for inexpensive, high-performing home
networks. Google Wifi is a nice, cloud-managed solution, great if you support remote family
members. Another option is to run a stripped down version of Linux (such as OpenWrt or LEDE)
on a commercial WAP. See openwrt.org for more information and a list of compatible hardware.
Literally dozens of vendors are hawking wireless access points these days. You can buy them at
Home Depot and even at the grocery store. El cheapo access points (those in the $30 range) are
likely to perform poorly when handling large file transfers or more than one active client.

Big money wireless
Big wireless means big money. Providing reliable, high-density wireless on a large scale (think
hospitals, sports arenas, schools, cities) is a challenge complicated by physical plant constraints,
user density, and the pesky laws of physics. For situations like this, you need enterprise-grade
wireless gear that’s aware of the location and condition of each WAP and that actively adjusts
the WAPs’ channels, signal strengths, and client associations to yield the best results. These
systems usually support transparent roaming, which allows a client’s association with a particular
VLAN and session to seamlessly follow it as the client moves among WAPs.
Our favorite large wireless platforms are those made by Aerohive and Meraki (the latter now
owned by Cisco). These next-generation platforms are managed from the cloud, allowing you to
sip martinis on the beach as you monitor your network through a browser. You can even eject
individual users from the wireless network from the comfort of your beach chair. Take that,
hater!
If you are deploying a wireless network on a large scale, you’ll probably need to invest in a
wireless network analyzer. We highly recommend the analysis products made by AirMagnet.
Wireless security
The security of wireless networks has traditionally been poor. Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP)
is a protocol used in conjunction with legacy 802.11b networks to encrypt packets traveling over
the airwaves. Unfortunately, this standard contains a fatal design flaw that makes it little more
than a speed bump for snoopers. Someone sitting outside your building or house can access your
network directly and undetectably, usually in under a minute.
More recently, the Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) security standards have engendered new
confidence in wireless security. Today, WPA (specifically, WPA2) should be used instead of
WEP in all new installations. Without WPA2, wireless networks should be considered
completely insecure and should never be found inside an enterprise firewall. Don’t even use
WEP at home!
To remember that it’s WEP that’s insecure and WPA that’s secure, just remember that WEP
stands for Wired Equivalent Privacy. The name is accurate; WEP gives you as much protection
as letting someone connect directly to your wired network. (That is, no protection at all—at least
at the IP level.)
14.3 SDN: SOFTWARE-DEFINED NETWORKING
Just as with server virtualization, the separation of physical network hardware from the
functional architecture of the network can significantly increase flexibility and manageability.
The best traction along this path is the software-defined networking (SDN) movement.
The main idea of SDN is that the components managing the network (the control plane) are
physically separate from the components that forward packets (the data plane). The data plane is
programmable through the control plane, so you can fine-tune or dynamically configure data
paths to meet performance, security, and accessibility goals.

As with so many things in our industry, SDN for enterprise networks has become somewhat of a
marketing gimmick. The original goal was to standardize vendor-independent ways to
reconfigure network components. Although some of this idealism has been realized, many
vendors now offer proprietary enterprise SDN products that run somewhat counter to SDN’s
original purpose. If you find yourself exploring the enterprise SDN space, choose products that
conform to open standards and are interoperable with other vendors’ products.
For large cloud providers, SDN adds a layer of flexibility that reduces your need to know (or
care) where a particular resource is physically located. Although these solutions may be
proprietary, they are tightly integrated into cloud providers’ platforms and can make configuring
your virtual infrastructure effortless.
SDN and its API-driven configuration system offer you, the sysadmin, a tempting opportunity to
integrate network topology management with other DevOps-style tools for continuous
integration and deployment. Perhaps in some ideal world, you always have a “next at bat”
production environment staged and ready to activate with a single click. As the new environment
is promoted to production, the network infrastructure magically morphs, eliminating user-visible
downtime and the need for you to schedule maintenance windows.
14.4 NETWORK TESTING AND DEBUGGING
The key to debugging a network is to break it down into its component parts and then test each
piece until you’ve isolated the offending device or cable. The “idiot lights” on switches and hubs
(such as “link status” and “packet traffic”) often hold immediate clues to the source of the
problem. Top-notch documentation of your wiring scheme is essential for making these indicator
lights work in your favor.
As with most tasks, having the right tools for the job is a big part of being able to get the job
done right and without delay. The market offers two major types of network debugging tools,
although these are quickly converging into unified devices.

The first type of tool is the hand-held cable analyzer. This device can measure the electrical
characteristics of a given cable, including its length, with a groovy technology called “time
domain reflectrometry.” Usually, these analyzers can also point out simple faults such as broken
or miswired cables.
Our favorite product for LAN cable analysis is the Fluke LanMeter. It’s an all-in-one analyzer
that can even perform IP pings across the network. High-end versions have their own web server
that can show you historical statistics. For WAN (telco) circuits, the T-BERD line analyzer is the
cat’s meow. It’s made by Viavi (viavisolutions.com).
The second type of debugging tool is the network sniffer. A sniffer captures the bytes that travel
across the wire and disassembles network packets to look for protocol errors, misconfigurations,
and general snafus. Sniffers operate at the link layer of the network rather than the electrical
layer, so they cannot diagnose cabling problems or electrical issues that might be affecting
network interfaces.
Commercial sniffers are available, but we find that the freely available program Wireshark
running on a fat laptop is usually the best option. See the Packet sniffers section for details. (Like
so many popular programs, Wireshark is often the target of attacks by hackers. Make sure you
stay up to date with the most current version.)
14.5 BUILDING WIRING
If you’re embarking on a building wiring project, the most important advice we can give you is
to “do it right the first time.” This is not an area in which to skimp or cut corners. Buying quality
materials, selecting a competent wiring contractor, and installing extra connections (drops) will
save you years of frustration and heartburn down the road.
UTP cabling options
Category 6a wire typically offers the best price vs. performance tradeoff in today’s market. Its
normal format is four pairs per sheath, which is just right for a variety of data connections from
RS-232 to gigabit Ethernet.
Category 6a specifications require that the twist be maintained to the point of contact. Special
training and termination equipment are necessary to satisfy this requirement. You must use
Category 6a jacks and patch panels. We’ve had the best luck with parts manufactured by Siemon.
Connections to offices
For many years, there has been an ongoing debate about how many connections should be wired
per office. One connection per office is clearly not enough. But should you use two or four? With
the advent of high-bandwidth wireless, we now recommend two, for several reasons:

      A nonzero number of wired connections is typically needed to support voice
      telephones and other specialty devices.
      Most user devices can now be connected through wireless networking, and users
      prefer this to being chained down by cables.
      Your network wiring budget is better spent on core infrastructure (fiber to closets,
      etc.) than on more drops to individual offices.

If you’re in the process of wiring your entire building, you might consider installing a few outlets
in hallways, conference rooms, lunch rooms, bathrooms, and of course, ceilings (for wireless
access points). Don’t forget to keep security in mind, however, and put publicly accessible ports
on a “guest” VLAN that doesn’t have access to your internal network resources. You can also
secure public ports by implementing 802.1x authentication.
Wiring standards
Modern buildings often require a large and complex wiring infrastructure to support all the
various activities that take place inside. Walking into the average telecommunications closet can
be a shocking experience for the weak of stomach, as identically colored, unlabeled wires often
cover the walls.
In an effort to increase traceability and standardize building wiring, the Telecommunications
Industry Association in February 1993 released TIA/EIA-606 (Administration Standard for
Commercial Telecommunications Infrastructure), later updated to TIA/EIA-606-B in 2012.
EIA-606 specifies requirements and guidelines for the identification and documentation of
telecommunications infrastructure. Items covered by EIA-606 include

      Termination hardware
      Cables
      Cable pathways
      Equipment spaces
      Infrastructure color coding
      Labeling requirements
      Symbols for standard components

In particular, the standard specifies colors to be used for wiring. Table 14.5 shows the details.

Table 14.5: EIA-606 color chart

Pantone sells software to map between the Pantone systems for ink-on-paper, textile dyes, and
colored plastic. Hey, you could color-coordinate the wiring, the uniforms of the installers, and
the wiring documentation! On second thought…
14.6 NETWORK DESIGN ISSUES
This section addresses the logical and physical design of networks. It’s targeted at medium-sized
installations. The ideas presented here scale up to a few hundred hosts but are overkill for three
machines and inadequate for thousands. We also assume that you have an adequate budget and
are starting from scratch, which is probably only partially true.
Most of network design consists of specifying

      The types of media that will be used
      The topology and routing of cables
      The use of switches and routers

Another key issue in network design is congestion control. For example, file-sharing protocols
such as NFS and SMB tax the network quite heavily, and so file serving on a backbone cable is
undesirable.

The issues presented in the following sections are typical of those that must be considered in any
network design.
Network architecture vs. building architecture
Network architecture is usually more flexible than building architecture, but the two must
coexist. If you are lucky enough to be able to specify the network before a building is
constructed, be lavish. For most of us, both the building and a facilities-management department
already exist and are somewhat rigid.
In existing buildings, the network must use the building architecture, not fight it. Modern
buildings often contain utility raceways for data and telephone cables in addition to high-voltage
electrical wiring and water or gas pipes. They often use drop ceilings, a boon to network
installers. Many campuses and organizations have underground utility tunnels that facilitate
network installation.
The integrity of firewalls must be maintained; if you route a cable through a firewall, the hole
must be snug and filled in with a noncombustible substance. (This type of firewall is a concrete,
brick, or flame-retardant wall that prevents a fire from spreading and burning down the building.
Although different from a network security firewall, it’s probably just as important.)
Respect return air plenums in your choice of cable. If you are caught violating fire codes, you
might be fined and will be required to fix the problems you have created, even if that means
tearing down the entire network and rebuilding it correctly.

Your network’s logical design must fit into the physical constraints of the buildings it serves. As
you specify the network, keep in mind that it’s easy to draw a logically good solution and then
find that it is physically difficult or impossible to implement.
Expansion
It’s difficult to predict needs ten years into the future, especially in the computer and networking
fields. Therefore, design the network with expansion and increased bandwidth in mind. As you
install cable, especially in out-of-the-way, hard-to-reach places, pull three to four times the
number of pairs you actually need. Remember: the majority of installation cost is labor, not
materials.
Even if you have no plans to use fiber, it’s wise to install some when wiring your building,
especially in situations where it will be hard to install cable later. Run both multimode and
single-mode fiber. The kind you need in the future is always the kind you didn’t install.
Congestion
A network is like a chain: it is only as good as its weakest or slowest link. The performance of
Ethernet, like that of many other network architectures, degrades nonlinearly as the network
becomes loaded.
Overtaxed switches, mismatched interfaces, and low-speed links can all lead to congestion. It’s
helpful to isolate local traffic by creating subnets and by using interconnection devices such as
routers. Subnets can also be used to cordon off machines that are used for experimentation. It’s
difficult to run an experiment that involves several machines if you cannot isolate those machines
both physically and logically from the rest of the network.
Maintenance and documentation
We have found that the maintainability of a network correlates highly with the quality of its
documentation. Accurate, complete, up-to-date documentation is indispensable.
Cables should be labeled at all termination points. It’s a good idea to post copies of local cable
maps inside communications closets so that the maps can be updated on the spot when changes
are made. Once every few weeks, have someone copy down the changes for entry into a wiring
database.
Joints between major population centers in the form of switches or routers can facilitate
debugging by allowing parts of the network to be isolated and debugged separately. It’s also
helpful to put joints between political and administrative domains, for similar reasons.
14.7 MANAGEMENT ISSUES
If a network is to work correctly, some things must be centralized, some distributed, and some
local. Reasonable ground rules and “good citizen” guidelines must be formulated and agreed on.
A typical environment includes

      A backbone network among buildings

      Departmental subnets connected to the backbone
      Group subnets within a department
      Connections to the outside world (Internet or field office VPNs)

Several facets of network design and implementation must have site-wide control, responsibility,
maintenance, and financing. Networks with chargeback algorithms for each connection grow in
bizarre but predictable ways as departments try to minimize their own local costs. Prime targets
for central control are

      The network design, including the use of subnets, routers, switches, etc.
      The backbone network itself, including the connections to it

      Host IP addresses, hostnames, and subdomain names
      Protocols, mostly to ensure their interoperation
      Routing policy to the Internet

Domain names, IP addresses, and network names are in some sense already controlled centrally
by authorities such as ARIN (the American Registry for Internet Numbers) and ICANN.
However, your site’s use of these items must be coordinated locally as well.
A central authority has an overall view of the network: its design, capacity, and expected growth.
It can afford to own monitoring equipment (and the staff to run it) and to keep the backbone
network healthy. It can insist on correct network design, even when that means telling a
department to buy a router and build a subnet to connect to the campus backbone. Such a
decision might be necessary to ensure that a new connection does not adversely impact the
existing network.
If a network serves many types of machines, operating systems, and protocols, it is almost
essential to have a layer 3 device as a gateway between networks.
14.8 RECOMMENDED VENDORS
In the past 30+ years of installing networks around the world, we’ve gotten burned more than a
few times by products that didn’t quite meet specs or were misrepresented, overpriced, or
otherwise failed to meet expectations. Below is a list of vendors in the United States that we still
trust, recommend, and use ourselves today.
Cables and connectors
Test equipment
Routers/switches
14.9 RECOMMENDED READING
ANSI/TIA/EIA-568-A, Commercial Building Telecommunications Cabling Standard, and
ANSI/TIA/EIA-606, Administration Standard for the Telecommunications Infrastructure of
Commercial Buildings, are the telecommunication industry’s standards for building wiring.
Unfortunately, they are not free. See tiaonline.org.
BARNETT, DAVID, DAVID GROTH, AND JIM MCBEE. Cabling: The Complete Guide to Network
Wiring (3rd Edition). San Francisco, CA: Sybex, 2004.

GORANSSON, PAUL, AND CHUCK BLACK. Software Defined Networks, A Comprehensive Approach
(2nd Edition). Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufman, 2016.
SPURGEON, CHARLES, AND JOANN ZIMMERMAN. Ethernet: The Definitive Guide: Designing and
Managing Local Area Networks (2nd Edition). Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly, 2014.
