15 IP Routing

More than 4.3 billion IP addresses are available world-wide, so getting packets to the right place
on the Internet is no easy task. Chapter 13, TCP/IP Networking, briefly introduced IP packet
forwarding. In this chapter, we examine the forwarding process in more detail and investigate
several network protocols that allow routers to automatically discover efficient routes. Routing
protocols not only lessen the day-to-day administrative burden of maintaining routing
information, but they also allow network traffic to be redirected quickly if a router, link, or
network should fail.
It’s important to distinguish between the process of actually forwarding IP packets and the
management of the routing table that drives this process, both of which are commonly called
“routing.” Packet forwarding is simple, whereas route computation is tricky; consequently, the
second meaning is used more often in practice. This chapter describes only unicast routing;
multicast routing (sending packets to groups of subscribers) involves an array of very different
problems and is beyond the scope of this book.
For most cases, the information covered in Chapter 13 is all you need to know about routing. If
the appropriate network infrastructure is already in place, you can set up a single static default
route (as described in the Routing section) and voilà, you have enough information to reach just
about anywhere on the Internet. If you must live within a complex network topology, or if you
are using UNIX or Linux systems as part of your network infrastructure, then this chapter’s
information about dynamic routing protocols and tools can come in handy. (However, we do not
recommend the use of UNIX or Linux systems as network routers in a production infrastructure.
Buy a dedicated router.)
IP routing (both for IPv4 and for IPv6) is “next hop” routing. At any given point, the system
handling a packet needs to determine only the next host or router in the packet’s journey to its
final destination. This is a different approach from that of many legacy protocols, which
determine the exact path a packet will travel before it leaves its originating host, a scheme known
as source routing. (IP packets can also be source-routed—at least in theory—but this is almost
never done. The feature is not widely supported because of security considerations.)
15.1 PACKET FORWARDING: A CLOSER LOOK
Before we jump into the management of routing tables, we need a more detailed look at how the
tables are used. Consider the network shown in Exhibit A.

Exhibit A: Example network

For simplicity, we start this example with IPv4; for an IPv6 routing table, see this page.

Router R1 connects two networks, and router R2 connects one of these nets to the outside world.
A look at the routing tables for these hosts and routers lets us examine some specific packet
forwarding scenarios. First, host A’s routing table:

The example above uses the venerable netstat tool to query the routing table. This tool is
distributed with FreeBSD and is available for Linux as part of the net-tools package. net-tools is
no longer actively maintained, and as a result it is considered deprecated. The less featureful ip
route command is the officially recommended way to obtain this information on Linux:

The output from netstat -rn is slightly easier to read, so we use that for subsequent examples and
for the following exploration of Exhibit A.
Host A has the simplest routing configuration of the four machines. The first two routes describe
the machine’s own network interfaces in standard routing terms. These entries exist so that
forwarding to directly connected networks need not be handled as a special case. eth0 is host A’s
Ethernet interface, and lo is the loopback interface, a virtual interface emulated in software.
Entries such as these are normally added automatically when a network interface is configured.

     See the discussion of netmasks starting on this page.

The default route on host A forwards all packets not addressed to the loopback address or to the
199.165.145 network to the router R1, whose address on this network is 199.165.145.24.
Gateways must be only one hop away.

     See this page for more information about addressing.

Suppose a process on A sends a packet to B, whose address is 199.165.146.4. The IP
implementation looks for a route to the target network, 199.165.146, but none of the routes
match. The default route is invoked and the packet is forwarded to R1. Exhibit B shows the
packet that actually goes out on the Ethernet. The addresses in the Ethernet header are the MAC
addresses of A’s and R1’s interfaces on the 145 net.

Exhibit B: Ethernet packet

The Ethernet destination address is that of router R1, but the IP packet hidden within the Ethernet
frame does not mention R1 at all. When R1 inspects the packet it has received, it sees from the IP
destination address that it is not the ultimate destination of the packet. It then uses its own routing
table to forward the packet to host B without rewriting the IP header; the header still shows the
packet coming from A.
Here’s the routing table for host R1:
This table is similar to that of host A, except that it shows two physical network interfaces. The
default route in this case points to R2, since that’s the gateway through which the Internet can be
reached. Packets bound for either of the 199.165 networks can be delivered directly.
Like host A, host B has only one real network interface. However, B needs an additional route to
function correctly because it has direct connections to two different routers. Traffic for the
199.165.145 net must travel through R1, but other traffic should go out to the Internet through
R2.

     See this page for an explanation of ICMP redirects.

In theory, you can configure host B with initial knowledge of only one gateway and rely on help
from ICMP redirects to eliminate extra hops. For example, here is one possible initial
configuration for host B:

If B then sends a packet to host A (199.165.145.17), no route matches and the packet is
forwarded to R2 for delivery. R2 (which, being a router, presumably has complete information
about the network) sends the packet on to R1. Since R1 and B are on the same network, R2 also
sends an ICMP redirect notice to B, and B enters a host route for A into its routing table:

This route sends all future traffic for A directly through R1. However, it does not affect routing
for other hosts on A’s network, all of which have to be routed by separate redirects from R2.
Some sites use ICMP redirects this way as a sort of low-rent routing “protocol,” thinking that this
approach is dynamic. Unfortunately, systems and routers all handle redirects differently. Some
hold on to them indefinitely. Others remove them from the routing table after a relatively short
period (5–15 minutes). Still others ignore them entirely, which is probably the correct approach
from a security perspective.
Redirects have several other potential disadvantages: increased network load, increased load on
R2, routing table clutter, and dependence on extra servers, to name a few. Therefore, we don’t
recommend their use. In a properly configured network, redirects should never appear in the
routing table.

If you are using IPv6 addresses, the same model applies. Here’s a routing table from a FreeBSD
host that is running IPv6:

As in IPv4, the first route is a default that’s used when no more-specific entries match. The next
line contains a route to the global IPv6 network where the host lives, 2001:886b:4452::/64. The
final two lines are special; they represent a route to the reserved IPv6 network fe80, known as the
link-local unicast network. This network is used for traffic that is scoped to the local broadcast
domain (typically, the same physical network segment). It is most often used by network services
that need to find each other on a unicast network, such as OSPF. Don’t use link-local addresses
for normal networking purposes.
15.2 ROUTING DAEMONS AND ROUTING PROTOCOLS
In simple networks such as the one shown in Exhibit A, it is perfectly reasonable to configure
routing by hand. At some point, however, networks become too complicated to be managed this
way. Instead of having to explicitly tell every computer on every network how to reach every
other computer and network, it would be nice if the computers could just cooperate and figure it
all out. This is the job of routing protocols and the daemons that implement them.
Routing protocols have a major advantage over static routing systems in that they can react and
adapt to changing network conditions. If a link goes down, then the routing daemons can
discover and propagate alternative routes to the networks served by that link, if any such routes
exist.

Routing daemons collect information from three sources: configuration files, the existing routing
tables, and routing daemons on other systems. This information is merged to compute an optimal
set of routes, and the new routes are then fed back into the system routing table (and possibly fed
to other systems through a routing protocol). Because network conditions change over time,
routing daemons must periodically check in with one another for reassurance that their routing
information is still current.
The exact manner in which routes are computed depends on the routing protocol. Two general
types of protocols are in common use: distance-vector protocols and link-state protocols.
Distance-vector protocols
Distance-vector (aka “gossipy”) protocols are based on the general idea, “If router X is five hops
away from network Y, and I’m adjacent to router X, then I must be six hops away from network
Y.” You announce how far you think you are from the networks you know about. If your
neighbors don’t know of a better way to get to each network, they mark you as being the best
gateway. If they already know a shorter route, they ignore your advertisement. Over time,
everyone’s routing tables are supposed to converge to a steady state.
This is a really elegant idea. If it worked as advertised, routing would be relatively simple.
Unfortunately, the basic algorithm does not deal well with changes in topology. The problem is
that changes in topology can lengthen the optimal routes. Some DV protocols, such as EIGRP,
maintain information about multiple possible routes so that they always have a fallback plan. The
exact details are not important.
In some cases, infinite loops (e.g., router X receives information from router Y and sends it on to
router Z, which sends it back to router Y) can prevent routes from converging at all. Real-world
distance-vector protocols must avoid such problems by introducing complex heuristics or by
enforcing arbitrary restrictions such as the RIP (Routing Information Protocol) notion that any
network more than 15 hops away is unreachable.
Even in nonpathological cases, it can take many update cycles for all routers to reach a steady
state. Therefore, to guarantee that routing does not jam for an extended period, the cycle time
must be made short, and for this reason distance-vector protocols as a class tend to be talkative.
For example, RIP requires that routers broadcast all their routing information every 30 seconds.
EIGRP sends updates every 90 seconds.

On the other hand, BGP, the Border Gateway Protocol, transmits the entire table once and then
transmits changes as they occur. This optimization substantially reduces the potential for “chatty”
(and mostly unnecessary) traffic.
Table 15.1 lists the distance-vector protocols in common use today.

Table 15.1: Common distance-vector routing protocols
Link-state protocols
Link-state protocols distribute information in a relatively unprocessed form. The records traded
among routers are of the form “Router X is adjacent to router Y, and the link is up.” A complete
set of such records forms a connectivity map of the network from which each router can compute
its own routing table. The primary advantage that link-state protocols offer over distance-vector
protocols is the ability to quickly converge on an operational routing solution after a catastrophe
occurs. The tradeoff is that maintaining a complete map of the network at each node requires
memory and CPU power that would not be needed by a distance-vector routing system.
Because the communications among routers in a link-state protocol are not part of the actual
route-computation algorithm, they can be implemented in such a way that transmission loops do
not occur. Updates to the topology database propagate across the network efficiently, at a lower
cost in network bandwidth and CPU time.
Link-state protocols tend to be more complicated than distance-vector protocols, but this
complexity can be explained in part by the fact that link-state protocols make it easier to
implement advanced features such as type-of-service routing and multiple routes to the same
destination.
The only true link-state protocol in general use is OSPF.
Cost metrics
For a routing protocol to determine which path to a network is shortest, the protocol has to define
what is meant by “shortest.” Is it the path involving the fewest number of hops? The path with
the lowest latency? The largest minimal intermediate bandwidth? The lowest financial cost?
For routing, the quality of a link is represented by a number called the cost metric. A path cost is
the sum of the costs of each link in the path. In the simplest systems, every link has a cost of 1,
leading to hop counts as a path metric. But any of the considerations mentioned above can be
converted to a numeric cost metric.
Routing protocol designers have labored long and hard to make the definition of cost metrics
flexible, and some protocols even allow different metrics to be used for different kinds of
network traffic. Nevertheless, in 99% of cases, all this hard work can be safely ignored. The
default metrics for most systems work just fine.
You might encounter situations in which the actual shortest path to a destination is not a good
default route for political or financial reasons. To handle these cases, you can artificially boost
the cost of the critical links to make them seem less appealing. Leave the rest of the routing
configuration alone.
Interior and exterior protocols
An “autonomous system” (AS) is a group of networks under the administrative control of a
single entity. The definition is vague; real-world autonomous systems can be as large as a world-
wide corporate network or as small as a building or a single academic department. It all depends
on how you want to manage routing. The general tendency is to make autonomous systems as
large as you can. This convention simplifies administration and makes routing as efficient as
possible.
Routing within an autonomous system is somewhat different from routing between autonomous
systems. Protocols for routing among ASs (“exterior” protocols) must often handle routes for
many networks (e.g., the entire Internet), and they must deal gracefully with the fact that
neighboring routers are under other people’s control. Exterior protocols do not reveal the
topology inside an autonomous system, so in a sense they can be thought of as a second level of
routing hierarchy that deals with collections of nets rather than individual hosts or cables.
In practice, small- and medium-sized sites rarely need to run an exterior protocol unless they are
connected to more than one ISP. With multiple ISPs, the easy division of networks into local and
Internet domains collapses, and routers must decide which route to the Internet is best for any
particular address. (However, that is not to say that every router must know this information.
Most hosts can stay stupid and route their default packets through an internal gateway that is
better informed.)
Although exterior protocols are not much different from their interior counterparts, this chapter
concentrates on the interior protocols and the daemons that support them. If your site must use an
external protocol as well, see the recommended reading list here for some suggested references.
15.3 PROTOCOLS ON PARADE
Several routing protocols are in common use. In this section, we introduce the major players and
summarize their main advantages and weaknesses.
RIP and RIPng: Routing Information Protocol
RIP is an old Xerox protocol that was adapted for IP networks. The IP version was originally
specified in RFC1058, circa 1988. The protocol has existed in three versions: RIP, RIPv2, and
the IPv6-only RIPng (“next generation”).
All versions of RIP are simple distance-vector protocols that use hop counts as a cost metric.
Because RIP was designed in an era when computers were expensive and networks small, RIPv1
considers any host 15 or more hops away to be unreachable. Later versions of RIP have
maintained the hop-count limit, mostly to encourage the administrators of complex sites to
migrate to more sophisticated routing protocols.

    See this page for more information about CIDR.

RIPv2 is a minor revision of RIP that distributes netmasks along with next-hop addresses, so its
support for subnetted networks and CIDR is better than that of RIPv1. A vague gesture toward
increasing the security of RIP was also included.

RIPv2 can be run in a compatibility mode that preserves most of its new features without entirely
abandoning vanilla RIP receivers. In most respects, RIPv2 is identical to the original protocol
and should be used in preference to it.

    See this page for details on IPv6.

RIPng is a restatement of RIP in terms of IPv6. It is an IPv6-only protocol, and RIP remains
IPv4-only. If you want to route both IPv4 and IPv6 with RIP, you’ll need to run RIP and RIPng
as separate protocols.
Although RIP is known for its profligate broadcasting, it does a good job when a network is
changing often or when the topology of remote networks is not known. However, it can be slow
to stabilize after a link goes down.

It was originally thought that the advent of more sophisticated routing protocols such as OSPF
would make RIP obsolete. However, RIP continues to fill a need for a simple, easy-to-implement
protocol that doesn’t require much configuration, and it works well on low-complexity networks.
RIP is widely implemented on non-UNIX platforms. A variety of common devices, from printers
to SNMP-manageable network components, can listen to RIP advertisements to learn about
network gateways. In addition, some form of RIP client is available for all versions of UNIX and
Linux, so RIP is a de facto lowest-common-denominator routing protocol. Often, RIP is used for
LAN routing, and a more featureful protocol is used for wide-area connectivity.
Some sites run passive RIP daemons (usually routed or Quagga’s ripd) that listen for routing
updates on the network but do not broadcast any information of their own. The actual route
computations are performed with a more efficient protocol such as OSPF (see the next section).
RIP is used only as a distribution mechanism.
OSPF: Open Shortest Path First
OSPF is the most popular link-state protocol. “Shortest path first” refers to the mathematical
algorithm that calculates routes; “open” is used in the sense of “nonproprietary.” RFC2328
defines the basic protocol (OSPF version 2), and RFC5340 extends it to include support for IPv6
(OSPF version 3). OSPF version 1 is obsolete and is not used.
OSPF is an industrial-strength protocol that works well for large, complicated topologies. It
offers several advantages over RIP, including the ability to manage several paths to a single
destination and the ability to partition the network into sections (“areas”) that share only high-
level routing information. The protocol itself is complex and hence only worthwhile at sites of
significant size, where routing protocol behavior really makes a difference. To use OSPF
effectively, your site’s IP addressing scheme should be reasonably hierarchical.
The OSPF protocol specification does not mandate any particular cost metric. Cisco’s
implementation uses a bandwidth-related value by default.
EIGRP: Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol
EIGRP is a proprietary routing protocol that runs only on Cisco routers. Its predecessor IGRP
was created to address some of the shortcomings of RIP before robust standards like OSPF
existed. IGRP has now been deprecated in favor of EIGRP, which accommodates CIDR masks.
IGRP and EIGRP are configured similarly despite being quite different in their underlying
protocol design.
EIGRP supports IPv6, but as with other routing protocols, the IPv6 world and IPv4 world are
configured separately and act as separate, though parallel, routing domains.
EIGRP is a distance-vector protocol, but it’s designed to avoid the looping and convergence
problems found in other DV systems. It’s widely regarded as the most evolved distance-vector
protocol. For most purposes, EIGRP and OSPF are equally functional.
BGP: Border Gateway Protocol
BGP is an exterior routing protocol; that is, a protocol that manages traffic among autonomous
systems rather than among individual networks. There were once several exterior routing
protocols in common use, but BGP has outlasted them all.
BGP is now the standard protocol used for Internet backbone routing. As of mid-2017, the
Internet routing table contains about 660,000 prefixes. It should be clear from this number that
backbone routing has scaling requirements very different from those for local routing.
15.4 ROUTING PROTOCOL MULTICAST COORDINATION
Routers need to talk to each other to learn how to get to places on the network, but to get to
places on the network they need to talk to a router. This chicken-and-egg problem is most
commonly solved through multicast communication. This is the networking equivalent of
agreeing to meet your friend on a particular street corner if you get separated. The process is
normally invisible to system administrators, but you might occasionally see this multicast traffic
in your packet traces or when doing other kinds of network debugging. Table 15.2 lists the
agreed-on multicast addresses for various routing protocols.

Table 15.2: Routing protocol multicast addresses
15.5 ROUTING STRATEGY SELECTION CRITERIA
Routing for a network can be managed at essentially four levels of complexity:

      No routing
      Static routes only

      Mostly static routes, but clients listen for RIP updates
      Dynamic routing everywhere

The topology of the overall network has a dramatic effect on each individual segment’s routing
requirements. Different nets might need very different levels of routing support. The following
rules of thumb can help you choose a strategy:

      A stand-alone network requires no routing.
      If a network has only one way out, clients (nongateway machines) on that network
      should have a static default route to the lone gateway. No other configuration is
      necessary, except perhaps on the gateway itself.
      A gateway with a small number of networks on one side and a gateway to “the
      world” on the other side can have explicit static routes pointing to the former and a
      default route to the latter. However, dynamic routing is advisable if both sides have
      more than one routing choice.

      If networks cross political or administrative boundaries, use dynamic routing at those
      points, even if the complexity of the networks involved would not otherwise suggest
      the use of a routing protocol.
      RIP works OK and is widely supported. Don’t reject it out of hand just because it’s
      an older protocol with a reputation for chattiness.

      The problem with RIP is that it doesn’t scale indefinitely; an expanding network will
      eventually outgrow it. That fact makes RIP something of a transitional protocol with
      a narrow zone of applicability. That zone is bounded on one side by networks too
      simple to require any routing protocol and on the other side by networks too
      complicated for RIP. If your network plans include continued growth, it’s probably
      reasonable to skip over the “RIP zone” entirely.

      Even when RIP isn’t a good choice for your global routing strategy, it’s still a good
      way to distribute routes to leaf nodes. But don’t use it where it’s not needed: systems
      on a network that has only one gateway never need dynamic updates.
      EIGRP and OSPF are about equally functional, but EIGRP is proprietary to Cisco.
      Cisco makes excellent and cost-competitive routers; nevertheless, standardizing on
      EIGRP limits your choices for future expansion.
      Routers connected to the Internet through multiple upstream providers must use BGP.
      However, most routers have only one upstream path and can therefore use a simple
      static default route.

A good default strategy for a medium-sized site with a relatively stable local structure and a
connection to someone else’s net is to use a combination of static and dynamic routing. Routers
within the local structure that do not lead to external networks can use static routing, forwarding
all unknown packets to a default machine that understands the outside world and does dynamic
routing.

A network that is too complicated to be managed with this scheme should rely on dynamic
routing. Default static routes can still be used on leaf nets, but machines on networks with more
than one router should run routed or some other RIP receiver in passive mode.
15.6 ROUTING DAEMONS
You should not use UNIX and Linux systems as routers for production networks. Dedicated
routers are simpler, more reliable, more secure, and faster (even if they are secretly running a
Linux kernel). That said, it’s nice to be able to set up a new subnet with only a $6 network card
and a $20 switch. That’s a reasonable approach for lightly populated test and auxiliary networks.
Systems that act as gateways to such subnets don’t need any help managing their own routing
tables. Static routes are perfectly adequate, both for the gateway machine and for the machines
on the subnet itself. However, if you want the subnet to be reachable by other systems at your
site, you need to advertise the subnet’s existence and to identify the router to which packets
bound for that subnet should be sent. The usual way to do this is to run a routing daemon on the
gateway.

UNIX and Linux systems can participate in most routing protocols through various routing
daemons. The notable exception is EIGRP, which, as far as we are aware, has no widely
available UNIX or Linux implementation.
Because routing daemons are uncommon on production systems, we don’t describe their use and
configuration in detail. However, the following sections outline the common software options
and point to detailed configuration information.
routed: obsolete RIP implementation
routed was for a long time the only standard routing daemon, and it’s still included on a few
systems. routed speaks only RIP, and poorly at that: even support for RIPv2 is scattershot.
routed does not speak RIPng, implementation of that protocol being confined to modern
daemons such as Quagga.
Where available, routed is useful chiefly for its “quiet” mode (-q), in which it listens for routing
updates but does not broadcast any information of its own. Aside from the command-line flag,
routed normally does not require configuration. It’s an easy and cheap way to get routing
updates without having to deal with much configuration hassle.

     See this page for more about manual maintenance of routing tables.

routed adds its discovered routes to the kernel’s routing table. Routes must be reheard at least
every four minutes or they will be removed. However, routed knows which routes it has added
and does not remove static routes that were installed with the route or ip commands.
Quagga: mainstream routing daemon
Quagga (quagga.net) is a development fork of Zebra, a GNU project started by Kunihiro Ishiguro
and Yoshinari Yoshikawa to implement multiprotocol routing with a collection of independent
daemons instead of a single monolithic application. In real life, the quagga—a subspecies of
zebra last photographed in 1870—is extinct, but in the digital realm it is Quagga that survives
and Zebra that is no longer under active development.
Quagga currently implements RIP (all versions), OSPF (versions 2 and 3), and BGP. It runs on
Linux, FreeBSD, and several other platforms. Quagga is either installed by default or is available
as an optional package through the system’s standard software repository.
In the Quagga system, the core zebra daemon acts as a central clearing-house for routing
information. It manages the interaction between the kernel’s routing table and the daemons for
individual routing protocols (ripd, ripngd, ospfd, ospf6d, and bgpd). It also controls the flow of
routing information among protocols. Each daemon has its own configuration file in the
/etc/quagga directory.
You can connect to any of the Quagga daemons through a command-line interface (vtysh) to
query and modify its configuration. The command language itself is designed to be familiar to
users of Cisco’s IOS operating system; see the section on Cisco routers below for some
additional details. As in IOS, you use enable to enter “superuser” mode, config term to enter
configuration commands, and write to save your configuration changes back to the daemon’s
configuration file.

The official documentation at quagga.net is available in HTML or PDF form. Although
complete, it’s for the most part a workmanlike catalog of options and does not provide much of
an overview of the system. The real documentation action is at quagga.net/docs. Look there for
well-commented example configurations, FAQs, and tips.
Although the configuration files have a simple format, you’ll need to understand the protocols
you’re configuring and have some idea of which options you want to enable or configure. See the
recommended reading list here for some good books on routing protocols.
XORP: router in a box
XORP, the eXtensible Open Router Platform project, was started at around the same time as
Zebra, but its ambitions are more general. Instead of focusing on routing, XORP aims to emulate
all the functions of a dedicated router, including packet filtering and traffic management. Check
it out at xorp.org.
One interesting aspect of XORP is that in addition to running under several operating systems
(Linux, FreeBSD, macOS, and Windows Server), it’s also available as a live CD that runs
directly on PC hardware. The live CD is secretly based on Linux, but it does go a long way
toward turning a generic PC into a dedicated routing appliance.
15.7 CISCO ROUTERS
Routers made by Cisco Systems, Inc., are the de facto standard for Internet routing today. Having
captured over 56% of the router market, Cisco’s products are well known, and staff that know
how to operate them are relatively easy to find. Before Cisco, UNIX boxes with multiple network
interfaces were often used as routers. Today, dedicated routers are the favored gear to put in
datacom closets and above ceiling tiles where network cables come together.
Most of Cisco’s router products run an operating system called Cisco IOS, which is proprietary
and unrelated to UNIX. Its command set is rather large; the full documentation set fills up about
4.5 feet of shelf space. We could never fully cover Cisco IOS here, but knowing a few basics can
get you a long way.

By default, IOS defines two levels of access (user and privileged), both of which are password
protected. By default, you can simply ssh to a Cisco router to enter user mode.
You are prompted for the user-level access password:

Upon entering the correct password, you receive a prompt from Cisco’s EXEC command
interpreter.

At this prompt, you can enter commands such as show interfaces to see the router’s network
interfaces or show ? to list the other things you can see.
To enter privileged mode, type enable and when asked, type the privileged password. Once you
have reached the privileged level, your prompt ends in a #:

Be careful—you can do anything from this prompt, including erasing the router’s configuration
information and its operating system. When in doubt, consult Cisco’s manuals or one of the
comprehensive books published by Cisco Press.
You can type show running to see the current running configuration of the router and show
config to see the current nonvolatile configuration. Most of the time, these are the same.
Here’s a typical configuration:
The router configuration can be modified in a variety of ways. Cisco offers graphical tools that
run under some versions of UNIX/Linux and Windows. Real network administrators never use
these; the command prompt is always the sure bet. You can also scp a config file to or from a
router so you can edit it with your favorite editor.
To modify the configuration from the command prompt, type config term.

You can then type new configuration commands exactly as you want them to appear in the show
running output. For example, if you wanted to change the IP address of the Ethernet0 interface
in the configuration above, you could enter

When you’ve finished entering configuration commands, press <Control-Z> to return to the
regular command prompt. If you’re happy with the new configuration, enter write mem to save
the configuration to nonvolatile memory.
Here are some tips for a successful Cisco router experience:

      Name the router with the hostname command. This precaution helps prevent
      accidents caused by configuration changes to the wrong router. The hostname always
      appears in the command prompt.
      Always keep a backup router configuration on hand. You can scp or tftp the running
      configuration to another system each night for safekeeping.

      It’s often possible to store a copy of the configuration in NVRAM or on a removable
      jump drive. Do so!
      Control access to the router command line by putting access lists on the router’s
      VTYs (VTYs are like PTYs on a UNIX system). This precaution prevents unwanted
      parties from trying to break into your router.
      Control the traffic flowing through your networks (and possibly to the outside world)
      by setting up access lists on each router interface.
      Keep routers physically secure. It’s easy to reset the privileged password if you have
      physical access to a Cisco box.

If you have multiple routers and multiple router wranglers, check out the free tool RANCID from
shrubbery.net. With a name like RANCID it practically markets itself, but here’s the elevator
pitch: RANCID logs into your routers every night to retrieve their configuration files. It diffs the
configurations and lets you know about anything that’s changed. It also automatically keeps the
configuration files under revision control (see this page).
15.8 RECOMMENDED READING
PERLMAN, RADIA. Interconnections: Bridges, Routers, Switches, and Internetworking Protocols
(2nd Edition). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2000. This is the definitive work in this topic
area. If you buy just one book about networking fundamentals, this should be it. Also, don’t ever
pass up a chance to hang out with Radia—she’s a lot of fun and holds a shocking amount of
knowledge in her brain.
EDGEWORTH, BRAD, AARON FOSS, AND RAMIRO GARZA RIOS. IP Routing on Cisco IOS, IOS XE, and
IOS XR: An Essential Guide to Understanding and Implementing IP Routing Protocols.
Indianapolis, IN: Cisco Press, 2014.

HUITEMA, CHRISTIAN. Routing in the Internet (2nd Edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall
PTR, 2000. This book is a clear and well-written introduction to routing from the ground up. It
covers most of the protocols in common use and also some advanced topics such as multicasting.
There are many routing-related RFCs. Table 15.3 shows the main ones.

Table 15.3: Routing-related RFCs
