17 Single Sign-On

Both users and system administrators would like account information to magically propagate to
all an environment’s computers so that a user can log in to any system with the same credentials.
The common term for this feature is “single sign-on” (SSO), and the need for it is universal.
SSO involves two core security concepts: identity and authentication. A user identity is the
abstract representation of an individual who needs access to a system or an application. It
typically includes attributes such as a username, password, user ID, and email address.
Authentication is the act of proving that an individual is the legitimate owner of an identity.
This chapter focuses on SSO as a component of UNIX and Linux systems within a single
organization. For interorganizational SSO (such as might be needed to integrate your systems
with a Software-as-a-Service provider), several standards-based and commercial SSO solutions
are available. For those cases, we recommend learning about Security Assertion Markup
Language (SAML) as a first step on your journey.
17.1 CORE SSO ELEMENTS
Although there are many ways to set up SSO, four elements are typically required in every
scenario:

      A centralized directory store that contains user identity and authorization information.
      The most common solutions are directory services based on the Lightweight
      Directory Access Protocol (LDAP). In environments that mix Windows, UNIX, and
      Linux systems, the ever-popular Microsoft Active Directory service is a good choice.
      Active Directory includes a customized, nonstandard LDAP interface.
      A tool for managing user information in the directory. For native LDAP
      implementations, we recommend phpLDAPadmin or Apache Directory Studio. Both
      are easy-to-use, web-based tools that let you import, add, modify, and delete
      directory entries. If you’re a Microsoft Active Directory fan-person, you can use the
      Windows-native MMC snap-in “Active Directory Users and Computers” to manage
      information in the directory.

      A mechanism for authenticating user identities. You can authenticate users directly
      against an LDAP store, but it’s also common to use the Kerberos ticket-based
      authentication system originally developed at MIT. In Windows environments,
      Active Directory supplies LDAP access to user identities and uses a customized
      version of Kerberos for authentication.

      Authentication on modern UNIX and Linux systems goes through the Pluggable
      Authentication Module system, aka PAM. You can use the System Security Services
      Daemon (sssd) to aggregate access to user identity and authentication services, then
      point PAM at sssd.

      Centralized-identity-and-authentication-aware versions of the C library routines that
      look up user attributes. These routines (e.g., getpwent) historically read flat files such
      as /etc/passwd and /etc/group and answered queries from their contents. These days,
      the data sources are configured in the name service switch file, /etc/nsswitch.conf.

The security community is divided over whether authentication is most secure when performed
through LDAP or Kerberos. The road of life is paved with flat squirrels that couldn’t decide. Pick
an option and don’t look back.
Exhibit A illustrates the high-level relationships of the various components in a typical
configuration. This example uses Active Directory as the directory server. Note that both time
synchronization (NTP) and hostname mapping (DNS) are critical for environments that use
Kerberos because authentication tickets are time stamped and have a limited validity period.
Exhibit A: SSO components

In this chapter, we cover core LDAP concepts and introduce two specific LDAP servers for
UNIX and Linux. We then discuss the steps needed to make a machine use a centralized
directory service to process logins.
17.2 LDAP: “LIGHTWEIGHT” DIRECTORY SERVICES
A directory service is just a database, but one that makes a few assumptions. Any kind of data
that matches the assumptions is a candidate for inclusion in the directory. The basic assumptions
are as follows:

      Data objects are relatively small.
      The database will be widely replicated and cached.

      The information is attribute-based.
      Data are read often but written infrequently.
      Searching is a common operation.

The current IETF standards-track protocol that fills this role is the Lightweight Directory Access
Protocol (LDAP). Ironically, LDAP is anything but lightweight. It was originally a gateway
protocol that allowed TCP/IP clients to talk to an older directory service called X.500, which is
now obsolete.
Microsoft’s Active Directory is the most common instantiation of LDAP, and many sites use
Active Directory for both Windows and UNIX/Linux authentication. For environments in which
Active Directory isn’t a candidate, the OpenLDAP package (openldap.org) has become the
standard implementation. The 389 Directory Server (formerly known as the Fedora Directory
Server and the Netscape Directory Server) is also open source and can be found at port389.org.
The name derives from the fact that TCP port 389 is the default port for all LDAP
implementations.
Uses for LDAP
Until you’ve had some experience with it, LDAP can be a slippery fish to grab hold of. LDAP by
itself doesn’t solve any specific administrative problem. Today, the most common use of LDAP
is to act as a central repository for login names, passwords, and other account attributes.
However, LDAP can be used in many other ways:

      LDAP can store additional directory information about users, such as phone numbers,
      home addresses, and office locations.
      Most mail systems—including sendmail, Exim, and Postfix—can draw a large part
      of their routing information from LDAP. See this page for more information about
      using LDAP with sendmail.
      LDAP makes it easy for applications (even those written by other teams and
      departments) to authenticate users without having to worry about the exact details of
      account management.
      LDAP is well supported by common scripting languages such as Perl and Python
      through code libraries. Ergo, LDAP can be an elegant way to distribute configuration
      information for locally written scripts and administrative utilities.

      LDAP is well supported as a public directory service. Most major email clients can
      read user directories stored in LDAP. Simple LDAP searches are also supported by
      many web browsers through an LDAP URL type.
The structure of LDAP data
LDAP data takes the form of property lists, which are known in the LDAP world as “entries.”
Each entry consists of a set of named attributes (such as description or uid) along with those
attributes’ values. Every attribute can have multiple values. Windows users might recognize this
structure as being similar to that of the Windows registry.
As an example, here’s a typical (but simplified) /etc/passwd line expressed as an LDAP entry:

This notation is a simple example of LDIF, the LDAP Data Interchange Format, which is used by
most LDAP-related tools and server implementations. The fact that LDAP data can be easily
converted back and forth from plain text is part of the reason for its success.
Entries are organized into a hierarchy through the use of “distinguished names” (attribute name:
dn) that form a sort of search path. As in DNS, the “most significant bit” goes on the right. In the
example above, the DNS name navy.mil has structured the top levels of the LDAP hierarchy. It
has been broken down into two domain components (dc’s), “navy” and “mil,” but this is only one
of several common conventions.
Every entry has exactly one distinguished name. Entries are entirely separate from one another
and have no hierarchical relationship except as is implicitly defined by the dn attributes. This
approach enforces uniqueness and gives the implementation a hint as to how to efficiently index
and search the data. Various LDAP consumers use the virtual hierarchy defined by dn attributes,
but that’s more a data-structuring convention than an explicit feature of the LDAP system. There
are, however, provisions for symbolic links between entries and for referrals to other servers.
LDAP entries are typically schematized through the use of an objectClass attribute. Object classes
specify the attributes that an entry can contain, some of which may be required for validity. The
schemata also assign a data type to each attribute. Object classes nest and combine in the
traditional object-oriented fashion. The top level of the object class tree is the class named top,
which specifies merely that an entry must have an objectClass attribute.
Table 17.1 shows some common LDAP attributes whose meanings might not be immediately
apparent. These attributes are case-insensitive.

Table 17.1: Some common attribute names found in LDAP hierarchies
OpenLDAP: the traditional open source LDAP server
OpenLDAP is an extension of work originally done at the University of Michigan; it now
continues as an open source project. It’s shipped with most Linux distributions, although it is not
necessarily included in the default installation. The documentation is perhaps best described as
“brisk.”
In the OpenLDAP distribution, slapd is the standard LDAP server daemon. In an environment
with multiple OpenLDAP servers, slurpd runs on the master server and handles replication by
pushing changes out to slave servers. A selection of command-line tools enable the querying and
modification of LDAP data.
Setup is straightforward. First, create an /etc/openldap/slapd.conf file by copying the sample
installed with the Open-LDAP server. These are the lines you need to pay attention to:

The database format defaults to Berkeley DB, which is fine for data that will live within the
OpenLDAP system. You can use a variety of other back ends, including ad hoc methods such as
scripts that create the data on the fly.
suffix is your “LDAP basename.” It’s the root of your portion of the LDAP namespace, similar in
concept to your DNS domain name. In fact, this example illustrates the use of a DNS domain
name as an LDAP basename, which is a common practice.
rootdn is your administrator’s name, and rootpw is the administrator’s hashed password. Note that
the domain components leading up to the administrator’s name must also be specified. You can
use slappasswd to generate the value for this field; just copy and paste its output into the file.

Because of the presence of this password hash, make sure that the slapd.conf file is owned by
root and that its permissions are 600.
Edit /etc/openldap/ldap.conf to set the default server and basename for LDAP client requests.
It’s pretty straightforward—just set the argument of the host entry to the hostname of your server
and set the base to the same value as the suffix in the slapd.conf file. Make sure both lines are
uncommented. Here’s an example from atrust.com:

At this point, you can start up slapd simply by running it with no arguments.
389 Directory Server: alternative open source LDAP server
Like OpenLDAP, the 389 Directory Server (port389.org) is an extension of the work done at the
University of Michigan. However, it spent some years in the commercial world (at Netscape)
before returning as an open source project.
There are several reasons to consider the 389 Directory Server as an alternative to OpenLDAP,
but its superior documentation is one clear advantage. The 389 Directory Server comes with
several professional grade administration and use guides, including detailed installation and
deployment instructions.
A few other key features of the 389 Directory Server are

      Multimaster replication for fault tolerance and superior write performance
      Active Directory user and group synchronization

      A graphical console for all facets of user, group, and server management
      On-line, zero-downtime, LDAP-based update of schema, configuration, management,
      and in-tree Access Control Information (ACIs)

389 Directory Server has a much more active development community than does OpenLDAP.
We generally recommend it over OpenLDAP for new installations.
From an administrative standpoint, the structure and operation of the two open source servers are
strikingly similar. This fact is perhaps not too surprising since both packages were built on the
same original code base.
LDAP Querying
To administer LDAP, you need to be able to see and manipulate the contents of the database. The
phpLDAPadmin tool mentioned earlier is one of the nicer free tools for this purpose because it
gives you an intuitive point-and-click interface. If phpLDAPadmin isn’t an option, ldapsearch
(distributed with both OpenLDAP and 389 Directory Server) is an analogous command-line tool
that produces output in LDIF format. ldapsearch is especially good for use in scripts and for
debugging environments in which Active Directory is acting as the LDAP server.
The following example query uses ldapsearch to look up directory information for every user
whose cn starts with “ned.” In this case, there’s only one result. The meanings of the various
command-line flags are discussed below.

ldapsearch’s -h and -p flags specify the host and port of the LDAP server you want to query,
respectively.
You usually need to authenticate yourself to the LDAP server. In this case, the -x flag requests
simple authentication (as opposed to SASL). The -D flag identifies the distinguished name of a
user account that has the privileges needed to execute the query, and the -W flag makes
ldapsearch prompt for the corresponding password.
The -b flag tells ldapsearch where in the LDAP hierarchy to start the search. This parameter is
known as the baseDN; hence the b. By default, ldapsearch returns all matching entries below the
baseDN. You can tweak this behavior with the -s flag.

The last argument is a “filter,” which is a description of what you’re searching for. It doesn’t
require an option flag. This filter, cn=ned*, returns all LDAP entries that have a common name
that starts with “ned”. The filter is quoted to protect the star from shell globbing.
To extract all entries below a given baseDN, just use objectClass=* as the search filter—or leave
the filter out, since this is the default.
Any arguments that follow the filter select specific attributes to return. For example, if you added
mail givenName to the command line above, ldapsearch would return only the values of
matching attributes.
Conversion of passwd and group files to LDAP
If you are moving to LDAP and your existing user and group information is stored in flat files,
you may want to migrate your existing data. RFC2307 defines the standard mapping from
traditional UNIX data sets, such as the passwd and group files, into the LDAP namespace. It’s a
useful reference document for sysadmins who want to use LDAP in a UNIX environment, at
least in theory. In practice, the specifications are a lot easier for computers to read than for
humans; you’re better off looking at examples.
Padl Software offers a free set of Perl scripts that migrate existing flat files or NIS maps to
LDAP. It’s available from padl.com/OSS/MigrationTools.html, and the scripts are
straightforward to run. They can be used as filters to generate LDIF, or they can be run against a
live server to upload the data directly. For example, the migrate_group script converts this line
from /etc/group:

to the following LDIF:
17.3 USING DIRECTORY SERVICES FOR LOGIN
Once you have a directory service set up, complete the following configuration chores so your
system can enter SSO paradise:

      If you’re planning to use Active Directory with Kerberos, configure Kerberos and
      join the system to the Active Directory domain.
      Configure sssd to communicate with the appropriate identity and authentication
      stores (LDAP, Active Directory, or Kerberos).

      Configure the name service switch, nsswitch.conf, to use sssd as a source of user,
      group, and password information.
      Configure PAM to service authentication requests through sssd.

Some software uses the traditional getpwent family of library routines to look up user
information, whereas modern services often directly call the PAM authentication routines.
Configure both PAM and nsswitch.conf to ensure a fully functional environment.
We walk through these procedures below.
Kerberos
Kerberos is a ticket-based authentication system that uses symmetric key cryptography. Its recent
popularity has been driven primarily by Microsoft, which uses it as part of Active Directory and
Windows authentication. For SSO purposes, we describe how to integrate with an Active
Directory Kerberos environment on both Linux and FreeBSD. If you’re using an LDAP server
other than Active Directory or if you want to authenticate against Active Directory through the
LDAP path rather than the Kerberos path, you can skip to the discussion of sssd here.

     See this page for general information about Kerberos.

Linux Kerberos configuration for AD integration
Sysadmins often want their Linux systems to be members of an Active Directory domain. In the
past, the complexity of this configuration drove some of those sysadmins to drink. Fortunately,
the debut of realmd has made this task much simpler. realmd acts as a configuration tool for
both sssd and Kerberos.
     Before attempting to join an Active Directory domain, verify the following:

      realmd is installed on the Linux system you’re joining to the domain.
      sssd is installed (see below).
      ntpd is installed and running.

      You know the correct name of your AD domain.
      You have credentials for an AD account that is allowed to join systems to the
      domain. This action results in a Kerberos ticket-granting ticket (TGT) being issued to
      the system so that it can perform authentication operations going forward without
      access to an administrator’s password.

For example, if your AD domain name is ULSAH.COM and the AD account trent is allowed to
join systems to the domain, you can use the following command to join your system to the
domain:

You can then verify the result:
FreeBSD Kerberos configuration for AD integration
Kerberos is infamous for its complex configuration process, especially on the server side.
Unfortunately, FreeBSD has no slick tool akin to Linux’s realmd that configures Kerberos and
joins an Active Directory domain in one step. However, you need to set up only the client side of
Kerberos. The configuration file is /etc/krb5.conf.
    First, double-check that the system’s fully qualified domain name has been included in
    /etc/hosts and that NTP is configured and working. Then edit krb5.conf to add the realm as
shown in the following example. Substitute the name of your site’s AD domain for
ULSAH.COM.

Several values are of interest in the example above. A 5-minute clock skew is allowed even
though the time is set through NTP. This leeway allows the system to function even in the event
of an NTP problem. The default realm is set to the AD domain, and the key distribution center
(or KDC) is configured as an AD domain controller. krb5.log might come in handy for
debugging.
Request a ticket from the Active Directory controller by running the kinit command. Specify a
valid domain user account. The “administrator” account is usually a good test, but any account
will do. When prompted, type the domain password.

Use klist to show the Kerberos ticket:

If a ticket is displayed, authentication was successful. In this case, the ticket is valid for 10 hours
and can be renewed for 24 hours. You can use the kdestroy command to invalidate the ticket.
The last step is to join the system to the domain, as shown below. The administrator account used
(in this case, trent) must have the appropriate privileges on the Active Directory server to join
systems to the domain.

See the man page for krb5.conf for additional configuration options.
sssd: the System Security Services Daemon
         The UNIX and Linux road to SSO nirvana has been a rough one. Years ago, it was
         common to set up independent authentication for every service or application. This
         approach often resulted in a morass of separate configurations and undocumented
         dependencies that were impossible to manage over time. Users’ passwords would work
         with one application but not another, causing frustration for everyone.
Microsoft formerly published extensions (originally called “Services for UNIX,” then “Windows
Security and Directory Services for UNIX,” and finally, “Identity Management for UNIX” in
Windows Server 2012) that facilitated the housing of UNIX users and groups within Active
Directory. Putting the authority for managing these attributes in a non-UNIX system was an
unnatural fit, however. To the relief of many, Microsoft discontinued this feature as of Windows
Server 2016.
These issues needed some kind of comprehensive solution, and that’s just what we got with sssd,
the System Security Services Daemon. Available for both Linux and FreeBSD, sssd is a one-stop
shop for user identity wrangling, authentication, and account mapping. It can also cache
credentials off-line, which is useful for mobile devices. sssd supports authentication both through
native LDAP and through Kerberos.
You configure sssd through the sssd.conf file. Here’s a basic example for an environment that
uses Active Directory as the directory service:

If you are using a non-AD LDAP server, your sssd.conf file might look more like this:
For obvious security reasons, sssd does not allow authentication over an unencrypted channel, so
the use of LDAPS/TLS is required. Setting the tls_reqcert attribute to demand in the example above
forces sssd to validate the server certificate as an additional check. sssd drops the connection if
the certificate is found to be deficient.
Once sssd is up and running, you must tell the system to use it as the source for identity and
authentication information. Configuring the name service switch and configuring PAM are the
next steps in this process.
nsswitch.conf: the name service switch
The name service switch (NSS) was developed to ease selection among various configuration
databases and name resolution mechanisms. All the configuration goes into the
/etc/nsswitch.conf file.
The syntax is simple: for a given type of lookup, you simply list the sources in the order they
should be consulted. The system’s local passwd and group files should always be consulted first
(specified by files), but you can then punt to Active Directory or another directory service by way
of sssd (specified by sss). These entries do the trick:

Once you’ve configured the nsswitch.conf file, you can test the configuration with the command
getent passwd. This command prints the user accounts defined by all sources in /etc/passwd
format:

The only way to distinguish local users from domain accounts is by user ID and by the path of
the home directory, as seen in the last three entries above.
PAM: cooking spray or authentication wonder?
PAM stands for “pluggable authentication modules.” The PAM system relieves programmers of
the chore of implementing direct connections to authentication systems and gives sysadmins
flexible, modular control over the system’s authentication methods. Both the concept and the
term come from Sun Microsystems (now part of Oracle *sniff*) and from a 1996 paper by Samar
and Lai of SunSoft.
In the distant past, commands like login included hardwired authentication code that prompted
the user for a password, tested the password against the encrypted version obtained from
/etc/shadow (/etc/passwd at that time), and rendered a judgment as to whether the two
passwords matched. Of course, other commands (e.g., passwd) contained similar code. It was
impossible to change authentication methods without source code, and administrators had little or
no control over details such as whether the system should accept “password” as a valid password.
PAM changed all that.
PAM puts the system’s authentication routines into a shared library that login and other
programs can call. By separating authentication functions into a discrete subsystem, PAM makes
it easy to integrate new advances in authentication and encryption into the computing
environment. For instance, multifactor authentication is supported without changes to the source
code of login and passwd.
For the sysadmin, setting the right level of security for authentication has become a simple
configuration task. Programmers win, too, since they no longer have to write tedious
authentication code. More importantly, their authentication systems are implemented correctly on
the first try. PAM can authenticate all sorts of activities: user logins, other forms of system
access, use of protected web sites, even the configuration of applications.

PAM configuration
PAM configuration files are a series of one-liners, each of which names a particular PAM
module to be used on the system. The general format is

Fields are separated by whitespace.
The order in which modules appear in the PAM configuration file is important. For example, the
module that prompts the user for a password must come before the module that checks that
password for validity. One module can pass its output to the next by setting either environment
variables or PAM variables.
The module-type parameter—auth, account, session, or password—determines what the module is
expected to do. auth modules identify the user and grant group memberships. Modules that do
account chores enforce restrictions such as limiting logins to particular times of day, limiting the
number of simultaneous users, or limiting the ports on which logins can occur. (For example, you
would use an account-type module to restrict root logins to the console.) session chores include tasks
that are done before or after a user is granted access; for example, mounting the user’s home
directory. Finally, password modules change a user’s password or passphrase.

The control-flag specifies how the modules in the stack should interact to produce an ultimate
result for the stack. Table 17.2 shows the common values.

Table 17.2: PAM control flags

If PAM could simply return a failure code as soon as the first individual module in a stack failed,
the control-flags system would be simpler. Unfortunately, the system is designed so that most
modules get a chance to run regardless of their sibling modules’ success or failure, and this fact
causes some subtleties in the flow of control. (The intent is to prevent an attacker from learning
which module in the PAM stack caused the failure.)
required modules are required to succeed; a failure of any one of them guarantees that the stack as a
whole will eventually fail. However, the failure of a module that is marked required doesn’t
immediately stop execution of the stack. If you want that behavior, use the requisite control flag
instead of required.

The success of a sufficient module aborts the stack immediately. However, the ultimate result of the
stack isn’t guaranteed to be a success because sufficient modules can’t override the failure of earlier
required modules. If an earlier required module has already failed, a successful sufficient module aborts
the stack and returns failure as the overall result.

Before you modify your systems’ security settings, make sure you understand the system
thoroughly and that you double-check the particulars. (You won’t configure PAM every day.
How long will you remember which version is requisite and which is required?)

PAM example
An example /etc/pam.d/login file from a Linux system running sssd is reproduced below. We
expanded the included files to form a more coherent example.
The auth stack includes several modules. On the first line, the pam_nologin module checks for the
existence of the /etc/nologin file. If it exists, the module aborts the login immediately unless the
user is root. The pam_securetty module ensures that root can log in only on terminals listed in
/etc/securetty. This line uses an alternative Linux syntax described in the pam.conf man page. In
this case, the requested behavior is similar to that of the required control flag. pam_env sets
environment variables from /etc/security/pam_env.conf, then pam_unix2 checks the user’s
credentials by performing standard UNIX authentication. If the user doesn’t have a local UNIX
account, pam_sss attempts authentication through sssd. If any of these modules fail, the auth stack
returns an error.
The account stack includes only the pam_unix2 and pam_sss modules. In this context, they assess the
validity of the account itself. The modules return an error if, for example, the account has expired
or the password must be changed. In the latter case, the relevant module collects a new password
from the user and passes it on to the password modules.

The pam_pwcheck line checks the strength of proposed new passwords by calling the cracklib
library. It returns an error if a new password does not meet the requirements. However, it also
allows empty passwords because of the nullok flag. The pam_unix2 and pam_sss lines update the actual
password.
Finally, the session modules perform several housekeeping chores. pam_loginuid sets the kernel’s
loginuid process attribute to the user’s UID. pam_limits reads resource usage limits from
/etc/security/limits.conf and sets the corresponding process parameters that enforce them.
pam_unix2 and pam_sss log the user’s access to the system, and pam_umask sets an initial file creation
mode. The pam_lastlog module displays the user’s last login time as a security check, and the
pam_mail module prints a note if the user has new mail. Finally, pam_ck_connector notifies the
ConsoleKit daemon (a system-wide daemon that manages login sessions) of the new login.
At the end of the process, the user has been successfully authenticated and PAM returns control
to login.
17.4 ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES
Although LDAP is currently the most popular method for centralizing user identity and
authentication information within an organization, many other approaches have emerged over the
decades. Two older options, NIS and rsync, are still in use in some isolated pockets.
NIS: the Network Information Service
NIS, released by Sun in the 1980s, was the first “prime time” administrative database. It was
originally called the Sun Yellow Pages, but eventually had to be renamed for legal reasons. NIS
commands still begin with the letters yp, so it’s hard to forget the original name. NIS was widely
adopted and is still supported in both FreeBSD and Linux.
These days, however, NIS is an old gray mare. NIS should not be used for new deployments, and
existing deployments should be migrated to a modern day alternative such as LDAP.
rsync: transfer files securely
rsync, written by Andrew Tridgell and Paul Mackerras, is a bit like a souped-up version of scp
that is scrupulous about preserving links, modification times, and permissions. It is network
efficient because it looks inside individual files and attempts to transmit only the differences
between versions.
One quick-and-dirty approach to distributing files such as /etc/passwd and /etc/group is to set up
a cron job to rsync them from a master server. Although this scheme is easy to set up and might
be useful in a pinch, it requires that all changes be applied directly to the master, including user
password changes.
As an example, the command

transfers the /etc/passwd and /etc/shadow files to the machine lollipop. The -gopt options
preserve the permissions, ownerships, and modification times of the file. rsync uses ssh as the
transport, and so the connection is encrypted. However, sshd on lollipop must be configured not
to require a password if you want to run this command from a script. Of course, such a setup has
significant security implications. Coder beware!
With the --include and --exclude flags you can specify a list of regular expressions to match
against filenames, so you can set up a sophisticated set of transfer criteria. If the command line
gets too unwieldy, you can read the patterns from separate files with the --include-file and --
exclude-file options.
Configuration management tools such as Ansible are another common way to distribute files
among systems. See Chapter 23, Configuration Management, for more details.
17.5 RECOMMENDED READING
A good general introduction to LDAP is LDAP for Rocket Scientists, which covers LDAP
architecture and protocol. Find it on-line at zytrax.com/books/ldap. Another good source of
information is the LDAP-related RFCs, which are numerous and varied. As a group, they tend to
convey an impression of great complexity, which is somewhat unrepresentative of average use.
Table 17.3 list some of the most important of these RFCs.

Table 17.3: Important LDAP-related RFCs

In addition, there are a couple of oldie-but-goodie books on LDAP:
CARTER, GERALD. LDAP System Administration. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2003.
VOGLMAIER, REINHARD. The ABCs of LDAP: How to Install, Run, and Administer LDAP Services.
Boca Raton, FL: Auerbach Publications, 2004.

There’s also a decent book focused entirely on PAM:
LUCAS, MICHAEL. PAM Mastery. North Charleston, SC: CreateSpace, 2016.
Finally, the O’Reilly book on Active Directory is excellent:
DESMOND, BRIAN, JOE RICHARDS, ROBBIE ALLEN, AND ALISTAIR G. LOWE-NORRIS. Active Directory:
Designing, Deploying, and Running Active Directory. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2013.
