19 Web Hosting

UNIX and Linux are the predominant platforms for serving web applications. According to data
from w3techs.com, 67% of the top one million web sites are served by either Linux or FreeBSD.
Above the OS level, open source web server software commands more than 80% of the market.
At scale, web applications do not run on a single system. Instead, a collection of software
components distributed through a meshwork of systems cooperate to answer requests as quickly
and as flexibly as possible. Each piece of this architecture must be resilient to server failures,
load spikes, network partitions, and targeted attacks.
Cloud infrastructure helps address these needs. Its ability to provision capacity quickly in
response to demand is an ideal match for the sudden and sometimes unexpected tidal waves of
users that materialize on the web. In addition, cloud providers’ add-on services include a variety
of convenient recipes that meet common requirements, greatly simplifying the design,
deployment, and operation of web systems.
19.1 HTTP: THE HYPERTEXT TRANSFER PROTOCOL
HTTP is the core network protocol for communication on the web. Lurking beneath a
deceptively simple facade of stateless requests and responses lie layers of refinements that bring
both flexibility and complexity. A well-rounded understanding of HTTP is a core competency for
all system administrators.
In its simplest form, HTTP is a client/server, one-request/one-response protocol. Clients, also
called user agents, submit requests for resources to an HTTP server. Servers receive incoming
requests and process them by retrieving files from local disks, resubmitting them to other servers,
querying databases, or performing any number of other possible computations. A typical page
view on the web entails dozens or hundreds of such exchanges.

As with most Internet protocols, HTTP has adapted over time, albeit slowly. The centrality of the
protocol to the modern Internet makes updates a high-stakes proposition. Official revisions are a
slog of committee meetings, mailing list negotiations, public review periods, and maneuvering by
stakeholders with vested and conflicting interests. During the long gaps between official
revisions documented in RFCs, unofficial protocol extensions are born from necessity, become
ubiquitous, and are eventually included as features in the next specification.
HTTP versions 1.0 and 1.1 are sent over the wire in plain text. Adventurous administrators can
interact with servers directly by running telnet or netcat. They can also observe and collect
HTTP exchanges by using protocol-agnostic packet capture software such as tcpdump.

     See this page for general information about TLS.

The web is in the process of adopting HTTP/2, a major protocol revision that preserves
compatibility with previous versions but introduces a variety of performance improvements. In
an effort to promote the universal use of HTTPS (secure, encrypted HTTP) for the next
generation of the web, major browsers such as Firefox and Chrome have elected to support
HTTP/2 only over TLS-encrypted connections.

HTTP/2 moves from plain text to binary format in an effort to simplify parsing and improve
network efficiency. HTTP’s semantics remain the same, but because the transmitted data is no
longer directly legible to humans, generic tools such as telnet are no longer useful. The handy
h2i command-line utility, part of the Go language networking repository at
github.com/golang/net, helps restore some interactivity and debuggability to HTTP/2
connections. Many HTTP-specific tools such as curl also support HTTP/2 natively.
Uniform Resource Locators (URLs)
A URL is an identifier that specifies how and where to access a resource. URLs are not HTTP-
specific; they are used for other protocols as well. For example, mobile operating systems use
URLs to facilitate communication among apps.
You may sometimes see the acronyms URI (Uniform Resource Identifier) and URN (Uniform
Resource Name) used as well. The exact distinctions and taxonomic relationships among URLs,
URIs, and URNs are vague and unimportant. Stick with “URL.”
The general pattern for URLs is scheme:address, where scheme identifies the protocol or system
being targeted and address is some string that’s meaningful within that scheme. For example, the
URL mailto:ulsah@admin.com encapsulates an email address. If it’s invoked as a link target on
the web, most browsers will bring up a preaddressed window for sending mail.
For the web, the relevant schemes are http and https. In the wild, you might also see the schemes
ws (WebSockets), wss (WebSockets over TLS), ftp, ldap, and many others.

The address portion of a web URL allows quite a bit of interior structure. Here’s the overall
pattern:
  scheme://[username:password@]hostname[:port][/path][?query][#anchor]
All the elements are optional except scheme and hostname.

    See this page for more details about HTTP basic authentication.

The use of a username and password in the URL enables “HTTP basic authentication,” which is
supported by most user agents and servers. In general, it’s a bad idea to embed passwords into
URLs because URLs are apt to be logged, shared, bookmarked, visible in ps output, etc. User
agents can get their credentials from a source other than the URL, and that is typically a better
option. In a web browser, just leave the credentials out and let the browser prompt you for them
separately.
HTTP basic authentication is not self-securing, which means that the password is accessible to
anyone who listens in on the transaction. Therefore, basic authentication should really only be
used over secure HTTPS connections.
The hostname can be a domain name or IP address as well as an actual hostname. The port is the
TCP port number to connect to. The http and https schemes default to ports 80 and 443,
respectively.
The query section can include multiple parameters separated by ampersands. Each parameter is a
key=value pair. For example, Adobe InDesign users may find the following URL eerily familiar:
  http://adobe.com/search/index.cfm?term=indesign+crash&loc=en_us
As with passwords, sensitive data should never appear as a URL query parameter because URL
paths are often logged as plain text. The alternative is to transmit parameters as part of the
request body. (You can’t really control this in other people’s web software, but you can make
sure your own site behaves properly.)

The anchor component identifies a subtarget of a specific URL. For example, Wikipedia uses
named anchors extensively as section headings, allowing specific parts of an entry to be linked to
directly.
Structure of an HTTP transaction
HTTP requests and responses are similar in structure. After an initial line, both include a
sequence of headers, a blank line, and finally, the body of the message, called the payload.

HTTP requests
The first line of a request specifies an action for the server to perform. It consists of a request
method (also known as the verb), a path on which to perform the action, and the HTTP version to
use. For example, a request to retrieve a top-level HTML page might look like this:

Table 19.1 shows the common HTTP request methods. Verbs marked as “safe” should not
change the server’s state. However, this is more a convention than a mandate. It’s ultimately up
to the software that handles the request to decide how to interpret the verb.

Table 19.1: HTTP request methods

GET is by far the most commonly used HTTP verb, followed by POST. REST APIs, discussed in
Application programming interfaces (APIs), are more likely to employ the more exotic verbs
such as PUT and DELETE.
The distinction between POST and PUT is subtle and largely of concern to web API developers.
PUTs should be idempotent, meaning that a PUT can be repeated without causing ill effects. For
example, a transaction that causes the server to send email should not be represented as a PUT.
The rules for HTTP caching also differ significantly between PUT and POST. See RFC2616 for
more details.

HTTP responses
The initial line in a response, called the status line, indicates the disposition of the request. It
looks like this:
The important part is the three-digit numeric status code. The phrase that follows it is a helpful
English translation that software ignores.
The first digit in the code determines its class; that is, the general nature of the result. Table 19.2
shows the five defined classes. Within a class, additional detail is provided by the remaining two
digits. More than 60 status codes are defined, but only a few of these are commonly seen in the
wild.

Table 19.2: HTTP response classes

Headers and the message body
Headers specify metadata about a request or response, such as whether to allow compression;
what types of content are accepted, expected, or provided; and how intermediate caches should
handle the data. For requests, the only required header is Host, which is used by web server
software to determine which site is being contacted.
Table 19.3 shows some common headers.

Table 19.3: Commonly encountered HTTP headers
Table 19.3 is by no means a definitive list. In fact, both sides of the transaction can include any
headers they wish. Both sides must ignore headers they don’t understand. By convention, custom
and experimental headers were originally prefixed with “X-”. But some X- headers (such as X-
Forwarded-For) became de facto standards, and it was then infeasible to remove the prefix
because that would break compatibility. The use of X- is now deprecated by RFC6648.
Headers are separated from the message body by a blank line. For requests, the body can include
parameters (for POST or PUT requests) or the contents of a file to upload. For responses, the
message body is the payload of the resource being requested (e.g., HTML, image data, or query
results). The message body is not necessarily human-readable, since it can contain images or
other binary data. The body can also be empty, as for GET requests or most error responses.
curl: HTTP from the command line
curl (cURL) is a handy command-line HTTP client that’s available for most platforms.
(Administrators will also encounter libcurl, a client library that developers can use to give their
own software curl-like superpowers.) Here, we use curl to explore an HTTP exchange.
Below is an invocation of curl that requests the root of the web site admin.com on TCP port 80,
which is the default for unencrypted (non-HTTPS) requests. The response payload (i.e., the
admin.com homepage) and some informative messages from curl itself have been hidden by the
-o /dev/null and -s flags. We also include the -v flag to request that curl display verbose output,
which includes headers.

Lines starting with > and < denote the request and response, respectively. In the request, the
client tells the server that the user agent is curl, that it’s looking for host admin.com, and that it
will accept any type of content as a response. The server identifies itself as Apache 2.4.7 and
replies with contents of type HTML, along with a variety of other metadata.
We can set headers explicitly with curl’s -H argument. This feature is especially handy for
making requests directly against IP addresses, bypassing DNS. For example, we could check that
the server for www.admin.com responds identically to requests targeted at admin.com by setting
the Host header, which informs the remote server of the domain the user agent is attempting to
contact:
We use the -O argument to download a file. This example downloads a tarball of the curl source
code to the current directory:

We’ve only scratched the surface of curl’s capabilities. It can handle other request methods such
as POST and DELETE, store and submit cookies, download files, and assist with many different
debugging scenarios.
Google’s Chrome browser offers a feature called “Copy as cURL” that creates a curl command
to simulate the browser’s own behavior, including headers, cookies, and other details. You can
easily retry requests with various adjustments and see the results exactly as the browser would.
(Right-click a resource name in the Network tab of the developer tools panel to uncover this
option.)
TCP connection reuse
TCP connections are expensive. In addition to the memory needed to maintain them, the three-
way handshake used to establish each new connection adds latency equivalent to a full round trip
before an HTTP request can even begin. (TCP Fast Open is a proposal that aims to improve this
situation by allowing the SYN and SYN-ACK packets of TCP’s three-way handshake to also
carry data. See RFC7413.)
The HTTP Archive, a project that tracks web statistics, estimates that the average site incurs
requests for 99 resources per page load. If each resource required a new TCP connection, the
performance of the web would be atrocious indeed. This was in fact the case early in the life of
the web.
The original HTTP/1.0 specification did not include any provisions for connection reuse, but
some adventurous developers added experimental support as an extension. The Connection:
Keep-Alive header was added informally to clients and servers, then improved and made the
default in HTTP/1.1. With keep-alive (also known as persistent) connections, HTTP clients and
servers send multiple requests over a single connection, thus saving some of the cost and latency
of initiating and tearing down multiple connections.
TCP overhead turns out to be nontrivial even when HTTP/1.1 persistent connections are enabled.
Most browsers open as many as six parallel connections to the server to improve performance.
Busy servers in turn must maintain many thousands of TCP connections in various states,
resulting in network congestion and wasted resources.

HTTP/2 introduces multiplexing as a solution, allowing several transactions to be interleaved on
a single connection. HTTP/2 servers can therefore support more clients per system, since each
client imposes lower overhead.
HTTP over TLS
On its own, HTTP provides no network-level security. The URL, headers, and payload are open
to inspection and modification at any point between the client and server. A malevolent infiltrator
can intercept messages, alter their contents, or redirect requests to servers of its choice.
Enter Transport Layer Security (TLS), which runs as a separate layer between TCP and HTTP.
TLS supplies only the security and encryption for the connection; it does not involve itself at the
HTTP layer.
The precursor of TLS was known as SSL, the Secure Sockets Layer. All versions of SSL are
obsolete and formally deprecated, but the name SSL remains in wide colloquial use. Outside of
cryptographic contexts, assume that references to SSL really mean TLS.
The user agent verifies the server’s identity as part of the TLS connection process, eliminating
the possibility of spoofing by counterfeit servers. Once the connection is established, its contents
are protected against snooping and modification for the duration of the exchange. Attackers can
still see the host and port used at the TCP layer, but they cannot access HTTP details such as the
URL of a request or the headers that accompany it.

See Transport Layer Security for more details on TLS cryptography.
Virtual hosts
In the early days of the web, a server typically hosted only a single web site. When admin.com
was requested, for example, clients performed a DNS lookup to find the IP address associated
with that name and then sent an HTTP request to port 80 at that address. The server at that
address knew that it was dedicated to hosting admin.com and served results accordingly.
As web use increased, administrators realized that they could achieve economies of scale if a
single server could host more than one site at once. But how do you distinguish requests bound
for admin.com from those bound for example.com if both kinds of traffic end up at the same
network port?
One possibility is to define virtual network interfaces, effectively permitting several different IP
addresses to be bound to a single physical connection. Most systems allow this, and it works fine,
but the scheme is fiddly and requires management at several different layers.
A better solution, virtual hosts, was provided by HTTP 1.1 in RFC2616. This scheme defines a
Host HTTP header that user agents set explicitly to indicate what site they’re attempting to
contact. Servers examine the header and behave accordingly. This convention conserves IP
addresses and simplifies management, especially for sites that have hundreds or thousands of
web sites on a single server.

HTTP 1.1 requires user agents to provide a Host header, so virtual hosts are now the standard
way that web servers and administrators handle server consolidation.
The use of name-based virtual hosts in combination with TLS is a bit tricky under the hood. TLS
certificates are issued to specific hostnames, which are chosen when the certificate is generated.
A TLS connection must be established before the server can read the Host header from the HTTP
request, but without that header, the server does not know which virtual host it should be
impersonating, and hence, which certificate to select.
The solution is SNI, Server Name Indication, in which the client submits the hostname that it’s
requesting as part of the initial TLS connection message. Modern servers and clients all handle
SNI automatically.
19.2 WEB SOFTWARE BASICS
A rich library of open source software facilitates the construction of flexible, resilient web
applications. Table 19.4 lists a few general categories of services that speak HTTP and perform
specific functions within the web application stack.

Table 19.4: Partial list of HTTP server types

A web proxy is an intermediary that receives HTTP requests from clients, optionally performs
some processing, and relays the requests to their ultimate destination. Proxies are normally
transparent to clients. Load balancers, web application firewalls, and cache servers are all
specialized types of proxy servers. A web server also acts as a sort of proxy if it relays requests
to application servers.
Exhibit A illustrates the role that each service plays in an HTTP exchange. Requests can be
fulfilled higher in the stack if the requested resource can be satisfied, or rejected with a 4xx or
5xx code if a problem occurs. Requests that require a query to the database traverse every layer.

Exhibit A: Components of a web application stack
To maximize availability, each layer should run on more than one node simultaneously. Ideally,
redundancy should span geographical regions so that the overall design is not dependent on any
single physical data center. This goal is a lot easier to achieve when you build on a cloud
platform that offers well-defined geographic regions as a fundamental building block (as most
do).
Real-world architectures aren’t usually as straightforward as Exhibit A suggests. In addition,
most web software components perform functions in more than one area. NGINX is best known
as a web server, for example, but it’s also a highly capable cache and load balancer. An NGINX
web server with caching features enabled is more efficient than a stack of separate servers
running on individual virtual machines.
Web servers and HTTP proxy software
Most sites use web servers either to proxy HTTP connections to application servers or to serve
static content directly. A few of the features provided by web servers include

      Virtual hosts, allowing many sites to coexist peacefully within a single server
      Handling of TLS connections
      Configurable logging that tracks requests and responses
      HTTP basic authentication

      Routing to different downstream systems according to requested URLs
      Execution of dynamic content through application servers

The leading open source web servers are the Apache HTTP Server, known colloquially as httpd,
and NGINX, which is pronounced “engine X.”
Netcraft, an English Internet research and security company, publishes monthly market share
statistics for web servers. As of June 2017, Netcraft shows that around 46% of active web sites
run Apache. NGINX accounts for 20% and has been steadily rising since 2008.
Apache httpd is the original project from the Apache Software Foundation, now known for
supporting a variety of excellent open source projects. httpd has been under active development
since 1995 and is widely regarded as the reference HTTP server implementation.

NGINX is a versatile server designed for speed and efficiency. Like httpd, NGINX supports
service of static web content, load balancing, monitoring of downstream servers, proxying,
caching, and other related functions.
Some development systems, notably Node.js and the language Go, implement web servers
internally and can handle many HTTP workflows without the need for a separate web server.
These systems incorporate sophisticated connection management features and are robust enough
for production workloads.
The H2O server (h2o.examp1e.net; note the numeral one in “examp1e”) is a newer web server
project that takes full advantage of HTTP/2 features and achieves even better performance than
NGINX. Because it was first released in 2014, it can’t claim the track record of Apache or
NGINX. On the other hand, neither is it constrained by historical implementation decisions as is
httpd. It’s certainly worth a look for new deployments.
It’s hard to make strong recommendations among these options because they’re all quite good.
That said, for mainstream production use, we suggest NGINX. It offers exceptional performance
and a relatively simple and modern configuration system.
Load balancers
You can’t run a highly available web site on a single server. Not only does this configuration
expose your users to every potential hiccup experienced by the server, but it also gives you no
way to update the software, operating system, or configuration without downtime.
Single servers are also exquisitely vulnerable to load spikes and intentional attacks. The more
overloaded a server becomes, the more time it spends thrashing instead of getting useful work
done. Past a certain load threshold (one that you will have to discover through bitter experience!),
performance craters abruptly rather than degrading gracefully.
To avoid these problems, you can use a load balancer, which is a type of proxy server that
distributes incoming requests among a set of downstream web servers. Load balancers also
monitor the status of those servers to ensure that they are providing timely and correct responses.
Exhibit B shows the placement of load balancers in an architecture diagram.

Exhibit B: The role of a load balancer

Load balancers solve many of the problems inherent in a single-system design:

      Load balancers do not process requests but merely route them to other systems. As a
      result, they can handle many more concurrent requests than does a typical web server.

      When a web server needs a software upgrade or has to be taken off-line for any other
      reason, it can easily be removed from the rotation.
      If one of the servers experiences a problem, the health-check mechanism on the load
      balancer detects the problem and removes the errant system from the server pool until
      it becomes healthy again.
To avoid becoming single points of failure themselves, load balancers usually run in pairs.
Depending on the configuration, one balancer might act as a passive backup while the other
serves live traffic, or both balancers might serve requests simultaneously.
The way that requests are distributed is usually configurable. Here are a few common algorithms:

      Round robin, in which requests are distributed among the active servers in a fixed
      rotation order

      Load equalization, in which new requests go to the downstream server that’s
      currently handling the smallest number of connections or requests
      Partitioning, in which the load balancer selects a server according to a hash of the
      client’s IP address. This method ensures that requests from the same client always
      reach the same web server.

Load balancers normally operate at layer four of the OSI model, in which they route requests
based just on the IP address and port of the request. However, they can also operate at layer
seven by inspecting requests and routing them according to their target URL, cookie values, or
other HTTP headers. For example, requests for example.com/linux might route to a separate set
of servers than do requests for example.com/bsd.

     See this page for more information about network DMZs (demilitarized zones).

As an added bonus, load balancers can improve security. They usually reside in the DMZ portion
of a network and proxy requests to web servers behind an internal firewall. If HTTPS is in use,
they also perform TLS termination: the connection from the client to the load balancer uses TLS,
but the connection from the load balancer to the web server can be vanilla HTTP. This
arrangement offloads some processing overhead from the web servers.

Load balancers can distribute other kinds of traffic in addition to (or instead of) HTTP. A
common use is to add a load balancer that distributes requests to databases such as MySQL or
Redis.
The most common open source load balancers for UNIX and Linux are NGINX, already
introduced as a web server, and HAProxy, a high-performance TCP and HTTP proxy beloved by
veteran administrators for its flexible configuration, stability, and robust performance. Both are
excellent and well documented, and both have large user communities. (Apache httpd also has a
load-balancing module, though we haven’t seen it used as widely.)
Commercial load balancers such as those from F5 and Citrix are available both as hardware
devices to be installed in a data center and as software solutions. They typically offer a graphical
configuration interface, more features than open source tools, extra functions in addition to
straightforward load balancing, and hefty price tags.
Amazon offers a dedicated load-balancing service, the Elastic Load Balancer (ELB), for use with
EC2 virtual machines. ELB is a completely managed service; no virtual machine is required for
the load balancer itself. ELB handles an extremely large number of concurrent connections and
can balance traffic among multiple availability zones.
In ELB terminology, a “listener” accepts connections from clients and proxies them to back-end
EC2 instances that do the actual work. Listeners can proxy TCP, HTTP, or HTTPS traffic. The
load is distributed according to the “least connections” algorithm.

ELB is not the most fully featured load balancer, but it is our recommended solution for AWS-
hosted systems because it requires virtually no administrative attention.
Caches
Web caches were born from the observation that clients often repeatedly access the same content
within a short time. Caches live between clients and web servers and store the results of the most
frequent requests, sometimes in memory. They can then intervene to answer requests for which
they know the correct response, reducing load on the authoritative web servers and improving
response times for users.
In caching jargon, an origin is the original content provider, the source of truth about the content.
Caches get their content directly from the origin or from another upstream cache.
Several factors determine caching behavior:

      The values of HTTP headers, including Cache-Control, ETag, and Expires
      Whether the request is served by HTTPS, for which caching is more nuanced

      The response status code; some are not cacheable (see RFC2616)
      The contents of HTML <meta> tags (not respected by all caches)

Static blobs such as images, videos, CSS stylesheets, and JavaScript files are well suited to
caching because they rarely change. Dynamic content loaded from a database or another system
in real time is more difficult—but not necessarily impossible—to cache.
Because HTTPS payloads are encrypted, responses cannot be cached unless the cache server
terminates the TLS connection, decrypting the payload. The connection from the cache server to
the origin may then require a separately encrypted TLS connection (or not, depending on whether
the connection between the two is trusted).
For highly variable pages that should never be cached, developers set the following HTTP
header:

Exhibit C shows the placement of several potential cache layers in an HTTP request.

Exhibit C: Caching players involved in handling an HTTP request
Browser caches
All modern web browsers save recently used resources (images, stylesheets, JavaScript files, and
some HTML pages) locally to speed up backtracking and return visits.
In theory, browser caches should follow exactly the same caching rules as does any other HTTP
cache. This is why your browser’s Back button usually evinces a slight lag instead of zipping you
instantly to the previous page. Even though most of the resources needed to render the page are
cached locally, the page’s top-level HTML wrapper is typically dynamic and uncacheable, so a
round trip to the server is still required. The browser could simply rerender the materials on hand
from the previous visit—and one or two used to do that—but this shortcut breaks the correctness
of caching and leads to a variety of subtle problems.

Proxy cache
You can install a proxy cache at the edge of an organization’s network to speed up access for all
users. When a user loads a web site, the requests are first received by the proxy cache. If a
requested resource is cached, that resource is immediately returned to the user without the remote
site being consulted.

You can configure a proxy cache in two ways: actively, by changing users’ browser settings to
point to the proxy; or passively, by having a network router send all web traffic through the
cache server. The latter configuration is known as an intercepting proxy. There are also methods
by which user agents can automatically discover the relevant proxies.

Reverse proxy cache
Web site operators configure a “reverse proxy” cache to offload traffic from their web and
application servers. Incoming requests are first routed to the reverse proxy cache, from which
they may be served immediately if the requested resources are available. The reverse proxy
passes requests for uncached resources along to the appropriate web server.
Server sites use reverse proxy caches primarily because they reduce load on the origin servers.
They may also have the beneficial side effect of speeding response times for clients.

Cache problems
Web caches are tremendously important to the performance of the web, but they also introduce
complexity. A problem at any caching layer can introduce stale content that is out of date with
respect to the origin server. Cache problems can befuddle both users and administrators and are
sometimes difficult to debug.
Stale cache entries are best detected by a direct query at each hop along the path. If you are the
site operator, try using curl to request a problematic page directly from the origin, then from the
reverse proxy cache, and if applicable, from the proxy cache and from any other caches in the
request path.
You can use curl -H "Cache-Control: no-cache" to politely request a cache refresh. This is the
same as invoking <Shift-Reload> in a web browser. Conformant caches will obey, but if you’re
still seeing old data, don’t assume that your reload request has been honored unless you can
prove it on the server.

Cache software
Table 19.5 lists a few of the open source caching software implementations. Of these, we find
ourselves using NGINX most frequently. Its caching is easy to configure, and NGINX is often
already in use as a proxy or web server.

Table 19.5: Open source caching software
Content delivery networks
A content delivery network (CDN) is a globally distributed system that improves web
performance by moving content closer to users. Nodes in a CDN are dispersed geographically to
hundreds or thousands of locations. When clients request content from a site that uses a CDN,
they are routed to the closest node (called an edge server), thereby decreasing latency and
reducing congestion for the origin.
Edge servers are similar to proxy caches. They store copies of content locally. If they don’t have
a local copy of a requested resource or if their version of the content has expired, they retrieve
the resource from the origin, respond to the client, and update their cache.
CDNs use DNS to redirect clients to the geographically nearest host. Exhibit D explains how it
works.

Exhibit D: The role of DNS in a content delivery network

CDNs can now host dynamic content, but traditionally they have been best suited to static
content such as images, stylesheets, JavaScript libraries, HTML files, and downloadable objects.
Streaming services like Netflix and YouTube use CDNs to serve large media files.
CDNs also offer value beyond performance improvements. Most CDNs provide security services
such as denial-of-service attack prevention and web application firewalls. Some specialty CDNs
offer other innovations that optimize page rendering and reduce the load on origin servers.

A substantial portion of content on the web today is served by CDNs. If you’re at a large site,
expect to pull out your pocketbook to pay for the privilege of fast performance. If you run a
smaller service, optimize your local caching layers before turning to a CDN.
One of the oldest and most prestigious (read: expensive) CDNs is Akamai, headquartered in
Massachusetts. Akamai counts some of the world’s largest governments and businesses among
its customers. It has the largest global network as well as some of the most advanced CDN
features. Nobody was ever fired for choosing Akamai.
CloudFlare is another popular CDN. Unlike Akamai, CloudFlare has a history of selling to
smaller customers, although their target market has more recently shifted to enterprise. Pricing is
listed clearly on their web site, and they offer some of the best security features available.
CloudFlare was one of the first large-scale providers to deploy HTTP/2 for all its customers.
Amazon’s CDN service is called CloudFront. It integrates with other AWS services such as S3,
EC2, and ELB, but can also work for sites hosted outside of Amazon’s cloud. As with other
AWS products, pricing is competitive and metered by usage.
Languages of the web
The web has evolved from being mostly static to a rich, interactive experience. The web apps
that enable this bounty are coded in a variety of programming languages, each with associated
tooling and unique quirks. Administrators need to manage software libraries, install application
servers, and configure web applications according to the standards established for each
language’s ecosystem.
All the languages mentioned in the following sections are in common use on the web today. They
all feature engaged communities of developers, extensive support libraries, and well-documented
best practices. Sites typically choose whichever languages and frameworks their teams are most
comfortable with.

Ruby

       See the section starting here for a short summary of Ruby.

Ruby is well known in DevOps and system administration circles for its use in Chef and Puppet.
It’s also the language of Ruby on Rails, a widely used web framework. Rails is a good choice for
rapid development processes and is often used for prototyping new ideas.

Rails has a reputation for mediocre performance and for fostering monolithic applications. Over
time, many Rails applications tend to accumulate baggage that makes them harder to modify; the
end result is often a gradual performance sag over time.
Ruby features a large collection of libraries called gems that developers can use to simplify their
projects. Most are hosted at rubygems.org. They are curated by the community, but many are of
marginal quality. Managing a system’s installed versions of Ruby and its various gem
dependencies can be both tedious and troublesome.

Python

       See the section starting here for a short summary of Python.

Python is a general-purpose language used not only in web development but also in a wide swath
of scientific disciplines. It’s easy to read and to learn. The most widely deployed web framework
for Python is Django, which has many of the same benefits and drawbacks as Ruby on Rails.

Java
Java, now controlled by Oracle, is used most often in enterprise environments with slower
development workflows. Java offers fast performance at the expense of complex, clunky tooling
and many layers of abstraction. Java’s challenging license requirements and obtuse conventions
can frustrate neophytes.

Node.js
JavaScript is known first and foremost as a client-side scripting language that runs within web
browsers. As a language, it has been ridiculed as hastily designed, difficult to read, and
frequently counterintuitive. Now, Node.js—an engine for executing JavaScript on servers—
brings JavaScript to the data center as well.
To be fair, Node.js boasts high concurrency and native real-time messaging capabilities. As a
newer language, it has so far avoided much of the cruft built up over the years in other systems.

PHP
PHP is simple to get started with, and for that reason it tends to attract new and inexperienced
programmers. PHP applications are notorious for being difficult to maintain. Past versions of
PHP made it far too easy for developers to create large security holes in their applications, but
recent versions have made improvements in this area. PHP is the language used by WordPress,
Drupal, and several other content management systems.

Go
Go is a lower-level language from Google. It has gained popularity in recent years through its use
in major open source projects such as Docker. It’s excellent for systems programming but is also
well suited for web applications because of its powerful native concurrency primitives. One
benefit for administrators is that Go software usually compiles to a stand-alone binary, making it
simple to deploy.
Application programming interfaces (APIs)
Web APIs are application interfaces intended for use not by humans but by software agents. An
API defines a set of methods through which a remote system can make use of an application’s
data and services. APIs have become ubiquitous on the web because they promote cooperation
among many diverse clients.
APIs are nothing new. Operating systems define APIs to allow user-space applications to interact
with the kernel. Nearly all software packages use defined interfaces to facilitate modularity and
separation of functions within the code base. However, web APIs are a bit special because they
are exposed to the world on the public web with the intention of promoting use by outside
developers.
Web API calls are normal HTTP requests. They’re only “APIs” because the client and server
have agreed, by convention, that certain URLs and verbs have specific meanings and effects
within the domain of their interaction.
Web APIs commonly use some kind of text-based serialization format to encode data for
exchange. These formats are relatively simple and can be parsed by applications written in any
programming language. Many formats exist, but by far the most common are JavaScript Object
Notation (JSON) and Extensible Markup Language (XML). (Douglas Crockford, who named and
promoted the JSON format, says it’s pronounced like the name Jason. But somehow, “JAY-
sawn” seems to have become more common in the technical community.)

HTTP APIs are perhaps easiest to explain by example. The Spotify music service exposes an API
that represents its music library. A client of the API can request information about albums,
artists, and tracks; execute searches; and perform other related actions. This API is used both by
Spotify’s own client applications (its browser, desktop, and mobile clients) and by third parties
that want to incorporate Spotify’s services.
Because web APIs consist of HTTP requests, you can interact with them with all the normal
HTTP tools, including web browsers and curl. For example, we can obtain Spotify’s JSON
record for The Beatles:
Here, we’ve piped the JSON output through jq to clean up the formatting a bit. On a terminal, jq
also colorizes the output. jq does far more than just formatting and is highly recommended for
parsing and filtering JSON from the command line. Find it at stedolan.github.io/jq.
How did we know that 3WrFJ7ztbogyGnTHbHJFl2 is the Spotify ID for The Beatles? Try
searching through the API: https://api.spotify.com/v1/search?type=artist&q=beatles.
Spotify’s API is also an example of a “RESTful” API, which is the predominant approach today.
REST (Representational State Transfer) is an architectural style of API design introduced by Roy
Fielding in his doctoral dissertation; Fielding is also a primary author of the HTTP specification.
The term was originally quite specific but is now more loosely applied to web services that 1)
explicitly use HTTP verbs to communicate intent, and 2) use a directory-like path structure to
locate resources. Most REST APIs use JSON as their underlying representation for data.
REST contrasts starkly with SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol), an earlier system for
implementing HTTP APIs that defines strict and elaborate multilevel guidelines for interactions
among systems. SOAP APIs use a complex XML-based format that funnels all calls through a
few specific URLs, resulting in large HTTP payloads, poor performance, and endless difficulties
in development, debugging, and deployment.

The development of the SOAP ecosystem is an interesting case study of the ways that technical
initiatives can go awry. In particular, it illustrates the risks of attempting to design systems for a
hazy and uncertain future. SOAP put a lot of effort into remaining platform-, language-, data-,
and transport-neutral, and indeed it largely achieved these goals—even basic data types such as
integers were left open to definition. Unfortunately, the resulting system was complex and didn’t
fit well with real-world needs.
19.3 WEB HOSTING IN THE CLOUD
Cloud providers offer dozens of services for hosting web applications, and the landscape changes
weekly. We can’t possibly cover everything, but a few points stand out as being of particular
interest to web administrators.
Small sites with few users and a tolerance for occasional outages can get away with a single
virtual cloud instance as a web server (or possibly two instances behind a load balancer for
improved reliability). But the cloud offers many opportunities to improve these simple
configurations without significant increases in cost and complexity of administration.
Build versus buy
Administrators working on a cloud platform can build custom, self-managed web applications
out of “raw” virtual machines. Alternatively, they can farm out parts of the design to off-the-shelf
cloud services, thus reducing the labor involved in designing, configuring, and maintaining
everything by hand. For the sake of efficiency, we prefer to rely on vendor services when
possible.
Load balancers are a good example of this tradeoff. On AWS, for example, you can either run an
EC2 instance with open source load-balancing software or sign up for an AWS-provided Elastic
Load Balancer. The former offers greater customization but requires you to manage the load
balancer’s operating system, configure the load-balancing software, tune performance, and
promptly install security patches as they are released in the future. In addition, the glue needed to
gracefully handle failures of the software or the instance will be somewhat more complex.
An ELB, on the other hand, can be created in a matter of seconds and requires no further
administrative action. AWS handles everything behind the scenes. Unless the ELB lacks a
specific feature that you need, it is clearly the expedient choice.
Ultimately, this is a decision between building a service or outsourcing it to the vendor. For the
sake of your own sanity, avoid the building option unless the function in question is a core
competence for your business.
Platform-as-a-Service
The PaaS concept simplifies web hosting for developers by eliminating infrastructure as a
concern. Developers package their code in a specific format and upload it to the PaaS provider,
which provisions appropriate systems and runs it automatically. The provider issues a DNS
endpoint connected to the client’s running application, which the client can then customize by
using a DNS CNAME record.
Although PaaS offerings greatly simplify infrastructure management, they sacrifice flexibility
and customization. Most offerings either do not allow administrative access to a shell or they
actively discourage it. Users of a PaaS must accept certain design decisions made by the vendor.
Users’ ability to implement some features may be constrained.
Google App Engine pioneered the PaaS concept and remains one of the most prominent
products. App Engine supports Python, Java, PHP, and Go, and has many supporting features
such as cron-like scheduled job execution, programmatic access to logs, real-time messaging,
and access to various databases. It is considered the Cadillac of PaaS offerings.
The competing product from AWS is called Elastic Beanstalk. In addition to all the languages
supported by App Engine, it supports Ruby, Node.js, Microsoft .NET, and Docker containers. It
integrates with Elastic Load Balancers and AWS’s Auto Scaling feature, leveraging the power of
the AWS ecosystem.

In practice, we’ve found Elastic Beanstalk to be a mixed bag. Customization is possible through
an extension framework that is proprietary and tedious. Users are still responsible for running the
EC2 instances that host the application. So although Elastic Beanstalk might be a fine fit for
prototyping, we believe that the system is not a good choice for production workloads consisting
of many services.
Heroku is another respected vendor in this space. An application on Heroku is deployed to a
dyno, Heroku’s word for a lightweight Linux container. Users control the dyno deployments.
Heroku has a strong network of partnerships that offer databases, load balancing, and other
integrations. Heroku’s pricing is higher than some other offerings in part because its own
infrastructure runs on AWS under the hood.
Static content hosting

    See this page for more information about content delivery networks.

It seems like overkill to run an operating system just for the sake of hosting static web sites.
Fortunately, the cloud providers can host them for you. In AWS S3, you create a bucket for your
content, then configure a CNAME record from your domain to an endpoint within the provider.
In Google Firebase, you use a command-line tool to copy your local content to Google, which
provisions an SSL certificate and hosts your files. In both cases you can serve your content from
a CDN for better performance.
Serverless web applications
AWS Lambda is an event-based computing service. Developers who use Lambda write code that
runs in response to an event such as the arrival of a message in a queue, a new object in a bucket,
or even an HTTP request. Lambda feeds the event payload and metadata as inputs to a user-
defined function, which performs processing and returns a response. There are no instances or
operating systems to manage.
To process HTTP requests, Lambda is used in conjunction with another AWS service called API
Gateway, a proxy that can scale to hundreds of thousands of simultaneous requests. API Gateway
is interposed in front of an origin to add features such as access control, rate limiting, and
caching. HTTP requests are received by the API Gateway, and when a request arrives, the
gateway triggers a Lambda function.
In combination with static hosting on S3, Lambda and API Gateway can lead to a fully serverless
platform for running web applications, as illustrated in Exhibit E.

Exhibit E: Serverless web hosting with AWS Lambda, API Gateway, and S3

This technology is still in its youth, but it’s already altering the mechanics of hosting web
applications. We expect enhancements, frameworks, competing services, and best practices to
mature rapidly in the coming years.
19.4 APACHE HTTPD
The httpd web server is ubiquitous among the many flavors of UNIX and Linux. It is portable
across many architectures, and prebuilt packages exist for all major systems. Unfortunately, OS
vendors have varied and highly opinionated approaches to httpd configuration.
A modular architecture has been fundamental to Apache’s adoption. Dynamic modules can be
turned on through configuration, offering alternative authentication options, improved security,
support for running code written in most languages, URL-rewriting superpowers, and many other
features.

For largely historical reasons, Apache has a pluggable connection handling system called multi-
processing modules (MPMs) that determines how HTTP connections are managed at the network
I/O layer. The event MPM is the modern choice and is recommended over the worker and
prefork alternatives. (Some legacy software that is not considered thread-safe, such as mod_php,
should use the prefork MPM. It uses processes rather than threads for each connection.)
To bind to privileged ports (those below 1024, such as HTTP port 80 and HTTPS port 443), the
initial httpd process must run as root. That process then forks additional workers under a local
account with lower privileges to handle actual requests. Sites that do not need to listen on port 80
or 443 can be run entirely without root privileges.
httpd is configured through directives (Apache-speak for configuration options) in plain text
files that use a distinctive Apache-style syntax. Though hundreds of directives exist,
administrators usually need to tweak only a few. The directives and their values are documented
directly in the default files that ship with the OS as well as on Apache’s web site.
httpd in use
httpd is both the name given to the daemon’s binary and to the project. Ubuntu has taken the
liberty of renaming httpd to apache2, which matches the name of the apt package but otherwise
does little more than create confusion.
System V init, BSD init, and systemd can all manage httpd. Whichever option is standard for
your system is the one you should default to. For debugging and configuration, however, you can
interact with the daemon independently of the startup scripts.
Administrators can either run httpd directly or use apachectl. Invoking httpd offers direct
control over the server daemon, but remembering (and typing!) all the options is a challenge.
apachectl is a shell script wrapper around httpd. Each operating system vendor customizes
apachectl to conform to the conventions of its init process. It can start, stop, reload, and show
the status of Apache.
For example, here’s how to start the server with the default configuration:

In this output from a FreeBSD system, apachectl first performs a lint-like configuration check
by running httpd -t, then starts the daemon. (lint is a UNIX program that evaluates C code for
potential bugs. The term is now applied more broadly to any tool that inspects software and
configuration files for errors, bugs, or other problems.)
apachectl graceful waits for any currently open connections to conclude and then restarts the
server. This feature is handy for updating without interrupting active connections. It’s available
through the system start and stop scripts as well.

Use apachectl’s -f flag to start Apache with a custom configuration, e.g.:

Some vendors deprecate this use of apachectl in favor of running httpd directly.
Refer to Chapter 2, Booting and System Management Daemons, to learn how to configure httpd
to start automatically at boot time.
httpd configuration logistics
Although an entire httpd configuration can be contained in a single file, OS maintainers typically
use the Include directive to split the default configuration into multiple files and directories. This
architecture simplifies site management and is better suited to automation. Predictably, the
specifics of the configuration hierarchy differ by system. Table 19.6 lists the Apache
configuration defaults for each of our example platforms.

Table 19.6: Apache configuration details by platform

When httpd starts, it consults a primary configuration file, usually httpd.conf, and incorporates
any additional files as referenced by Include directives. The default httpd.conf is heavily
commented and serves as a quick reference. Configuration options in this file can be grouped
into three categories:

      Global settings such as the path to httpd’s configuration root, the user and group as
      which to run, the modules to activate, and the network interfaces and ports to listen
      on
      VirtualHost sections that define how to provide service for a given domain (usually
      delegated to subdirectories and Included in the main configuration)

      Instructions for answering requests that don’t match any VirtualHost definition

Many admins will be satisfied with the global settings and need only manage individual
VirtualHosts.

Modules exist independently of the httpd core and often have their own configuration options.
Most OS vendors choose to separate out module configuration into subdirectories.
Debian and Ubuntu approach Apache configuration idiosyncratically. A structure of
subdirectories, configuration files, and symlinks creates a more flexible system for managing the
server, at least in theory.
Exhibit F attempts to clarify this puzzle. The master apache2.conf file includes all files from the
*-enabled subdirectories in /etc/apache2. These files are in fact symbolic links to files in the *-
available subdirectories. A pair of configuration commands that create and remove symlinks is
provided for each set of subdirectories.

Exhibit F: Subdirectories of /etc/apache2 on Debian-based systems

In our experience, the Debian system is unnecessary and overly complex. A simple site-
configuration subdirectory usually provides sufficient structure. If you’re running Debian or
Ubuntu, though, it makes sense to stick with their defaults.
Virtual host configuration
The lion’s share of httpd configuration lies in virtual host definitions. It’s generally a good idea
to create a file for each site.
When an HTTP request arrives, httpd identifies which virtual host to select by consulting the
HTTP Host header and network port. It then matches the path portion of the requested URL to a
Files, Directory, or Location directive to determine how to serve the requested content. This mapping
process is known as request routing.
The following sample shows the HTTP and HTTPS configuration for admin.com.

Much of this is self explanatory, but a few details are worth noting:
      The first VirtualHost answers on port 80 and redirects all HTTP requests for admin.com,
      www.admin.com, and ulsah.admin.com to use HTTPS.
      Requests for admin.com/photos receive an index of all files in that directory.

      Requests for /usah or /lsah are rewritten to /ulsah.

Server status, accessible in this configuration at www.admin.com/server-status, is a module that
shows useful runtime performance information, including statistics about the daemon’s CPU and
memory usage, request status, the average number of requests per second, and more. Monitoring
systems can use this feature to collect data about the web server for alerting, reporting, and
visualization of HTTP traffic. Here, access to server status is restricted to a single IP address,
10.0.10.10.

HTTP basic authentication
In the HTTP basic authentication scheme, clients pass a base-64-encoded username and
password in the Authorization HTTP header. If a user includes a name and password in a URL
(e.g., https://user:pass@www.admin.com/server-status), the browser performs the encoding and
transfers the value to the Authorization header automatically.
The username and password are not encrypted, so basic authentication does not provide any
confidentiality. Thus, it is safe to use only in combination with HTTPS.

Basic authentication in Apache is configured in Location or Directory blocks. For example, the
following snippet requires authentication to access /server-status (a best practice) and limits
access to a subnet:

Note that the account information is stored externally to the configuration file. Use htpasswd to
create the account entries:
Password files are conventionally hidden files called .htpasswd, but they can be named anything.
Even though the passwords are encrypted, set the permissions on .htpasswd files to be readable
only by the web-server user. This precaution limits attackers’ ability to see usernames and to run
passwords through cracking software.

Configuring TLS
SSL might have changed its name to TLS, but in the interest of backward compatibility, Apache
retains the SSL name for its configuration options (as do many other software packages). Just a
few lines are needed to set up TLS:

Here, the TLS certificate and key are located in Linux’s central system location, /etc/ssl. The
public certificates can be readable by anyone, but the key should be accessible only to the
Apache master-process user, typically root. We prefer to set permissions to 444 for the certificate
and 400 for the key.
All versions of the actual SSL protocol (precursor to TLS) are known to be insecure and should
be disabled with the SSLProtocol directive, shown above.

     See this page for a complete citation for the Server Side TLS guide.

A few ciphers have known weaknesses. You can configure the web server’s supported ciphers
with the SSLCipherSuite directive. The best practices for precisely which settings to use are
constantly in flux. The Mozilla Server Side TLS guide is the best resource that we are aware of
for staying current on best practices for TLS. It also has a handy configuration syntax reference
for Apache, NGINX, and HAProxy.

Running web applications within Apache
httpd can be extended to run programs written in Python, Ruby, Perl, PHP, and other languages
from within the module system. Modules run inside Apache processes and have access to the full
HTTP request/response life cycle.
Modules provide additional configuration directives that let administrators control the runtime
characteristics of applications. Table 19.7 lists some common application server modules.

Table 19.7: Application server modules for httpd

The following example (to configure a Python Django application for api.admin.com) uses
mod_wsgi:

Once mod_wsgi.so has been loaded by Apache, several WSGI configuration directives become
available. The WSGIScriptAlias file in the configuration above, admin_api.wsgi, contains Python
code that is needed by the WSGI module.
Logging
httpd offers best-in-class logging capabilities, with fine-grained control over the data that is
logged and the ability to separate log data by virtual host. Administrators use these logs to debug
configuration problems, detect potential security threats, and analyze usage information.
A sample log message from admin.com.access.log looks like this:

The message shows:

      The source of the request; in this case, 127.0.0.1, the local host
      A time stamp
      The path of the requested resource (/search) and the HTTP method (GET)
      The response status code (200)

      The size of the response
      The user agent (the curl command-line tool)

The documentation for mod_log_config has all the details on how to customize the log format.
A busy web site generates a large number of request logs that can quickly fill up the disk.
Administrators are responsible for ensuring that this never happens. Keep web server logs on a
dedicated partition to prevent a large log file from affecting the rest of the system.

     See this page for more information about logrotate.

On most Linux distributions, the default package installation of Apache includes an appropriate
logrotate configuration. FreeBSD comes with no such default, and administrators should instead
add an entry in /etc/newsyslog.conf for Apache’s logs.
The log directory and the files within should be writable only by the user of the master httpd
process, which is normally root. If nonroot users have write access, they can create a symlink to
another file, causing it to be overwritten with bogus data. The system defaults are set safely, so
avoid customizing the owner and group.
19.5 NGINX
A busy web server must respond to many thousands of concurrent requests. Most of the time
needed to handle each request is spent waiting for data to arrive from the network or disk. The
time spent actively processing the request is short by comparison.
To handle this workload efficiently, NGINX uses an event-based system in which just a few
worker processes handle many requests simultaneously. When a request or response (an event) is
ready for servicing, a worker process quickly completes processing before returning to handle the
next event. Above all, NGINX aims to avoid blocking on network or disk I/O.

The event MPM included in newer releases of Apache uses a similar architecture, but for high-
volume and performance-sensitive sites, NGINX remains the software of choice.
Administrators running NGINX will notice at least two processes: a master and a worker. The
master performs housekeeping duties such as opening sockets, reading the configuration, and
keeping the other NGINX processes running. Workers do most of the heavy lifting by handling
and processing requests. Some configurations use additional processes dedicated to caching. As
in Apache, the master process runs as root so that it can open sockets for any ports below 1024.
The other processes run as a less privileged user.
The number of worker processes is configurable. A good rule of thumb is to run as many worker
processes as the system has CPU cores. Debian and Ubuntu configure NGINX this way by
default if it’s installed from a package. FreeBSD and RHEL default to a single worker process.
Installing and running NGINX
Although NGINX continues to grow in popularity and is a staple among some of the world’s
busiest web sites, OS distributions still lag on NGINX support. The versions available in the
official repositories for Debian and RHEL are usually out of date, though FreeBSD is typically
more current. NGINX is open source, so it can be built and installed manually. The project’s web
page, nginx.org, offers packages for apt and yum than are generally more current than those
supplied by the distributions.

    See this page for more information about signals.

The system’s normal service management is appropriate for day-to-day wrangling of nginx. You
can also run the nginx daemon during development and debugging. Use the -c argument to
specify a custom configuration file. The -t option performs a check of the configuration file
syntax.
nginx uses signals to trigger various maintenance actions; Table 19.8 lists these. Make sure you
target the master nginx process (usually the one with the lowest PID).

Table 19.8: Signals understood by the nginx daemon
Configuring NGINX
The NGINX configuration style is generally C-like; it uses curly braces to distinguish blocks of
configuration lines and semicolons to separate lines. The main configuration file is called
nginx.conf by default. Table 19.9 summarizes the most important system-specific aspects of
NGINX configuration.

Table 19.9: NGINX configuration details by platform

Within the nginx.conf file, blocks of configuration directives surrounded by curly braces are
called contexts. A context contains directives specific to that block of configuration. For
example, here’s a minimal (but complete) NGINX configuration that shows three contexts:

The outermost context (called main) is implicit and configures the core functionality. The events
and http contexts live within main. events is a required context that configures connection handling.
Since it’s blank in this example, default values are implied. Fortunately, the defaults are sensible:

      Run one worker process (use the unprivileged user account).
      Listen on port 80 if started as root or port 8000 otherwise.
      Write logs to /var/log/nginx (chosen at compile time).

The http context contains all directives relating to web and HTTP proxy services. server contexts,
which define virtual hosts, are nested within http. Multiple server contexts within http would
configure multiple virtual hosts.
Aliases can be included in server_name to match the Host header against a group of subdomains:

     See this page for an overview of regular expressions.

The value for server_name can also be a regular expression, and the match can even be captured and
named as a variable for use later in configuration. By using this feature, you can refactor the
previous configuration to

The regular expression, which starts with a tilde, matches either example.com or admin.com,
optionally preceded by www. The value of the matched domain is stored in the $domain variable,
which is then used to determine which server root to select.
Be aware that use of this syntax commits NGINX to performing a regular expression match on
every HTTP request. We use it here to demonstrate NGINX’s flexibility, but in practice you
would probably want to just list all possible hostnames in plain text. It’s perfectly reasonable to
use regular expressions in nginx.conf, but make sure they’re delivering actual value, and try to
keep them low in the configuration hierarchy so that they activate only in specific situations.
Name-based virtual hosts can be distinguished from IP-based hosts by using the listen and
server_name directives together.
This configuration shows two versions of admin.com being served from different web roots. The
IP address of the interface on which the request was received determines which version of the
site the client sees.
The root is the base directory where HTML, images, stylesheets, scripts, and other files for the
virtual host are stored. By default, NGINX just serves files out of the root, but you can use the
location directive to do more sophisticated request routing. If a given path isn’t matched by a location
directive, NGINX automatically falls back to the root.

The following example uses location in combination with the proxy_pass directive. It instructs
NGINX to serve most requests from the web root but forward requests for
http://www.admin.com/nginx to nginx.org.

proxy_passinstructs NGINX to act as a proxy and replay requests from clients to another
downstream server. We revisit the proxy_pass directive when we describe how to use NGINX as a
load balancer here.
location can use regular expressions to perform powerful path-based routing to different sources
based on the requested content. The official NGINX documentation analyzes how NGINX
evaluates the server_name, listen, and location directives to route requests.

A common pattern among distributions is to set sensible defaults for many directives in the
global http context, then use the include directive to add site-specific virtual hosts to the final
configuration. For example, the default nginx.conf file for Ubuntu includes the line
This architecture helps eliminate redundancy since all children inherit the global settings.
Administrators in straightforward environments may not need to do anything more than write
virtual host configurations expressed as server contexts.
Configuring TLS for NGINX
Although NGINX didn’t borrow much from Apache’s configuration style, its TLS configuration
is one area in which it’s strikingly similar. As in Apache, the configuration keywords all refer to
SSL, TLS’s earlier name.
Enable TLS and point to the certificate and private key file like so:

Only the actual TLS protocols (not the older SSL versions) should be enabled; all SSL protocols
have been deprecated. Permissions on the certificate and key should follow the recommendations
outlined in the Apache TLS section here.
Use the ssl_ciphers directive to require cryptographically strong cipher suites and to disable weaker
ciphers. The ssl_prefer_server_ciphers option in conjunction with ssl_ciphers instructs NGINX to choose
from the server’s list rather than from the client’s; otherwise, the client could suggest any cipher
it pleased. (The previous example does not show a full list of ciphers because the appropriate list
is quite long; refer to the Mozilla Server Side TLS guide cited here for recommended values. If
you prefer a shorter cipher list, try the one at cipherli.st.)
Load balancing with NGINX
In addition to being a web and cache server, NGINX is also a capable load balancer. Its
configuration style is flexible but somewhat nonobvious.
Use the upstream module to create named groups of servers. For example, the following clause
defines admin-servers as a collection of two servers:

upstream groups can be referenced from virtual host definitions. In particular, they can be used as
proxying destinations, just like hostnames:

Here, traffic for admin.com and www.admin.com is farmed out to the web1 and web2 servers in
round robin order (the default).
This configuration also sets up health checks for the back-end servers. Checks are performed
every 30 seconds (interval=30) against each server at the /health_check endpoint (uri=/health_check).
NGINX will mark the server down if the health check fails on three consecutive attempts (fails=3),
but will add the server back to the rotation if it succeeds just once (passes=1).
The match keyword is peculiar to NGINX. It dictates the conditions under which the health check
is considered successful. In this case, NGINX must receive a 200 response code, the Content-
Type header must be set to text/html, and the body of the response must contain the phrase “Red
Leader, Standing By.”
We’ve added an additional condition within the upstream context that sets the maximum number of
connection attempt failures to two. That is, if NGINX cannot connect to the server at all within
two attempts, it gives up and removes that server from the pool. This is an additive connectivity
check that complements the more structured checks from the health_check clause.
19.6 HAPROXY
HAProxy is the most widely used open source load-balancing software. It proxies HTTP and
TCP, supports sticky sessions to pin a given client to a specific web server, and offers advanced
health-checking capabilities. Recent versions also support TLS, IPv6, and HTTP compression.
Support for HTTP/2 is a work in progress and is expected to mature quickly beginning with
HAProxy version 1.7.
HAProxy’s configuration is usually contained in a single file, haproxy.cfg. It’s so simple that OS
vendors generally don’t overcomplicate things and instead embrace the default directory
structure recommended by the project.

On Debian and RHEL systems, the configuration is in /etc/haproxy/haproxy.cfg. FreeBSD
doesn’t provide a default, as there really is no sensible one for load balancing; it’s entirely
dependent on your setup. You can find an example configuration on FreeBSD in
/usr/local/share/examples/haproxy after the HAProxy package has been installed.
The following simple example configuration sets HAProxy to listen on port 80 and distribute
requests in a round robin fashion between two web servers, web1 and web2, on port 8080.

This example introduces HAProxy’s frontend and backend keywords, illustrated in Exhibit G.

Exhibit G: HAProxy frontend and backend specifications
frontend dictates how HAProxy will receive requests from clients: which addresses and ports to
use, what types of traffic to serve, and other client-facing considerations. backend configures the
set of servers that actually process requests. Multiple frontend/backend pairs can exist in a single
configuration, allowing a single HAProxy to service multiple sites.
The timeout settings allow fine-grained control over how long a system should wait when trying to
open a new connection to a server and how long to keep connections open once they have been
established. Fine-tuning these values is important on busy web servers. On local networks, the
timeout connect value can be quite low (500ms or less) because new connections should be
established quickly.
Health checks
Although the previous configuration provides basic functionality, it doesn’t check the status of
downstream web servers. If web1 or web2 goes off-line, half of incoming requests would begin
to fail.
HAProxy’s status-check feature performs regular HTTP requests to determine the health of each
server. As long as servers respond with an HTTP 200 response code, they remain in service and
continue to receive requests from the load balancer.
If a server fails a status check (by returning anything other than status 200), then HAProxy
removes the errant server from the pool. However, HAProxy continues to perform health checks
on the server. If it starts to respond successfully once again, HAProxy will return it to the pool.
The specifics of the health check, such as what request method to use, the interval between
checks, and the path to request, can all be adjusted. In this example, HAProxy performs a GET
request for / on each server every 30 seconds:

It’s reassuring to know that you can contact a machine’s web server, but that’s hardly the last
word on server health. Well-constructed web applications commonly expose a health-check
endpoint that performs a thorough probe of the application to determine its true health. These
checks may include verification of database or cache connectivity as well as performance
monitoring. Use these more sophisticated checks if they are available.
Server statistics
HAProxy offers a convenient web interface that displays server stats, much like mod_status in
Apache. HAProxy’s version shows the state of each server in the pool and lets you manually
enable and disable servers as needed.
The syntax is straightforward:

Server stats can be configured either within a specific listener or within a backend or frontend block,
to limit the feature to that configuration alone.
Sticky sessions
HTTP is a stateless protocol, so each transaction is an independent session. From the perspective
of the protocol, requests from the same client are unrelated.
At the same time, most web applications need state to track user behavior over time. The classic
example of state is a shopping cart. Users browse a store, add items to the cart, and when ready
to check out, submit their payment information. The web application needs some way to track the
contents of the cart across multiple page views.
Most web applications use cookies to track state. The web application generates a session for a
user and puts the session ID in a cookie that is sent back to the user in the response header. Each
time a client submits a request to the server, the cookie is sent with the request. The server uses
the cookie to recover the client’s context.
Ideally, web applications should store their state information in a persistent and shared medium
such as a database. However, some poorly behaved web applications keep their session data
locally, in the server’s memory or on its local disk. When placed behind a load balancer, these
applications break because a single client’s requests might be routed to multiple servers,
depending on the vagaries of the load balancer’s scheduling algorithm.

To address this issue, HAProxy can insert a cookie of its own into responses, a feature known as
sticky sessions. Any future requests from the same client will include the cookie. HAProxy can
use the value of the cookie to route the request back to the same server.
A version of the previous configuration modified to support sticky sessions looks like the
following. Note the addition of the cookie directive.

In this configuration, HAProxy maintains a SERVERNAME cookie to track the server that a
client is dealing with. The secure keyword specifies that the cookie should only be sent over TLS
connections, and httponly informs browsers to use the cookie only over HTTP. Refer to RFC6265
for further information on these attributes.
TLS termination
HAProxy versions 1.5 and later include TLS support. A common configuration is to terminate
TLS connections at the HAProxy server and communicate with back-end servers over plain
HTTP. This approach offloads the cryptographic overhead from the back-end servers and reduces
the number of systems that need a private key.
For particularly security-conscious sites, it’s also possible to use HTTPS from HAProxy to the
back-end servers. You can use the same TLS certificate or a different one; either way, you will
still need to terminate and reinitiate TLS at the proxy.
Since HAProxy terminates the TLS connection from clients, you’ll need to add the pertinent
configuration to the frontend configuration block.

Apache and NGINX require the private key and certificate to be in separate files in PEM format,
but HAProxy expects both components to be present in the same file. You can simply
concatenate the separate files to create a composite file:

Since the private key is part of the composite file, ensure that the file is owned by root and is not
readable by any other user. (If you do not run HAProxy as root because you are not accessing
any privileged ports, make sure the ownership of the key file matches the identity under which
HAProxy runs.)
All usual best practices for TLS apply to HAProxy: disable SSL-era protocols and explicitly
configure the acceptable cipher suites.
19.7 RECOMMENDED READING
ADRIAN, DAVID, ET AL. Weak Diffie-Hellman and the Logjam Attack. weakdh.org. This page
describes the Logjam attack on the Diffie-Hellman key exchange protocol and suggests ways to
secure systems properly.
CLOUDFLARE, INC. blog.cloudflare.com. This is the corporate blog of content delivery network
CloudFlare. Some posts are just marketing information, but many include insights on the latest
web trends and technologies.

GOOGLE, INC. Web Fundamentals. developers.google.com/web/fundamentals. This is a useful
guide to various best practices for web development, including sections on site design, user
interfaces, security, performance, and other topics of interest to both developers and
administrators. The caching discussion is particularly good.
GRIGORIK, ILYA. High Performance Browser Networking. O’Reilly Media. 2013. An exceptional
guide to the protocols, strengths, limitations, and performance aspects of the web. Useful for
developers and system administrators alike.
IANA. Index of HTTP Status Codes. www.iana.org/assignments/http-status-codes.
INTERNATIONAL ENGINEERING TASK FORCE. Hypertext Transfer Protocol                 Version   2.
http2.github.io/http2-spec. The working draft of the HTTP2 specification.

MOZILLA. Security/Server Side TLS. wiki.mozilla.org/Security/Server_Side_TLS. An excellent
resource that documents best practices for TLS configuration across many platforms.
STENBERG, DANIEL. daniel.haxx.se/blog. This is the blog of Daniel Stenberg, the author of curl
and a prolific HTTP expert.
VAN ELST, REMY. Strong Ciphers for Apache, nginx, and Lighthttpd.    cipherli.st. Correct and
secure cipher configuration for Apache httpd, NGINX, and the lighttpd web servers, as well as
a TLS configuration tester.
