20 Storage

Data storage systems are looking more and more like a giant set of Lego blocks that you can
assemble in an infinite variety of configurations. You can build anything from a lightning-fast
storage space for a mission-critical database to a vast, archival vault that stores three copies of all
data and can be rewound to any point in the past.
Mechanical hard drives remain a popular storage medium when capacity is the most important
consideration, but solid state drives (SSDs) are preferred for performance-sensitive applications.
Caching systems, both software and hardware, help combine the best features these storage
types.
On cloud servers, you usually have a choice of storage hardware, but you’ll pay more for SSD-
backed virtual disks. You can also choose from a variety of purpose-specific storage types, such
as object stores, infinitely expandable network drives, and relational databases-as-a-service.
Running on top of this real and virtual hardware are a variety of software components that
mediate between the raw storage devices and the filesystem hierarchy seen by users. These
components include device drivers, partitioning conventions, RAID implementations, logical
volume managers, systems for virtualizing disks over a network, and the filesystem
implementations themselves.

In this chapter, we discuss the administrative tasks and decisions that occur at each of these
layers. We begin with “fast path” instructions for adding a basic disk to Linux or FreeBSD. We
then review storage-related hardware technologies and look at the general architecture of storage
software. We then work our way up the storage stack from low-level formatting to the filesystem
level. Along the way, we cover disk partitioning, RAID systems, and logical volume managers.
Above the level of individual machines lie a variety of schemes for sharing data on a network.
Chapters 21 and 22 describe two common file sharing systems: NFS for native sharing among
UNIX and Linux systems, and SMB for interoperability with Windows and macOS systems.
20.1 I JUST WANT TO ADD A DISK!
Before we launch into many pages of storage architecture and theory, we first address the most
common scenario: you want to install a hard disk and make it accessible through the filesystem.
Nothing fancy: no RAID, all the drive’s space in a single volume, and the default filesystem type.
Step one is to attach the drive. If the machine in question is a cloud server, you generally
provision a virtual drive of the desired size within the provider’s administrative GUI (or through
their API) and then attach it to an existing virtual server as a separate step. It’s normally
unnecessary to reboot the server because cloud (and virtual) kernels recognize such hardware
changes on the fly.

In the case of physical hardware, drives that communicate through a USB port can simply be
powered on and plugged in. SATA and SAS drives need to be mounted in a bay, enclosure, or
cradle. Although some hardware and drivers are designed to permit hot-addition of SATA drives,
that feature requires hardware support and is uncommon in mass-market hardware. Reboot the
system to make sure the OS is in a configuration that’s reasonably reproducible at boot time.
If you’re running a desktop machine with a window system and all the stars align, the system
might offer to format a new disk for you when you plug it in. That’s particularly likely if you’re
plugging in an external USB disk or thumb drive. The autoformat option usually works fine; use
it if it’s offered. However, check the mount details afterwards (by running the mount command
in a terminal window) to make sure the drive hasn’t been mounted with restrictions you don’t
want (e.g., with execution or normal ownerships disabled).
If you set up the disk by hand, it’s critically important to identify and format the right disk
devi ce. A newly added dr i ve i s not necessar i ly rep r esent ed by t he highes t​numb ered device fi le,
and on some systems, the addition of a new drive can change the device names of existing drives
(after a reboot, usually). Double-check the identity of the new drive by reviewing its
manufacturer, size, and model number before you do anything that’s potentially destructive! Use
the commands mentioned in the next two sections.
Linux recipe
First, run lsblk to list the system’s disks and identify the new drive. If that output doesn’t give
you enough information to conclusively identify the new drive, you can list model and serial
numbers with lsblk -o +MODEL,SERIAL.

     See this page for an explanation of GPT partition tables.

Once you know which device file refers to the new disk (assume it’s /dev/sdb), install a partition
table on the disk. Several commands and utilities can do this, including parted, gparted, fdisk,
cfdisk, and sfdisk; it doesn’t matter which one you use, as long as it understands GPT-style
partition tables. gparted is probably the easiest option on a system with a graphical user
interface. Below, we show the fdisk recipe, which works on all Linux systems. (Some systems
still ship a version of parted that doesn’t understand GPT.)

The g subcommand creates a GPT partition table. The n subcommand creates a new partition;
pressing <Return> in response to all fdisk’s questions allocates all free space to the new partition
(partition 1). Finally, the w subcommand writes the new partition table to the disk.
The device file for the newly created partition is the same as the device file for the disk as a
whole with a 1 appended to it. In the example above, the partition is /dev/sdb1.
You can now create a filesystem on /dev/sdb1 with the mkfs command. The -L option gives the
filesystem a shorthand label (here, “spare”). The label stays the same even if the disk that
contains the filesystem is assigned a different device name during a subsequent boot.
Next, create a mount point and mount the new filesystem:

You could equivalently specify /dev/sdb1 instead of LABEL=spare as a way of identifying the
partition, but that name won’t necessarily work in the future.
To have the filesystem automatically mounted at boot time, edit the /etc/fstab file and duplicate
one of the existing entries. Change the device name and mount point to match those shown in the
mount command above. For example,

You can also use a UUID to identify the filesystem; see this page.
See this page for more details on Linux device files for disks. See this page for partitioning
information. See this page for information about the ext4 filesystem.
FreeBSD recipe
     Run geom disk list to list the disk devices that the kernel is aware of. Unfortunately,
     FreeBSD doesn’t divulge much information beyond device names and sizes. You can
resolve any ambiguity as to which disk is which by running geom part list to see which devices
have existing partitions. An unformatted disk should have no partitions.
Once you know the disk name, you can install a partition table and create a filesystem. In this
example, we assume that the disk name is ada1 and that you want to mount the new filesystem as
/spare.

The -l option to gpart add applies a text label to the new partition. The label makes the partition
accessible through the path /dev/gpt/spare regardless of what device name the kernel assigns to
the underlying disk device. The -L option to newfs applies a similar (but distinct) label to the
new filesystem to make the partition accessible as /dev/ufs/spare.
Mount the filesystems with the following commands:

To have the filesystem automatically mounted at boot time, add it to the /etc/fstab file (see this
page).
20.2 STORAGE HARDWARE
Even in today’s post-Internet world, computer data can be stored in only a few basic ways: hard
disks, flash memory, magnetic tapes, and optical media. The last two technologies have
significant limitations that disqualify them from use as a system’s primary filesystem. However,
they’re still sometimes used for backups and for “near line” storage—cases in which instant
access and rewritability are not of primary concern.
After 40 years of traditional magnetic disk technology, performance-minded system builders
finally received a practical alternative in the form of solid state disks (SSDs). These flash-
memory-based devices offer a different set of tradeoffs from those of a standard disk, and they
will be influencing the architectures of databases, filesystems, and operating systems for years to
come.

At the same time, traditional hard disks are continuing their exponential increases in capacity.
Thirty years ago, at the dawn of the 5.25" form factor that remains in use today, a 60MB hard
disk cost $1,000. Today, a garden-variety 4TB drive runs $125 or so. That’s more than 500,000
times more storage for the money, or double the TB/$ every 1.6 years. During that same period,
the sequential throughput of mass-market drives has increased from 500 kB/s to 200 MB/s, a
comparatively paltry factor of 400. And random-access seek times have hardly budged. The more
things change, the more they stay the same.

     See this page for more information on IEC units (gibibytes, etc.).

Disk sizes are specified in gigabytes that are billions of bytes, as opposed to memory, which is
specified in “gigabytes” (gibibytes, really) of 230 (1,073,741,824) bytes. The difference is about
7%. Be sure to check your units when estimating and comparing capacities.
Hard disks and SSDs are enough alike that they can act as drop-in replacements for each other, at
least at the hardware level. They use the same hardware interfaces and interface protocols. And
yet they have very different strengths, as Table 20.1 summarizes.

Table 20.1: Comparison of HDD and SSD technology
In the next sections, we take a closer look at each of these technologies along with a more recent
category of storage devices: hybrid drives.
Hard disks
A typical hard drive contains several rotating platters coated with magnetic film. They are read
and written by tiny skating heads mounted on a metal arm that swings back and forth to position
them. The heads float close to the surface of the platters but don’t actually touch them.
Reading from a platter is quick; it’s the mechanical maneuvering needed to address a particular
sector that drives down random-access throughput. Delays come from two main sources.
First, the head armature must swing into position over the appropriate track. This part is called
seek delay. Second, the system must wait for the right sector to pass underneath the head as the
platter rotates. That part is rotational latency. Disks can stream data at hundreds of MB/s if reads
are optimally sequenced, but random reads are unlikely to achieve more than a few MB/s.
A set of tracks on different platters that are all the same distance from the spindle is called a
cylinder. The cylinder’s data can be read without any additional movement of the arm. Although
heads move amazingly fast, they still move much more slowly than the disks spin around.
Therefore, any disk access that does not require the heads to seek to a new position will be faster.

Spindle speeds vary. 7,200 RPM remains the mass-market standard for enterprise and
performance-oriented drives. A few 10,000 RPM and 15,000 RPM drives remain available at the
high end, but the advent of inexpensive SSDs now limits these drives to a small and shrinking
niche market. Higher rotational speeds decrease latency and increase the bandwidth of data
transfers, but the drives tend to run hot.

Hard disk reliability
Hard disks fail frequently. A 2007 Google Labs study of 100,000 drives surprised the tech world
with the news that hard disks more than two years old had an average annual failure rate (AFR)
of more than 6%, much higher than the failure rates manufacturers predicted from extrapolating
their short-term testing. The overall pattern was a few months of infant mortality, a two-year
honeymoon of annual failure rates of a few percent, and then a jump up to the 6%–8% AFR
range. Overall, hard disks in the Google study had less than a 75% chance of surviving a five-
year tour of duty.
Interestingly, Google found no correlation between failure rate and two environmental factors
that were formerly thought to be important: operating temperature and drive activity. The
complete paper can be found at goo.gl/Y7Senk.

More recently, Backblaze, a cloud storage provider, has posted regular updates about its
experience with various hard disk models at backblaze.com/blog. This data is 10 years more
recent than the original Google study but suggests the same basic pattern: high infant mortality
followed by a two- or three-year honeymoon and then a precipitous rise in annual failure rate.
The absolute numbers are pretty close, too.
Failure modes and metrics
Hard disk failures typically stem from either platter surface defects (bad blocks) or mechanical
failures. Drives attempt to transparently correct errors in the former category and remap the
recovered data to a different portion of the disk. When block errors become visible at the
operating system level (i.e., in the logs), that means data has already been lost. It’s a bad
prognostic sign; pull the drive from service and replace it.
A disk’s firmware and hardware interface usually remain operable after a failure, and it can be
entertaining to attempt to query the disk for details about what’s going on (see this page).
However, disks are so cheap that it’s rarely worth your time to do this except perhaps as a
learning exercise.
Drive reliability is often quoted by manufacturers in terms of mean time between failures
(MTBF), denominated in hours. A typical value for an enterprise drive is around 1.2 million
hours. However, MTBF is a statistical measure and should not be read to imply that an individual
drive will run for 140 years before failing.
MTBF is defined as the inverse of AFR in the drive’s steady-state period—that is, after break-in
but before wear-out. A manufacturer’s MTBF of 1.2 million hours corresponds to an AFR of
0.7% per year. This value is almost, but not quite, concordant with the AFR range observed by
Google and Backblaze (1%–2%) during the honeymoon years of their sample drives’ lives.

Manufacturers’ MTBF values are probably accurate, but they are cherry-picked from the most
reliable phase of each drive’s life. MTBF values should therefore be regarded as an upper bound
on reliability; they do not predict your actual expected failure rate over the long term. (Our
technical reviewer Jon Corbet refers to these as “reliability guaranteed not to exceed” values.)
Based on the limited data quoted above, you might consider dividing manufacturers’ MTBFs by
a factor of 7.5 or so to arrive at a more realistic estimate of five-year failure rates.

Drive types
Only two manufacturers of hard drives remain: Seagate and Western Digital. You may see a few
other brands for sale, but they’re all ultimately made by these same two companies, both of
which have been on decade-long acquisition binges.
Brands segment their hard disk offerings into a few general categories:

      Value drives: These products offer lots of storage at the lowest possible price point.
      Performance isn’t a priority, but it’s usually decent. Today’s low-end drives are often
      faster than the high-performance drives of five or ten years ago.
      Mass-market performance drives: These step-up products targeted at end users
      (often gamers) have higher spindle speeds and larger caches than those of their value
      equivalents. They perform notably better than value drives on most benchmarks. As
      with value drives, firmware tuning emphasizes single-user access patterns such as
      large sequential reads and writes. The drives often run hot.
      NAS drives: NAS stands for “network-attached storage,” but these drives are
      intended for use in all sorts of servers, RAID systems, and arrays—anywhere that
      multiple drives are housed and accessed together. They’re designed to be constantly
      on and working, and to balance performance, reliability, and low heat-emission.

      Benchmarks that replicate stand-alone access patterns may not reveal much
      performance difference from value drives, but NAS drives typically handle multiple
      streams of independent operations more intelligently because of firmware tuning.
      NAS drives often have a longer warranty than value drives; their pricing is
      somewhere between that for value and performance drives.

      Enterprise drives: “Enterprise” can mean a lot of things in the context of hard disks,
      but most commonly it means “expensive.” Here’s where you’ll find drives with non-
      SATA interfaces and uncommon features such as 10,000+ RPM spindle speeds.
      These are generally premium drives with long (often, five-year) warranties.

The differences among these drive categories are about half real and half marketing. All classes
of drives work fine in all applications, but performance and reliability may vary. NAS drives are
probably the best all-around choice for drives to keep on hand to fill a variety of potential needs.

Hard disks are commodity products, and one brand’s model of a given size, class, and spindle
speed is much like another’s. These days, you need a dedicated qualification laboratory to make
fine distinctions among competing drives, at least in terms of performance.
Reliability is another matter. The Google and Backblaze data demonstrate significant differences
among models. The least reliable are an order of magnitude more likely to fail than the best.
Unfortunately, there’s really no way to identify the turkeys until they’ve been sold for a year or
two and have established a reputation in the real world.
That said, Hitachi (HGST, now part of Western Digital) deserves recognition as a particularly
high-reliability brand. Over the last decade, its drives have consistently led the reliability charts.
However, HGST-branded drives command a significant price premium over their competitors’
offerings.
No matter; even the best drives are relatively failure prone. There’s no escaping the need for
backups and redundant storage when important data is at stake. Design your infrastructure with
the assumption that drives will fail, then figure out how much an incrementally more reliable
drive is worth within this context.

Warranties and retirement
Because hard drives are more likely to require warranty service than are other types of hardware,
warranty length is an important purchasing consideration. The industry standard has shrunk to a
paltry two years, suspiciously close to the length of the average hard drive’s honeymoon period.
The three-year warranty offered on many NAS drives is a significant advantage.
Hard disk exchanges under warranty are straightforward if you can demonstrate that drives fail a
diagnostic test supplied by the manufacturer. Test programs typically run only under Windows
and are intolerant of virtualization environments and of intervening connection hardware such as
USB cradles. If your operations entail frequent drive exchanges, you may find it worthwhile to
maintain a dedicated Windows machine as a drive testing station.

It usually pays to be aggressive in taking drives out of service, even if you can’t quite document
that they are broken enough to be eligible for exchange under warranty. Even seemingly
insignificant signs (e.g., funny noises or block errors within temporary files) are likely
indications that a drive is nearing the end of its life.
Solid state disks
SSDs spread reads and writes across banks of flash memory cells, which are individually rather
slow in comparison to modern hard disks. But because of parallelism, the SSD as a whole meets
or exceeds the bandwidth of a traditional disk. The great strength of SSDs is that they continue to
perform well when data is read or written at random, an access pattern that’s predominant in real-
world use.
Storage device manufacturers like to quote sequential transfer rates for their products because the
numbers are impressively high. But for traditional hard disks, these sequential numbers have
almost no relationship to the throughput observed with random reads and writes. It pays to know
your workloads. For access patterns that are in fact heavily sequential, hard disks can still be
competitive with SSDs, especially when hardware costs are taken into consideration.
SSDs’ performance comes at a cost, however. Not only are they more expensive per gigabyte of
storage than are hard disks, but they also introduce several new wrinkles and uncertainties into
the storage equation. Anand Shimpi’s March 2009 article on SSD technology is a superb
introduction to the promise and perils of the SSD. It can be found at tinyurl.com/dexnbt.

Rewritability limits
Each page of flash memory in an SSD (typically 4KiB on current products) can be rewritten only
a limited number of times (usually about 100,000, depending on the underlying technology). To
limit the wear on any given page, the SSD firmware maintains a mapping table and distributes
writes across all the drive’s pages. This remapping is invisible to the operating system, which
sees the drive as a linear series of blocks. Think of it as virtual memory for storage.
The theoretical limits on the rewritability of flash memory are probably less an issue than they
might initially seem. Just as a matter of arithmetic, you would have to stream 100 MB/s of data
to a 500GB SSD for more than 15 continuous years to start running up against the rewrite limit.
The more general question of long-term SSD reliability is as yet unanswered, however. We have
a pretty good idea of how SSDs manufactured five years ago held up over time, but today’s
products will no doubt behave differently.

Flash memory and controller types
SSDs are constructed from several types of flash memory. The main difference among the types
has to do with how many bits of information are stored in each individual flash memory location.
Single-level cells (SLC memories) store a single bit; they’re the fastest but most expensive
option. Also common in the mix are multilevel cells (MLC) and triple-level cells (TLC).

SSD reviews lovingly describe these implementation details as a matter of course, but it’s not
clear why buyers should care. Some SSDs are faster than others, but no particular hardware-
related insight is needed to appreciate this fact. Standard benchmarks capture the performance
differences quite well.
In theory, SLC flash memory has a reliability advantage over other types. In practice, reliability
seems to have more to do with how well a drive’s firmware manages the memory and with how
much memory the manufacturer has set aside for replacing cells that develop problems.
The controllers that coordinate SSD components are still evolving. Some are better than others,
but these days all mainstream offerings tend to be respectable. If you want to invest time in
scrutinizing SSD hardware, it’s usually more efficient to research the reputations of the flash
memory controllers used to implement SSDs than to investigate the individual brands and models
of SSD. SSD manufacturers are usually pretty open about the controllers they’re using. If they
won’t tell you, reviewers certainly will.

Page clusters and pre-erasing
A further complication is that flash memory pages must be erased before they can be rewritten.
SSDs handle this detail for you. However, erasing is a separate operation that is slower than
writing. It’s also impossible to erase individual pages—clusters of adjacent pages (typically 128
pages or 512KiB) must be erased together. The write performance of an SSD can drop
substantially when the pool of pre-erased pages is exhausted and the drive must recover pages
on-the-fly to service ongoing writes.
Rebuilding a buffer of erased pages is harder than it might seem because filesystems designed for
traditional hard disks do not actually erase data blocks they are no longer using. A storage device
doesn’t know that the filesystem now considers a given block to be free; it knows only that long
ago someone gave it data to store there. For an SSD to maintain its cache of pre-erased pages
(and thus, its write performance), the filesystem must be capable of informing the SSD that
certain pages are no longer needed. Support for this operation, known as TRIM, has finally
become widespread among filesystems. On our example systems, the only filesystem that does
not yet support TRIM is ZFS on Linux.

SSD reliability
A 2016 paper by Bianca Schroeder et al. (goo.gl/lzuX6c) summarized a vast set of SSD-related
data from Google’s data centers. The main conclusions:

      Memory technology has no relationship to reliability. Reliability varies widely among
      models, but as with hard disks, it can be assessed only retrospectively.
      Most read errors occur at the bit level and are corrected through redundant storage
      coding. These “raw” (but correctable) read errors are common and expected. They
      occur on most SSD drives on most days of operation.
      The most common failure mode is to discover more bad bits in a block than can be
      fixed by the coding system. These errors are detectable but uncorrectable; they
      necessarily entail data loss.
      Even among the most reliable SSD models, 20% of drives experienced at least one
      uncorrectable read error. Among the least reliable models, 63%.
      Although both drive age and workload correlate with uncorrectable error rates, the
      correspondence is weak. In particular, the study found no evidence for the notion that
      older SSDs are ticking time bombs that asymptotically approach certain failure.
      Because uncorrectable errors are only marginally correlated to workload, the standard
      reliability figure quoted by manufacturers—the uncorrectable bit error rate, or UBER
      —is meaningless. Workload has little effect on the number of errors observed, so
      reliability should not be characterized as a rate.

The most notable of these findings is that unreadable blocks are common and that they typically
occur in isolation. The usual scenario is for an SSD to report a block error but then continue to
function normally.

    See Chapter 28 for more information about setting up a comprehensive surveillance
    program.

Of course, unreliable storage devices are nothing new; backups and redundancy remain essential
no matter what hardware you’re using. However, SSD failures are sneakier than those you might
be accustomed to from dealing with hard disks. Unlike a hard disk, an SSD will rarely demand
your attention by failing in some obvious and unambiguous way. SSDs need structured and
systematic monitoring.
Errors develop over time regardless of a drive’s duty cycle, so SSDs are probably not a good
choice for archival storage. And conversely, an isolated bad block is not an indication that an
SSD has gone bad or is nearing the end of its useful life. In the absence of a larger pattern of
failures, it’s fine to reformat such a drive and return it to service.
Hybrid drives
After spending many years in the vaporware category, SSHDs—hard disks with built-in flash
memory caches—have become increasingly available. Current products are pitched at
consumers.
The initialism SSHD stands for “solid state hybrid drive” and is something of a triumph of
marketing, designed as it is to encourage confusion with SSDs. SSHDs are just traditional hard
disks with some extras on the logic board; in reality, they’re about as “solid state” as the average
dishwasher.
Benchmarks of current SSHD products have generally been unimpressive, even when the
benchmarks attempt to emulate real-world access patterns. In large part, that’s because the
current products often include only a token amount of flash memory cache.
Despite current SSHDs’ lackluster performance, the basic idea of multilevel caching is sound and
has been well exploited in systems such as ZFS and Apple’s Fusion Drive. As the price of flash
memory continues to fall, we anticipate that platter-based drives will continue to include more
and more cache. Those products may or may not be sold explicitly as SSHDs.
Advanced Format and 4KiB blocks
For decades, the standard size of a disk block was fixed at 512 bytes. That’s too small to be
practical from the perspective of most filesystems, so the filesystems themselves have long
aggregated 512-byte sectors into page clusters of 1KiB to 8KiB that are read and written
together.
Since no software that communicates with storage hardware actually has an interest in reading
and writing data at 512-byte granularity, it’s inefficient and wasteful for the hardware to maintain
such tiny sectors. Over the last decade, the storage industry has migrated to a new standard block
size of 4KiB, known as Advanced Format. All modern storage devices use 4KiB sectors
internally, although most of them continue to emulate 512-byte blocks from the perspective of
clients.
There are currently three different “worlds” that a storage device can live in:

      512n (or 512-native) devices are the old ones that actually have 512-byte sectors.
      These devices are no longer manufactured, but of course there are still plenty of them
      out there in the real world. These drives know nothing about Advanced Format.
      4Kn (or 4K-native) devices are Advanced Format devices that have 4KiB sectors (or
      pages, in the case of SSDs) and that report their block size as 4KiB to the host
      computer. All interfacing hardware and all software that deals directly with the
      device must be aware of, and prepared to deal with, 4KiB blocks.

      4Kn is the wave of the future, but because it demands both hardware and software
      support, its adoption will be gradual. Enterprise drives with 4Kn interfaces started
      becoming available in 2014, but at this point you’re in no danger of encountering a
      4Kn drive unless you explicitly order one.

      512e (or 512-emulated) devices use 4KiB blocks internally, but they report their
      sector size as 512 bytes to the host computer. Firmware in the device aggregates 512-
      byte block operations into operations on the actual 4KiB storage blocks.

The transition from 512n to 512e was completed in 2011. These two systems look essentially
identical from the perspective of the host computer, so 512e devices work fine with old
computers and old operating systems.
The one thing to know about 512e is that it’s sensitive to misalignment between filesystem page
clusters and hardware disk blocks. Because the disk can only read or write 4KiB pages (despite
its emulation of traditional 512-byte blocks), filesystem cluster boundaries and hard disk block
boundaries should coincide. You wouldn’t want a 4KiB logical cluster to correspond to half of
one 4KiB disk block and half of another—with that layout, the disk might have to read or write
twice as many physical pages as it should to service a given number of logical clusters.
Since filesystems usually count off their clusters starting at the beginning of whatever storage is
allocated to them, you can finesse the alignment issue by aligning disk partitions to a power-of-2
boundary that is large in comparison with the likely size of disk and filesystem pages (e.g.,
64KiB). Partitioning tools on modern versions of Windows, Linux, and BSD automatically
enforce such alignment. However, 512e disks that were mispartitioned on legacy systems can’t
be transparently corrected; you’ll need to run an alignment utility to adjust the partition
boundaries and physically move the data. Or, you can simply erase the device entirely and start
over.
20.3 STORAGE HARDWARE INTERFACES
These days, only a few interface standards are in common use. If a system supports several
different interfaces, use the one that best meets your requirements for speed, redundancy,
mobility, and price.
The SATA interface
Serial ATA, SATA, is the predominant hardware interface for storage. In addition to supporting
high transfer rates (currently 6 Gb/s), SATA has native support for hot-swapping and (optional)
command queueing, two features that finally make ATA a viable alternative to SAS in server
environments.
SATA cables slide easily onto their mating connectors, but they can just as easily slide off.
Cables with locking catches are available, but they’re a mixed blessing. On motherboards with
six or eight SATA connectors packed together, it can be hard to disengage the locking connectors
without a pair of needle-nosed pliers.
SATA also introduces an external cabling standard called eSATA. The cables are electrically
identical to standard SATA, but the connectors are slightly different. You can add an eSATA
port to a system that has only internal SATA connectors by installing an inexpensive converter
bracket.
Be leery of external multidrive enclosures that have only a single eSATA port—some of these
are smart (RAID) enclosures that require a proprietary driver, and the drivers rarely support
UNIX or Linux. Others are dumb enclosures that have a SATA port multiplier built in. These are
potentially usable on UNIX systems, but since not all SATA host adapters support port
expanders, pay close attention to the compatibility information. Enclosures with multiple eSATA
ports—one per drive bay—are always safe.
The PCI Express interface
The PCI Express (Peripheral Component Interconnect Express, abbreviated PCIe) backplane bus
has been used on PC motherboards for more than a decade. It’s now the predominant standard for
connecting all kinds of add-on circuit boards, even video cards.
As the SSD market developed, it became clear that even at 6 Gb/s, the speed of SATA interfaces
would soon become inadequate to handle the fastest storage devices. Rather than assuming the
traditional shape of a 2.5" laptop hard disk, high-end SSDs began to take the form of circuit
boards that plugged directly into the system’s PCIe bus.
PCIe was attractive because of its flexible architecture and fast signaling rate. The version that is
now mainstream, PCIe 3.0, has a signaling rate of 8 gigatransfers per second (GT/s). The actual
throughput depends on how many signaling channels a device has; there can be as few as 1 or as
many as 16. The widest devices can achieve more than 15 GB/s of throughput. (It’s not quite 16
GB/s because some of the bandwidth is consumed by signaling overhead. However, the amount
of overhead is so small—about 1.5%—that it can safely be ignored.) The soon-to-debut PCIe 4.0
standard doubles the basic signaling rate to 16 GT/s.
When comparing PCIe to SATA, keep in mind that SATA’s speed of 6 Gb/s is quoted in gigabits
per second. Full-width PCIe is actually more than 20 times faster than SATA.

The SATA standard is feeling the pressure. Unfortunately, the SATA ecosystem is constrained
by past design choices and by the need to support existing cabling and connectors. It’s unlikely
that the speed of SATA interfaces can be meaningfully improved over the next few years.
Instead, recent work has focused on attempting to unify SATA and PCIe at the level of
interconnections. The M.2 standard for plug-in cards routes SATA, PCIe (with up to four data
lanes), and USB 3.0 connectivity over a standard connector. One or two of these slots are now
standard on laptop computers, and they can also be found on desktop systems.
M.2 cards are about an inch wide and can be up to about four inches long. They are thin, with
only a few millimeters allowed on both sides for components.
U.2 is more recent tweak to the M.2 approach; it’s just starting to become available. Instead of
USB, U.2 feature SAS connectivity in addition to SATA and PCIe.
The SAS interface
SAS stands for Serial Attached SCSI, the SCSI portion of which denotes the Small Computer
System Interface, a generic data pipe that once connected many different types of peripherals.
These days, USB has captured the market for peripheral connections and SCSI is found only in
the form of SAS, an enterprise-level interface used to connect large numbers of storage devices.
Now that SAS and SCSI are largely synonymous, the vast history of different SCSI technologies
dating back to 1986 serves mostly to create confusion. Operating systems further muddy the
waters by filtering all disk access through a “SCSI subsystem” regardless of whether an actual
SCSI device is involved or not. Our advice is to ignore all this history and consider SAS as its
own system.
Like SATA, SAS is a point-to-point system: you plug a drive into a SAS port through a cable or
direct-mount backplane. However, SAS allows “expanders” to connect multiple devices to a
single host port. They’re analogous to SATA port multipliers, but whereas support for port
multipliers is hit or miss, SAS expanders are always supported.
SAS currently operates at 12 Gb/s, twice the speed of SATA.

In past editions of this book, SCSI was the obvious interface choice for server applications. It
offered the highest available bandwidth, out-of-order command execution (aka tagged command
queueing), lower CPU utilization, easier handling of large numbers of storage devices, and
access to the market’s most advanced hard drives.
The advent of SATA has removed or minimized most of these advantages, so SAS simply does
not deliver the clear advantages that SCSI used to. SATA drives compete with (and in some
cases, outperform) equivalent SAS disks in nearly every category. At the same time, both SATA
devices and the interfaces and cabling used to connect them are cheaper and far more widely
available.
SAS still holds a few trump cards:

      Manufacturers continue to use the SATA/SAS divide to stratify the storage market.
      To help justify premium pricing, the fastest and most reliable drives are still available
      only with SAS interfaces.
      SATA is limited to a queue depth of 32 pending operations. SAS can handle
      thousands.
      SAS can handle many storage devices (hundreds or thousands) on a single host
      interface. But keep in mind that all those devices share a single pipe to the host; you
      are still limited to 12 Gb/s of aggregate bandwidth.

The SAS vs. SATA debate may ultimately be moot because the SAS standard includes support
for SATA drives. SAS and SATA connectors are similar enough that a single SAS backplane can
accommodate drives of either type. At the logical layer, SATA commands are simply tunneled
over the SAS bus.
This convergence is an amazing technical feat, but the economic argument for it is less clear. The
expense of a SAS installation is mostly in the host adapter, backplane, and infrastructure; the
SAS drives themselves aren’t outrageously priced. Once you’ve invested in a SAS setup, you
might as well stick with SAS from end to end. (On the other hand, perhaps the modest price
premiums for SAS drives are a result of the fact that SATA drives can easily be substituted for
them.)
USB
The Universal Serial Bus (USB) is a popular option for connecting external hard disks. Current
speeds are 4 Gb/s for USB 3.0 and up to 10 GB/s for USB 3.1. (The speed of USB 3.0 is often
cited as 5 Gb/s, but because of mandatory encoding overhead, the actual transfer rate is more like
4 Gb/s.)
Both USB 3.0 and USB 3.1 are fast enough to accommodate all but the fastest SSDs streaming
data at full speed. Watch out for USB 2.0, however; it tops out at 480 Mb/s, which is too slow to
keep up with even a mechanical hard drive.
Storage devices themselves never come with native USB interfaces. External drives sold with
these interfaces are invariably SATA drives with a protocol converter built into the enclosure.
You can also buy these enclosures separately and install your choice of hard disks.
USB adapters are also available in the form of cradles and cable dongles. Cradles are particularly
helpful when disks must be swapped out frequently: just yank out the old disk and pop in a new
one.

USB thumb drives are perfectly legitimate storage devices. They present a block interface similar
to that of any other disk, although throughput is typically mediocre. The underlying technology is
similar to that of an SSD, but without some of the flourishes that give SSDs their superior speed
and robustness.
20.4 ATTACHMENT AND LOW-LEVEL MANAGEMENT OF DRIVES
The way a disk is attached to the system depends on the interface. The rest is all mounting
brackets and cabling. Fortunately, modern connection schemes are all pretty much idiot-proof.

     See this page for more information about dynamic handling of devices.

SAS is a hot-pluggable interface, so it’s fine to plug in new drives without powering off the
system or restarting it. The kernel should automatically recognize new devices and create device
files for them. SATA interfaces can also theoretically support hot-plugging. However, the SATA
specification does not require support for this feature, and most mass-market hardware does not
implement it.
It’s fine to attempt hot-plugging a SATA drive to find out if hot-plugging works on a particular
system. You won’t hurt anything. The worst that can happen is that the system ignores the drive.
Hot-plugging might seem like a neat trick that creates all sorts of options, such as the ability to
swap out a bad drive with little or no software-side wrangling. However, it’s tricky to get the
higher layers of the storage stack tuned to achieve these feats safely and reliably. We don’t
describe the management of hot-plugging in this book.
Installation verification at the hardware level
After you install a new disk, check to make sure that the system acknowledges its existence at the
lowest possible level. On a physical PC this is easy: the BIOS shows you a list of SATA and
USB disks connected to the system. SAS disks may be included here as well if the motherboard
supports them directly. If the system has a separate SAS interface card, you might need to invoke
the BIOS setup for that card to see the disk inventory.
On cloud servers and systems that support hot-pluggable drives, you might have to do some
sleuthing. Check the diagnostic output from the kernel as it probes for devices. For example, one
of our test systems showed the following messages for an older SCSI disk attached to a BusLogic
SCSI host adapter.

You may be able to review this information after the system has finished booting: look in your
system log files. See the material starting on this page for more information about the handling of
boot-time messages from the kernel.
Several commands can print out a list of the disks that the system is aware of. On Linux systems,
the best option is usually lsblk, which is standard on all distributions. For more information, ask
for model and serial numbers:
  lsblk -o +MODEL,SERIAL
On FreeBSD, use geom disk list.
Disk device files
A newly added disk is represented by device files in /dev. See this page for general information
about device files.
All our example systems automatically create these files for you, but you still need to know
where to look for the device files and how to identify the ones that correspond to your new
device. Formatting the wrong device file is a rapid route to disaster.
Table 20.2 summarizes the device naming conventions for disks on our example systems. Instead
of showing the abstract pattern according to which devices are named, Table 20.2 simply shows a
typical example for the name of the system’s first disk.

Table 20.2: Device naming standards for disks

Device names for whole disks comprise a basename that depends on the device driver and a
sequence number or letter that differentiates disks from each other. For example, /dev/sda on
Linux is the first drive managed by the sd driver. The next drive would be /dev/sdb, and so on.
FreeBSD has different driver names and uses numbers instead of letters, but the pattern is the
same.
Don’t ascribe too much significance to the driver names that show up in disk device files.
Modern kernels funnel both SATA and SAS management through a generic SCSI layer, so don’t
be surprised to see SATA disks masquerading as SCSI devices. Driver names also vary on cloud
and virtualized systems; a virtual SATA disk may or may not have the same driver name as an
actual SATA disk.
Device files for partitions add an additional decoration to the device file to indicate the partition
number. Partition numbering normally starts at 1 rather than 0.
Ephemeral device names
Disk names are assigned in sequence as the kernel enumerates the various interfaces and devices
on the system. Adding a disk can cause existing disks to change their names. In fact, even
rebooting the system can sometimes cause name changes.
These facts suggest a couple of good rules for system administrators to follow:

      Never make changes to disks, partitions, or filesystems without verifying the identity
      of the disk you’re working on, even on a stable system.
      Never mention a disk device in any sort of configuration file, lest it change out from
      under you at some point in the future.

The latter issue is most notable when you are setting up the /etc/fstab file, which lists filesystems
for the system to mount at boot time. It was once common to identify disk partitions by their
device files in /etc/fstab, but this is no longer safe. See this page for some alternative approaches.
       Linux has a couple of general ways around the “ephemeral names” issue. Subdirectories
       under /dev/disk list disks by various stable characteristics such as their manufacturer ID or
connection information. These device names (which are really just links back to the top-level
files in /dev) are stable, but they’re long and awkward.

At the level of filesystems and disk arrays, Linux uses both unique ID strings and text labels to
persistently identify objects. In many cases, the existence of these long IDs is cleverly concealed
so that you don’t have to deal with them directly.
parted -l lists the sizes, partition tables, model numbers, and manufacturers of every disk on the
system.
Formatting and bad block management
People sometimes use the word “formatting” to mean “writing a partition table on a disk and
setting up filesystems in the partitions.” But in this section, we use the word “formatting” to
mean the more fundamental operation of setting up a disk’s media at the hardware level. We’d
prefer to call the former operation “initializing,” but in the real world the terms are used more or
less interchangeably, so you have to decode the meaning through context.
The formatting process writes address information and timing marks on the platters to delineate
each sector. It also identifies bad blocks, imperfections in the media that result in areas that
cannot be reliably read or written. All modern disks have bad block management built in, so
neither you nor the driver need worry about managing defects. The drive firmware substitutes
known-good blocks from an area of backup storage on the disk that is reserved for this purpose.
All hard disks come preformatted, and the factory formatting is at least as good as any formatting
you can do in the field. It is best to avoid doing a low-level format if it’s not required. Don’t
reformat new drives as a matter of course.
If you encounter read or write errors on a disk, first check for cabling, termination, and address
problems, all of which can cause symptoms similar to those of a bad block. If after this procedure
you are still convinced that the disk has defects, you might be better off replacing it with a new
one rather than waiting long hours for a format to complete and hoping the problem doesn’t
come back.

Bad blocks that manifest themselves after a disk has been formatted may or may not be
automatically handled. If the drive is sure that the affected data can be reliably reconstructed, the
newly discovered defect might be mapped out on the fly and the data rewritten to a new location.
For more serious or less clearly recoverable errors, the drive aborts the read or write operation
and reports the error back to the host operating system.
SATA disks are usually not designed to be formatted outside the factory. However, you might be
able to obtain formatting software from the manufacturer, usually for Windows. Make sure the
software matches the drive you plan to format and follow the manufacturer’s directions carefully.
(On the other hand, at $100 for a 4TB drive, why bother?)
SAS disks format themselves in response to a standard command that you send from the host
computer. The procedure for sending this command varies from system to system. On PCs, you
can often send the command from the SAS controller’s BIOS. To issue the format command
from within the operating system, use the sg_format command on Linux and the camcontrol
command on FreeBSD.
Various utilities let you verify the integrity of a disk by writing random patterns to it and then
reading them back. Thorough tests take a long time (hours) and unfortunately seem to be of little
prognostic value. Unless you suspect that a disk is bad and are unable to simply replace it (or you
bill by the hour), you can skip these tests. Barring that, let the tests run overnight. Don’t be
concerned about “wearing out” a disk with overuse or aggressive testing. Enterprise-class disks
are designed for constant activity.
ATA secure erase
Since 2000, PATA and SATA disks have implemented a “secure erase” command that
overwrites the data on the disk according to a method the manufacturer has determined to be
secure against recovery efforts. Secure erase is NIST-certified for most needs. Under the U.S.
Department of Defense categorization, it’s approved for use at security levels less than “secret.”
Why is this feature even needed? First, filesystems generally do no erasing of their own, so an
rm -rf * of a disk’s data leaves everything intact and recoverable with software tools. It’s
critically important to remember this fact when disposing of disks, whether their destination is
eBay or the trash. (Now that most filesystems support the TRIM command to inform SSDs of
blocks that are no longer needed by the system, this statement is not quite as true as it used to be.
However, TRIM is advisory; an SSD is not required to erase anything in response.)
Second, even a manual rewrite of every sector on a traditional hard disk can leave magnetic
traces that are recoverable by a determined attacker with access to a laboratory. Secure erase
performs as many overwrites as are needed to eliminate these shadow signals. Magnetic
remnants won’t be a serious concern for most sites, but it’s always nice to know that you’re not
exporting your organization’s confidential data to the world at large. Some sites may have
regulatory or business requirements that dictate how data is to be erased.
Finally, secure erase has the effect of resetting SSDs to their fully erased state. This reset can
improve performance in cases in which the ATA TRIM command (the command to erase a
block) cannot be issued, either because the filesystem used on the SSD does not know to issue it
or because the SSD is connected through a host adapter or RAID interface that does not
propagate TRIM.

The ATA secure erase command is password-protected at the drive level to reduce the risk of
inadvertent activation. Therefore, you must set the password on a drive before invoking the
command. Don’t bother to record the password, however; you can reset it at will. There is no
danger of locking the drive.
     Under Linux, you can use the hdparm command to activate secure erase:

     The analogous FreeBSD command is camcontrol:

The SAS world has no analog to ATA’s secure erase command, but the SCSI “format unit”
command described under Formatting and bad block management is a reasonable alternative.
Many systems have a shred utility that attempts to securely erase the contents of individual files.
Unfortunately, it relies on the assumption that a file’s blocks can be overwritten in place. This
assumption is invalid in so many circumstances (any filesystem on any SSD, any logical volume
that has snapshots, anything on ZFS or Btrfs) that shred’s general utility is questionable.
For sanitizing an entire PC system at once, another option is Darik’s Boot and Nuke (dban.org).
This tool runs from its own boot disk, so it’s not a tool you’ll use every day. It is quite handy for
decommissioning old hardware, however.
hdparm and camcontrol: set disk and interface parameters
The hdparm (Linux) and camcontrol (FreeBSD) commands can do more than just send secure
erase commands. They give you a general way to interact with the firmware of SATA and SAS
hard disks.
As tools that operate close to the hardware layer, these commands work properly only on
nonvirtualized systems. On a traditional physical server, they are actually the best way to get
information about the system’s disk devices (hdparm -I and camcontrol devlist); we don’t
mention them elsewhere (e.g., in the “adding a disk” recipes at the start of this chapter) only
because they don’t work on virtual systems.
hdparm comes from the prehistoric world of IDE and has gradually grown to include coverage
of SATA and SCSI features. camcontrol started as a SCSI wrangling tool and has been extended
to cover some SATA features. The syntaxes are different, but the tools cover approximately the
same territory these days.
Among other things, these tools can set drive power options, enable or disable noise reduction
options, set the read-only flag, and print detailed drive information.
Hard disk monitoring with SMART
Hard disks are fault-tolerant systems that use error-correction coding and intelligent firmware to
hide their imperfections from the host operating system. In some cases, an uncorrectable error
that the drive is forced to report to the OS is merely the latest event in a long crescendo of
correctable but inauspicious problems. It would be nice to know about those omens before the
crisis occurs.
SATA devices implement a detailed form of status reporting that is sometimes predictive of drive
failures. This standard, called SMART, for “self-monitoring, analysis, and reporting technology,”
exposes more than 50 operational parameters for investigation by the host computer.
The Google disk drive study mentioned on this page has been widely summarized in media
reports as concluding that SMART data is not predictive of drive failure. That summary is not
accurate. In fact, Google found that four SMART parameters were highly predictive of failure
but that failure was not consistently preceded by changes in SMART values. Of failed drives in
the study, 56% showed no change in the four most predictive parameters. On the other hand,
predicting nearly half of failures sounds pretty good to us!
Those four sensitive SMART parameters are

      Scan error count
      Reallocation count
      Off-line reallocation count
      Number of sectors on probation

Those values should all be zero. According to the Google Labs study, a nonzero value in these
fields raises the likelihood of failure within 60 days by a factor of 39, 14, 21, or 16, respectively.

To take advantage of SMART data, you need software that queries your drives to obtain it and
then judges whether the current readings are sufficiently ominous to warrant administrator
notification. Unfortunately, reporting standards vary by drive manufacturer, so decoding isn’t
necessarily straightforward. Most SMART monitors collect baseline data and then look for
sudden changes in the “bad” direction rather than interpreting absolute values. (According to the
Google study, taking account of these “soft” SMART indicators in addition to the Big Four
predicts 64% of all failures.)
The standard software for SMART wrangling is the smartmontools package from
smartmontools.org. It’s installed by default on Red Hat, CentOS, and FreeBSD systems and is
usually in the default package repository on other systems.
The smartmontools package consists of a smartd daemon that monitors drives continuously and
a smartctl command you can use for interactive queries or for scripting. The daemon has a single
configuration file, normally /etc/smartd.conf, which is extensively commented and includes
plenty of examples.
SCSI has its own system for out-of-band status reporting, but unfortunately the standard is much
less granular in this respect than is SMART. The smartmontools attempt to include SCSI devices
in their schema, but the predictive value of the SCSI data is less clear.
20.5 THE SOFTWARE SIDE OF STORAGE: PEELING THE ONION
If you’re accustomed to plugging in a disk and having your Windows system ask if you want to
format it, you may be a bit taken aback by the apparent complexity of storage management on
UNIX and Linux systems. Why is it all so complicated?
To begin with, much of the complexity is optional. On UNIX and Linux systems with a window
manager, you can log in to your system’s desktop, connect that same USB drive, and have much
the same experience as on Windows. You’ll get a simple setup for personal data storage. If that’s
all you need, you’re good to go.

As usual in this book, we’re primarily interested in enterprise-class storage systems: filesystems
that are accessed by many users or processes (both local and remote) and that are reliable, high-
performance, easy to back up, and easy to adapt to future needs. These systems require a bit more
thought, and UNIX and Linux give you plenty to think about.
Elements of a storage system
Exhibit A shows a typical set of software components that can mediate between a raw storage
device and its end users. The architecture shown in Exhibit A is for Linux, but other systems
include similar features, although not necessarily in the same packages.

Exhibit A: Storage management layers

The arrows in Exhibit A mean “can be built on.” For example, a Linux filesystem can be built on
top of a partition, a RAID array, or a logical volume. It’s up to the administrator to construct a
stack of modules that connect each storage device to its final application.
Sharp-eyed readers will note that the graph has a cycle, but real-world configurations should not
loop. Linux allows RAID and logical volumes to be stacked in either order, but neither
component should be used more than once (though it is technically possible to do this).
Here’s what the pieces in Exhibit A represent:

      A storage device is anything that looks like a disk. It can be a hard disk, a flash
      drive, an SSD, an external RAID array implemented in hardware, or even a network
      service that gives block-level access to a remote device. The exact hardware doesn’t
      matter, as long as the device allows random access, handles block I/O, and is
      represented by a device file.
      A partition is a fixed-size subsection of a storage device. Each partition has its own
      device file and acts much like an independent storage device. For efficiency, the same
      driver that handles the underlying device usually implements partitioning.
      Partitioning schemes consume a few blocks at the start of the device to record the
      ranges of blocks in each partition.

      Volume groups and logical volumes are associated with logical volume managers
      (LVMs). These systems aggregate physical devices to form pools of storage called
      volume groups. An administrator can then subdivide this pool into logical volumes in
      much the same way that disks can be divided into partitions. For example, a 6TB disk
      and a 2TB disk could be aggregated into an 8TB volume group and then split into
      two 4TB logical volumes. At least one volume would include data blocks from both
      hard disks.

      Since the LVM adds a layer of indirection between logical and physical blocks, it can
      freeze the logical state of a volume simply by making a copy of the mapping table.
      Therefore, logical volume managers often have some kind of a “snapshot” feature.
      Writes to the volume are then directed to new blocks, and the LVM keeps both the
      old and new mapping tables. Of course, the LVM has to store both the original image
      and all modified blocks, so it can eventually run out of space if a snapshot is never
      deleted.

      A RAID array (a redundant array of inexpensive/independent disks) combines
      multiple storage devices into one virtualized device. Depending on how you set up
      the array, this configuration can increase performance (by reading or writing disks in
      parallel), increase reliability (by duplicating or parity-checking data across multiple
      disks), or both. RAID can be implemented by the operating system or by various
      types of hardware.

      As the name suggests, RAID is typically conceived of as an aggregation of bare
      drives, but modern implementations let you use as a component of a RAID array
      anything that acts like a disk.

      A filesystem mediates between the raw bag of blocks presented by a partition, RAID
      array, or logical volume and the standard filesystem interface expected by programs:
      paths such as /var/spool/mail, UNIX file types, UNIX permissions, etc. The
      filesystem determines where and how the contents of files are stored, how the
      filesystem namespace is represented and searched on disk, and how the system is
      made resistant to (or recoverable from) corruption.

      Most storage space ends up as part of a filesystem, but on some systems (not current
      versions of Linux), swap space and database storage can potentially be slightly more
      efficient without “help” from a filesystem. The kernel or database imposes its own
      structure on the storage, rendering the filesystem unnecessary.

If it seems to you that this taxonomy has a few too many little components that simply implement
one block storage device in terms of another, you’re in good company. The trend over the last
few years has been toward consolidating these components to increase efficiency and remove
duplication. Although logical volume managers did not originally function as RAID controllers,
most have absorbed some RAID-like features (notably, striping and mirroring).
On the cutting edge today are systems that combine a filesystem, a RAID controller, and an
LVM system all in one tightly integrated package. ZFS was the earliest example, but the Btrfs
filesystem for Linux has similar design goals. We have lots more to say about ZFS and Btrfs
starting on this page. (Spoiler alert: if you can use one of these systems, you probably should.)
The Linux device mapper
     For simplicity, we omitted a central component of the Linux storage stack from Exhibit A:
     the device mapper. This is a protean little beastie that has fingers inserted in multiple
contexts, prime examples being the implementation of LVM2, the implementation of filesystem
layers for containerization (see Chapter 25), and the implementation of whole-disk encryption
(search the web for LUKS).
The device mapper abstracts the idea of one block device being built on a collection of other
block devices. Given a mapping table of devices, it implements the ongoing translation among
them and routes each block to its appropriate home.
For the most part, the device mapper is part of the implementation of Linux storage and not
something you’ll deal with directly. However, you’ll see its traces whenever you access devices
under /dev/mapper. You can also set up your own mapping tables with the dmsetup command,
although cases in which you might need to do that are relatively rare.
In the next sections, we look in more detail at the layers involved in storage configuration:
partitioning, RAID, logical volume management, and filesystems.
20.6 DISK PARTITIONING
Partitioning and logical volume management are both ways of dividing up a disk (or pool of
disks, in the case of LVM) into separate chunks of known size. Linux and FreeBSD support both
of these methods.
Traditionally, partitioning was the lowest possible level of disk management, and only disks
could be partitioned. You could put individual disk partitions under the control of a RAID
controller or logical volume manager, for example, but you couldn’t then partition the resulting
logical volumes or RAID volumes.

The rule that only disks can be partitioned is increasingly being waived in favor of a more
general model in which disks, partitions, LVM pools, and RAID arrays can be derived from one
another in any order or combination. From the standpoint of software architecture, this is
beautiful and elegant. But from the standpoint of practicality, it has the unfortunate side effect of
implying that there’s some valid reason to partition entities other than disks.
In fact, partitioning is less desirable than logical volume management in most respects. It’s
coarse and brittle and lacks features such as snapshot management. Partitioning decisions are
difficult to revise later. The only notable advantages of partitioning over logical volume
management are its simplicity and the fact that Windows and PC BIOSs understand and expect
it. A few versions of UNIX that run on proprietary hardware have done away with partitioning
altogether, and nobody on those systems seems to miss it.
Both partitions and logical volumes make backups easier, prevent users from poaching each
other’s disk space, and confine potential damage from runaway programs. All systems have a
root “partition” that includes / and most of the local host’s configuration data. In theory,
everything needed to bring the system up to single-user mode is part of the root partition. Various
subdirectories (most commonly /var, /usr, /tmp, /share, and /home) can be broken out into their
own partitions or volumes. Most systems also have at least one swap area.
Opinions differ on the best way to divide up disks, as do the defaults used by various systems.
Most setups are relatively simple. Exhibit B illustrates a traditional partitions-and-filesystems
schema as it might be found on a couple of data disks on a Linux system. (The boot disk is not
shown.)

Exhibit B: Traditional data disk partitioning scheme (Linux device names)
Here are some general points to guide you:

      In the distant past, it was sometimes useful to have a backup root device that you
      could boot to if something went wrong with the normal root partition. These days, a
      bootable USB thumb drive or an OS installation DVD is a better recovery option for
      most systems. Backup root partitions are more trouble than they’re worth.
      Putting /tmp on a separate filesystem limits temporary files to a finite size and saves
      you from having to back them up. Some systems use a memory-based filesystem to
      hold /tmp for performance reasons. The memory-based filesystems are still backed
      by swap space, so they work well in a broad range of situations.

      Since log files are kept in /var/log, it’s a good idea for either /var or /var/log to be a
      separate disk partition. Leaving /var as part of a small root partition makes it easy to
      fill the root and bring the machine to a halt.
      It’s useful to put users’ home directories on a separate partition or volume. Even if
      the root partition is corrupted or destroyed, user data has a good chance of remaining
      intact. Conversely, the system can continue to operate even after a user’s misguided
      shell script fills up /home.
      Splitting swap space among several physical disks can potentially increase
      performance, although with today’s cheap RAM it’s usually better not to swap at all.
      This technique works for filesystems, too; put the busy ones on different disks. See
      this page for notes on this subject.
      As you add memory to your machine, also add swap space. See this page for more
      information about virtual memory.

      Try to cluster quickly changing information on a few partitions that are backed up
      frequently.
      The Center for Internet Security publishes configuration guidelines for a variety of
      operating systems at www.cisecurity.org/cis-benchmarks. They are “benchmarks” in
      the sense of being best practices. The documents include helpful recommendations
      for partitioning and filesystem layout.
Traditional partitioning
Systems that support partitions implement them by writing a “label” at the beginning of the disk
to define the range of blocks included in each partition. The exact details vary; the label must
often coexist with other startup information (such as a boot block), and it often contains extra
information such as a name or unique ID that identifies the disk as a whole.
The device driver responsible for representing the disk reads the label and uses the partition table
to calculate the physical location of each partition. Typically, one device file represents each
partition and an additional device file represents the disk as a whole.
Despite the universal availability of logical volume managers, some situations still require or
benefit from traditional partitioning.

      Only two partitioning schemes are used these days: MBR and GPT. We discuss the
      details of both schemes in the next sections.
      On PC hardware, the boot disk must have a partition table. Systems manufactured
      before 2012 usually require MBR, and some new systems require GPT. Most new
      systems support both.

      Installing an MBR or GPT partition table makes a disk comprehensible to Windows,
      even if the contents of the individual partitions are not. Though you may have no
      particular plans to interoperate with Windows, consider the ubiquity of Windows, the
      prevalence of virtual machines, and the portability of hard disks.
      Partitions have a defined location on the disk, so they guarantee locality of reference.
      Logical volumes do not (at least, not by default). In most cases, this fact isn’t terribly
      important. However, short seeks are faster than long seeks on mechanical hard disks,
      and the throughput of a disk’s outer cylinders (those containing the lowest-numbered
      blocks) can exceed the throughput of its inner cylinders by 30% or more.
      RAID systems (see this page) use disks or partitions of matched size. A given RAID
      implementation might accept entities of different sizes, but it will probably use only
      the block ranges that all devices have in common. Rather than letting extra space go
      to waste, you can isolate it in a separate partition. If you do this, however, use the
      spare partition for data that is infrequently accessed; otherwise, traffic on the partition
      will degrade the performance of the RAID array.
MBR partitioning
MBR (Master Boot Record) partitioning is an old Microsoft standard that dates back to the
1980s. It’s a cramped and ill-conceived format that can’t support disks larger than 2TB. Who
knew disks could ever get that big?
MBR offers no advantages over GPT except that it’s the only format from which old PC
hardware can boot Windows. Unless you’re forced by circumstances to use MBR partitions, you
typically don’t want them. Unfortunately, MBR is still a common default setup for many
distributions’ installers.
The MBR label occupies a single 512-byte disk block, most of which is consumed by boot code.
Only enough space remains to define four partitions. These are termed “primary” partitions
because they are defined directly in the MBR.
You can, in theory, define one of the primary partitions to be an “extended” partition, which
means that it contains its own subsidiary partition table. Unfortunately, extended partitions have
been known to cause a variety of subtle problems. It’s best to avoid them in these twilight years
of MBR.

The Windows partitioning system lets one partition be marked “active.” Boot loaders look for the
active partition and try to load the operating system from it.
Each partition also has a one-byte type attribute that is supposed to signal the partition’s contents.
Generally, the codes represent either filesystem types or operating systems. These codes are not
centrally assigned, but some common conventions have evolved. They are summarized by
Andries E. Brouwer at goo.gl/ATi3.
The MS-DOS command that partitioned hard disks was called fdisk. Most operating systems that
support MBR-style partitions have adopted this name for their own partitioning commands, but
there are many variations among fdisks. Windows itself has moved on: the command-line tool in
recent versions is called diskpart. Windows also has a partitioning GUI that’s available through
the Disk Management plug-in of mmc.
It does not matter whether you partition a disk with Windows or some other operating system.
The end result is the same.
GPT: GUID partition tables
Intel’s extensible firmware interface (EFI) project replaced the rickety conventions of PC BIOSs
with a more modern and functional architecture. EFI firmware is now standard for new PC
hardware, and EFI’s partitioning scheme has gained universal support among operating systems.
EFI has more recently become UEFI, a “unified” EFI effort supported by multiple vendors.
However, EFI remains the more common term in general use. UEFI and EFI are essentially
interchangeable.
The EFI partitioning scheme, known as a “GUID partition table” or GPT, removes the obvious
weaknesses of MBR. It defines only one kind of partition (no more “logical partitions in the
extended partition”), and you can create arbitrarily many of them. Each partition has a type
specified by a 16-byte ID code (a globally unique ID, or GUID) that requires no central
arbitration.
Significantly, GPT retains primitive compatibility with MBR-based systems by dragging along
an MBR as the first block of the partition table. This “fakie” MBR makes the disk look like it’s
occupied by one large MBR partition (at least, up to the 2TB limit of MBR). It isn’t useful per se,
but the hope is that the decoy MBR will at least prevent naïve systems from attempting to
reformat the disk.

Versions of Windows from the Vista era forward support GPT disks for data, but only systems
with EFI firmware can boot Windows from them. Linux and its GRUB boot loader have fared
better: GPT disks are supported by the OS and bootable on any system. Intel-based macOS
systems use both EFI and GPT partitioning.
Although GPT has already been well accepted by operating system kernels, many disk
management utilities are unmaintained and lack support for it. Make sure that any utility you run
on a GPT disk actually supports GPT.
Linux partitioning
Linux systems give you several options for partitioning, which makes for treacherous terrain,
given that some of the offerings are not GPT-aware. Default to parted, a command-line tool that
understands several label formats (including Solaris’s native one) and can move and resize
partitions in addition to simply creating and deleting them. A GUI version, gparted, runs under
GNOME.
      In general, we recommend gparted over parted. Both are simple, but with gparted you can
      specify the size of the partitions you want instead of specifying the starting and ending
block ranges. For partitioning the boot disk, most distributions’ graphical installers are the best
option since they typically suggest a partitioning plan that works well with that particular
distribution’s layout.
FreeBSD partitioning
     Like Linux, FreeBSD has several partitioning tools. Ignore all except gpart. The others
     exist only to lure you into making some kind of terrible mistake.
The mysterious “geoms” you’ll see referred to in the gpart man page (and in other storage-
related contexts on FreeBSD) are FreeBSD’s abstraction of storage devices. Not all geoms are
disk drives, but all disk drives are geoms, so you can use a generic disk name such as ada0
wherever a geom is called for.
The FreeBSD “adding a disk” recipe on this page uses gpart to configure the partition table on a
new disk.
20.7 LOGICAL VOLUME MANAGEMENT
Imagine a world in which you don’t know exactly how large a partition needs to be. Six months
after creating the partition, you discover that it is much too large, but that a neighboring partition
doesn’t have enough space. Sound familiar? A logical volume manager lets you reallocate space
dynamically from the greedy partition to the needy partition.
Logical volume management is essentially a supercharged and abstracted version of disk
partitioning. It groups individual storage devices into “volume groups.” The blocks in a volume
group can then be allocated to “logical volumes,” which are represented by block device files and
act like disk partitions.

However, logical volumes are more flexible and powerful than disk partitions. Here are some of
the magical operations a volume manager lets you carry out:

      Move logical volumes among different physical devices
      Grow and shrink logical volumes on the fly
      Take copy-on-write “snapshots” of logical volumes
      Replace on-line drives without interrupting service

      Incorporate mirroring or striping in your logical volumes

The components of a logical volume can be put together in various ways. Concatenation keeps
each device’s physical blocks together and lines the devices up one after another. Striping
interleaves the components so that adjacent virtual blocks are actually spread over multiple
physical disks. By reducing single-disk bottlenecks, striping can often result in higher bandwidth
and lower latency.
If you’ve had some prior exposure to RAID (see the section starting on this page), you might find
striping reminiscent of RAID 0. LVM implementations of striping tend to be more flexible than
RAID, though. For example, they may automatically optimize striping or allow devices of
different sizes to be striped, even if striping won’t actually happen 100% of the time. The line
between LVM and RAID has become blurry indeed, and even parity schemes like RAID 5 and
RAID 6 are making regular appearances in volume managers.
Linux logical volume management
     Linux’s volume manager, called LVM2, is essentially a clone of HP-UX’s volume manager,
     which is itself based on software by Veritas. The commands for the two systems are
essentially identical. Table 20.3 summarizes the LVM command set.

Table 20.3: LVM commands in Linux

The top-level architecture of LVM is that individual disks and partitions (physical volumes) are
gathered into storage pools called volume groups. Volume groups are then subdivided into
logical volumes, which are the block devices that hold filesystems.
A physical volume needs to have an LVM label applied with pvcreate. Applying such a label is
the first step to accessing the device through the LVM. In addition to bookkeeping information,
the label includes a unique ID to identify the device.

“Physical volume” is a somewhat misleading term because physical volumes need not have a
direct correspondence to physical devices. They can be disks, but they can also be disk partitions
or RAID arrays. LVM doesn’t care.
You can control LVM with either a large group of simple commands (the ones listed in Table
20.3) or with the single lvm command and its various subcommands. These options are
essentially identical; in fact, the individual commands are just links to lvm, which looks to see
how it’s been called to know how to behave. man lvm is a good introduction to the system and
its tools.
A Linux LVM configuration proceeds in a few distinct phases:

      Creating (defining, really) and initializing physical volumes
      Adding the physical volumes to a volume group

      Creating logical volumes on the volume group

LVM commands start with letters that make it clear at which level of abstraction they operate: pv
commands manipulate physical volumes, vg commands manipulate volume groups, and lv
commands manipulate logical volumes. A few commands with the prefix lvm (e.g., lvmchange)
operate on the system as a whole.
In the following example, we set up a 1TB hard disk (/dev/sdb) for use with LVM and create a
logical volume. We assume that the disk has been partitioned as described on this page, with all
space being assigned to a single partition, /dev/sdb1. We could omit the partitioning step entirely
and just use the raw disk as our physical device, but there is no performance benefit to doing so.
Partitioning makes the disk comprehensible to the broadest variety of software and operating
systems.
The first step is to label the sdb1 partition as an LVM physical volume:

Our physical device is now ready to be added to a volume group:

Although we’re using only a single physical device in this example, we could of course add
additional devices. To step back and examine our handiwork, we use the vgdisplay command:
A PE is a physical extent, the allocation unit according to which the volume group is subdivided.
The final steps are to create the logical volume within DEMO and then to create a filesystem
within that volume. We make the logical volume 100GB in size:

Most of LVM’s interesting options live at the logical volume level. That’s where striping,
mirroring, and contiguous allocation would be requested if we were using those features.
We can now access the volume through the device /dev/DEMO/web1. We discuss filesystems in
general starting on this page, but here is a quick overview of creating an ext4 filesystem so that
we can demonstrate a few additional LVM tricks.

Volume snapshots
You can create copy-on-write duplicates of any LVM logical volume, whether or not it contains
a filesystem. This feature is handy for creating a quiescent image of a filesystem to be backed up
elsewhere, but unlike ZFS and Btrfs snapshots, LVM2 snapshots are unfortunately not very
useful as a general method of version control.
The problem is that logical volumes are of fixed size. When you create one, storage space is
allocated for it up front from the volume group. A copy-on-write duplicate initially consumes no
space, but as blocks are modified, the volume manager must find space in which to store both the
old and new versions. This space for modified blocks must be set aside when you create the
snapshot, and like any LVM volume, the allocated storage is of fixed size.
Note that it does not matter whether you modify the original volume or the snapshot (which by
default is writable). Either way, the cost of duplicating the blocks is charged to the snapshot.
Snapshots’ allocations can be pared away by activity on the source volume even when the
snapshots themselves are idle.

If you do not allocate as much space for a snapshot as is consumed by the volume of which it is
an image, you can potentially run out of space in the snapshot. That’s more catastrophic than it
sounds because the volume manager then has no way to maintain a coherent image of the
snapshot; additional storage space is required just to keep the snapshot the same. The result of
running out of space is that LVM stops maintaining the snapshot, and the snapshot becomes
corrupted.
So, as a matter of practice, LVM snapshots should be either short-lived or as large as their source
volumes. So much for “lots of cheap virtual copies.”
To create /dev/DEMO/web1-snap as a snapshot of /dev/DEMO/web1, we would use the
following command:

Note that the snapshot has its own name and that the source of the snapshot must be specified as
volume_group/volume.
In theory, /mnt/web1 should really be unmounted first to ensure the consistency of the
filesystem. In practice, ext4 protects us against filesystem corruption, although we might lose a
few of the most recent data block updates. This is a perfectly reasonable compromise for a
snapshot used as a backup source.
To check on the status of your snapshots, run lvdisplay. If lvdisplay tells you that a snapshot is
“inactive,” that means it has run out of space and should be deleted. There’s little you can do
with a snapshot once it reaches this point.

Filesystem resizing
Filesystem overflows are more common than disk crashes, and one advantage of logical volumes
is that they’re much easier to juggle and resize than are hard partitions. We have experienced
everything from servers used for personal video storage to departments full of email pack rats.
The logical volume manager doesn’t know anything about the contents of its volumes, so you
must do your resizing at both the volume and filesystem levels. The order depends on the specific
operation. Reductions must be filesystem-first, and enlargements must be volume-first. Don’t
memorize these rules: just think about what’s actually happening and use common sense.
Suppose that in our example, /mnt/web1 has grown more than we predicted and needs another
100GB of space. We first check the volume group to be sure additional space is available.

Note that 200GB of space has been consumed, 100GB for the original filesystem and 100GB for
the snapshot. However, plenty of space is still available. We unmount the filesystem and use
lvresize to add space to the logical volume.

The lvchange commands are needed to deactivate the volume for resizing and to reactivate it
afterwards. This part is needed only because an existing snapshot of web1 remains from our
previous example. After the resize operation, the snapshot will “see” the additional 100GB of
allocated space, but since the filesystem it contains is only 100GB in size, the snapshot will still
be usable.
We can now resize the filesystem with resize2fs. (The 2 comes from the original ext2 filesystem,
but the command supports all versions of ext.) Since resize2fs can determine the size of the new
filesystem from the volume, we don’t need to specify the new size explicitly. We would have to
do so when shrinking the filesystem:
That’s it! Examining the output of df again shows the changes:

Commands for resizing other filesystems work similarly. For XFS filesystems (the default on
Red Hat and CentOS systems), use xfs_growfs; for UFS filesystems (the default on FreeBSD),
use growfs. XFS filesystems must be mounted to be expanded. As the names of these commands
suggest, XFS and UFS filesystems can be expanded but not made smaller. If you need to remove
space, you’ll need to copy the filesystem’s contents to a new, smaller filesystem.
It’s worth noting that “disks” you allocate and attach to virtual machines in the cloud are
essentially logical volumes, although the volume manager itself lives elsewhere in the cloud.
These volumes are usually resizable through the cloud provider’s management console or
command-line utility.
The procedure for resizing cloud filesystems is much the same as the one outlined above, but
keep in mind that because these virtual devices impersonate disk drives, they probably have
partition tables. You’ll need to resize on three separate layers: at the cloud provider level, at the
partition level, and at the filesystem level.
FreeBSD logical volume management
     FreeBSD has a full-fledged logical volume manager of its own. Previous versions were
     known by the name Vinum, but now that the system has been rewritten to conform to
FreeBSD’s generalized geom architecture for storage devices, the name has been changed to
GVinum. Like LVM2, GVinum implements a variety of RAID types.
FreeBSD has recently put a lot of effort into ZFS support, and although GVinum has not been
officially deprecated, developers’ public comments suggest that ZFS is the recommended
approach for logical volume management and RAID going forward. Accordingly, we do not
discuss GVinum here. ZFS is covered starting on this page.
20.8 RAID: REDUNDANT ARRAYS OF INEXPENSIVE DISKS
Even with backups, the consequences of a disk failure on a server can be disastrous. RAID,
“redundant arrays of inexpensive disks,” is a system that distributes or replicates data across
multiple disks. RAID is sometimes glossed as “redundant arrays of independent disks,” too. Both
versions are historically accurate.
RAID not only helps avoid data loss but also minimizes the downtime associated with hardware
failures (often to zero) and potentially increases performance.

RAID can be implemented by dedicated hardware that presents a group of hard disks to the
operating system as a single composite drive. It can also be implemented simply by the operating
system’s reading or writing multiple disks according to the rules of RAID.
Software vs. hardware RAID
Because the disks themselves are always the most significant bottleneck in a RAID
implementation, there is no reason to assume that a hardware-based implementation of RAID
will necessarily be faster than a software- or OS-based implementation. Hardware RAID has
been predominant in the past for two main reasons: lack of software alternatives (no direct OS
support for RAID) and hardware’s ability to buffer writes in some form of nonvolatile memory.
The latter feature does improve performance because it makes writes appear to complete
instantaneously. It also protects against a potential corruption issue called the “RAID 5 write
hole,” which we describe in more detail starting on this page. But beware: many of the common
“RAID cards” sold for PCs have no nonvolatile memory at all; they are just glorified SATA
interfaces with some RAID software on-board. RAID implementations on PC motherboards fall
into this category as well. You’re better off using the RAID features in Linux or FreeBSD on
these systems. (Or better yet, use ZFS or Btrfs.)
We have experienced a disk controller failure on an important production server. Although the
data was replicated across several physical drives, a faulty hardware RAID controller destroyed
the data on all disks. A lengthy and ugly restore process ensued. The rebuilt server now relies on
the kernel’s software to manage its RAID environment, removing the possibility of another
RAID controller failure.
RAID levels
RAID can do two basic things. First, it can improve performance by “striping” data across
multiple drives, thus allowing several drives to work simultaneously to supply or absorb a single
data stream. Second, it can replicate data across multiple drives, decreasing the risk associated
with a single failed disk.
Replication assumes two basic forms: mirroring, in which data blocks are reproduced bit-for-bit
on several different drives, and parity schemes, in which one or more drives contain an error-
correcting checksum of the blocks on the remaining data drives. Mirroring is faster but consumes
more disk space. Parity schemes are more disk-space-efficient but have lower performance.
RAID is traditionally described in terms of “levels” that specify the exact details of the
parallelism and redundancy implemented by an array. The term is perhaps misleading because
“higher” levels are not necessarily “better.” The levels are simply different configurations; use
whichever versions suit your needs.
In the following illustrations, numbers identify stripes and the letters a, b, and c identify data
blocks within a stripe. Blocks marked p and q are parity blocks.

“Linear mode,” also known as JBOD (for “just a bunch of disks”) is not even a real RAID level.
And yet, every RAID controller seems to implement it. JBOD concatenates the block addresses
of multiple drives to create a single, larger virtual drive. It has no data redundancy or
performance benefit. These days, JBOD functionality is best achieved through a logical volume
manager rather than a RAID system.
RAID level 0 increases performance. It combines two or more drives of equal size, but instead of
stacking them end-to-end, it stripes data alternately among the disks in the pool. Sequential reads
and writes are therefore spread among several disks, decreasing write and access times.

Note that RAID 0 has reliability characteristics that are significantly inferior to separate disks. A
two-drive array has roughly double the annual failure rate of a single drive, and so on.
RAID level 1 is colloquially known as mirroring. Writes are duplicated to two or more drives
simultaneously. This arrangement makes writes slightly slower than they would be on a single
drive. However, it offers read speeds comparable to RAID 0 because reads can be farmed out
among the several duplicate disk drives.
RAID levels 1+0 and 0+1 are stripes of mirrors or mirrors of stripes. Logically, they are
concatenations of RAID 0 and RAID 1, but many controllers and software implementations
support them directly. The goal of both modes is to simultaneously obtain the performance of
RAID 0 and the redundancy of RAID 1. These configurations need at least four devices.

RAID level 5 stripes both data and parity information, adding redundancy while simultaneously
improving read performance. In addition, RAID 5 is more efficient in its use of disk space than is
RAID 1. If an array has N drives (at least three are required), N–1 of them can store data. The
space-efficiency of RAID 5 is therefore at least 67%, whereas that of mirroring cannot be higher
than 50%.

RAID level 6 is similar to RAID 5 with two parity disks. A RAID 6 array can withstand the
complete failure of two drives without losing data. RAID 6 requires at least four devices.
RAID levels 2, 3, and 4 are defined but rarely deployed. Logical volume managers usually
include both striping (RAID 0) and mirroring (RAID 1) features.
As RAID systems, logical volume managers, and filesystem all rolled into one, ZFS and Btrfs
support striping, mirroring, and configurations similar to RAID 5 and RAID 6. See this page for
more details on these options.

     Linux supports both ZFS and Btrfs, though you might have to install ZFS separately. Btrfs’s
     RAID 5 and RAID 6 support is not officially ready for production use.
For simple striped and mirrored configurations outside the context of one of these filesystems,
Linux gives you a choice between a dedicated RAID system (md; see this page) and the logical
volume manager, LVM. The LVM approach is perhaps more flexible, but the md approach may
be a bit more rigorously predictable. If you opt for md, you can still use LVM to manage the
space on the RAID volume. For RAID 5 and RAID 6, you must use md to implement software
RAID.
     ZFS is the preferred RAID implementation for FreeBSD. However, two additional
     implementations are available.
At the disk driver level, FreeBSD’s geom system can combine disks into RAID arrays with
support for RAID 0, RAID 1, and RAID 3. (RAID 3 is similar to RAID 5 but uses a dedicated
parity disk instead of distributing parity among all disks in a pool.) You can stack geoms, so
RAID 1+0 and RAID 0+1 are possible as well.

FreeBSD also includes support for RAID 0, RAID 1, and RAID 5 in its logical volume manager,
GVinum. However, with the advent of full support for ZFS on FreeBSD, the future of GVinum
appears to be in question. It is not yet officially deprecated but no longer seems to be actively
maintained.
Disk failure recovery
The Google disk failure study cited on this page should be pretty convincing evidence of the
need for some form of storage redundancy in most production environments. At an 8% annual
failure rate, your organization needs only 150 hard disks in service to expect an average of one
disk failure per month.
JBOD and RAID 0 modes are of no help when hardware problems occur; you must recover your
data manually from backups. Other forms of RAID enter a degraded mode in which the
offending devices are marked as faulty. The RAID arrays continue to function normally from the
perspective of storage clients, although perhaps at reduced performance.
Bad disks must be swapped out for new ones as soon as possible to restore redundancy to the
array. A RAID 5 array or two-disk RAID 1 array can tolerate the failure of only a single device.
Once that failure has occurred, the array is vulnerable to a second failure.
The specifics of the process are usually pretty simple. You replace the failed disk with another of
similar or greater size, then tell the RAID implementation to replace the old disk with the new
one. What follows is an extended period during which the parity or mirror information is
rewritten to the new, blank disk. This is typically an overnight operation. The array remains
available to clients during this phase, but performance is likely to be poor.

To limit downtime and the vulnerability of the array to a second failure, most RAID
implementations let you designate one or more disks as “hot” spares. When a failure occurs, the
faulted disk is automatically swapped for a spare, and the process of resynchronizing the array
begins immediately. Where supported, hot spares should be used as a matter of course.
Drawbacks of RAID 5
RAID 5 is a popular configuration, but it has some weaknesses, too. The following issues apply
to RAID 6 also, but for simplicity we frame the discussion in terms of RAID 5.
First, it’s critically important to note that RAID 5 does not replace regular off-line backups. It
protects the system against the failure of one disk—that’s it. It does not protect against the
accidental deletion of files. It does not protect against controller failures, fires, hackers, or any
number of other hazards.
Second, RAID 5 isn’t known for its great write performance. RAID 5 writes data blocks to N–1
disks and parity blocks to the Nth disk. Parity data is distributed among all the drives in the array;
each stripe has its parity stored on a different drive. Since there’s no dedicated parity disk, it’s
unlikely that any single disk will act as a bottleneck.
Whenever a random block is written, at least one data block and the parity block for that stripe
must be updated. Furthermore, the RAID system doesn’t know what the new parity block ought
to contain until it has read the old parity block and the old data. Each random write therefore
expands into four operations: two reads and two writes. (Sequential writes may fare better if the
implementation is smart.)

Finally, RAID 5 is vulnerable to corruption in certain circumstances. Its incremental updating of
parity data is more efficient than reading the entire stripe and recalculating the stripe’s parity
from the original data. On the other hand, it means that at no point is parity data ever validated or
recalculated. If any block in a stripe should fall out of sync with the parity block, that fact will
never become evident in normal use; reads of the data blocks will still return the correct data.
Only when a disk fails does the problem become apparent. The parity block will likely have been
rewritten many times since the occurrence of the original desynchronization. Therefore, the
reconstructed data block on the replacement disk will consist of essentially random data.
This kind of desynchronization between data and parity blocks isn’t all that unlikely, either. Disk
drives are not transactional devices. Without an additional layer of safeguards, there is no simple
way to guarantee that either two blocks or zero blocks on two different disks will be properly
updated. It’s quite possible for a crash, power failure, or communication problem at the wrong
moment to create data/parity skew.
This problem is known as the RAID 5 “write hole,” and it has received increasing attention over
the last ten years or so. The implementors of the ZFS filesystem claim that because ZFS uses
variable-width stripes, it is immune to the RAID 5 write hole. That’s also why ZFS calls its
RAID implementation RAID-Z instead of RAID 5, though in practice the concept is similar.

Another potential solution is “scrubbing,” validating parity blocks one by one while the array is
relatively idle. Most RAID implementations include some form of scrubbing function. You just
have to remember to activate it regularly (by initiating it from cron or a systemd timer).
mdadm: Linux software RAID
      The standard software RAID implementation for Linux is called md, the “multiple disks”
      driver. It’s front-ended by the mdadm command. md supports all the RAID configurations
listed above as well as RAID 4. An earlier system known as raidtools is no longer used.
You can also implement RAID on Linux through the logical volume manager (LVM2) or
through Btrfs or another filesystem with built-in volume management and RAID features. We
address LVM2 starting on this page and next-generation filesystems starting on this page.
Generally, these multiple implementations represent different epochs of software development,
with mdadm being the earliest and ZFS/Btrfs the most recent.
All these systems are actively maintained, so choose whichever you prefer. Sites without an
installed base are best off jumping directly to an all-in-one system like Btrfs.

Creating an array
The following scenario configures a RAID 5 array composed of three identical 1TB hard disks.
Although md can use raw disks as components, we prefer to give every disk a partition table for
consistency, so we start by running gparted, creating a GPT partition table on each disk and
assigning all the disk’s space to a single partition of type “Linux RAID.” It’s not strictly
necessary to set the partition type, but it’s a useful reminder to anyone who might inspect the
table later.
The following command builds a RAID 5 array from three whole-disk partitions:

The virtual file /proc/mdstat always contains a summary of md’s status and the status of all the
system’s RAID arrays. It is especially useful to keep an eye on the /proc/mdstat file after adding
a new disk or replacing a faulty drive. (watch cat /proc/mdstat is a handy idiom.)
The md system does not keep track of which blocks in an array have been used, so it must
manually synchronize all the parity blocks with their corresponding data blocks. md calls the
operation a “recovery” since it’s essentially the same procedure used when you swap out a bad
hard disk. It can take many hours on a large array.
Some helpful notifications appear in the system logs, too (usually /var/log/messages or
/var/log/syslog):

The initial creation command also serves to “activate” the array (make it available for use). On
subsequent reboots, most distributions (including all our examples) automatically discover and
activate any existing arrays.
Note that you specify a device pathname for the composite array when you run mdadm --create.
Old-style md device paths looked like /dev/md0, but when you specify a path under the /dev/md
directory, as was done in this example, mdadm writes your chosen name into the array’s
superblock. This measure ensures that you can always locate the array by its logical path, even
when the array is autostarted and might be assigned a different array number. As you can see
from the log entries above, the array also has a traditional name (here, /dev/md127).
/dev/md/extra is just a symbolic link to the actual array device.

mdadm.conf: document array configuration
mdadm does not technically require a configuration file, but it will use a configuration file if you
supply one, typically /etc/mdadm/mdadm.conf or /etc/mdadm.conf. We recommend that you
add ARRAY entries to the configuration file as you create new arrays. Doing so documents the
RAID configuration in a standard place and gives administrators an obvious place to look for
information when problems occur.
mdadm --detail --scan dumps the current RAID setup in the format required for inclusion in
mdadm.conf. For example,

With the addition of this line, mdadm can now read mdadm.conf at startup or shutdown to
easily manage the array. For example, to take down the array created above, we could run

And to start it up again, run

The first of these commands would work even without the mdadm.conf file, but the second
would not.

We formerly recommended that you add DEVICE entries for the components of each array to
mdadm.conf, too. We take that back. Device names are more ephemeral these days and mdadm
is better at finding and identifying array components than it used to be. We don’t think DEVICE
entries are a best practice anymore.
mdadm has a --monitor mode in which it runs continuously as a daemon process and raises an
alarm when problems are detected on a RAID array. Use this feature! To set it up, add a
MAILADDR or PROGRAM line to your mdadm.conf file. A MAILADDR notifies you of issues by email,
and a PROGRAM configuration runs an external reporting tool that you supply (as is useful for
integrating with monitoring systems; see Chapter 28).
You also need to arrange for the monitor daemon to run at boot time. All our example
distributions have an init script that does this for you, but the names and procedures for enabling
it are slightly different.
Simulating a failure
What happens when a disk actually fails? Let’s find out! mdadm offers the handy option to
simulate a failed disk.

Because RAID 5 is a redundant configuration, the array continues to function in degraded mode,
so users will not necessarily be aware of the problem.

To remove the drive from the RAID configuration, use mdadm -r:

Once the disk has been logically removed, you can shut down the system and replace the drive.
Hot-swappable drive hardware lets you make the change without turning off the system or
rebooting.
If your RAID components are raw disks, replace them only with an identical drive. You can
replace partition-based components with any partition of similar size, which is a good reason to
build your arrays on top of partitions rather than raw disks. Still, for bandwidth matching it’s best
if the underlying drive hardware is similar. (Of course, if your RAID configuration is built on top
of partitions, you must run a partitioning utility to define the partitions appropriately before
adding the replacement disk to the array.)
In our example, the failure is just simulated, so we can add the drive back to the array without
replacing any hardware:
md immediately starts to rebuild the array. As always, you can see its progress in /proc/mdstat.
A rebuild can take hours, so consider this fact in your disaster recovery (and testing!) plans.
20.9 FILESYSTEMS
Even after a hard disk has been conceptually divided into partitions or logical volumes, it is still
not ready to hold files. All the abstractions and goodies described in Chapter 5, The Filesystem,
must be implemented in terms of raw disk blocks. The filesystem is the code that implements
these, and it needs to add a bit of its own overhead and data.
Early systems bundled the filesystem implementation into the kernel, but it soon became
apparent that support for multiple filesystem types was an important design goal. UNIX systems
developed a well-defined kernel interface that allowed multiple types of filesystems to be active
at once. The filesystem interface also abstracted the underlying hardware, so filesystems see
approximately the same interface to storage devices as do other UNIX programs that access the
disks through device files in /dev.

Support for multiple filesystem types was initially motivated by the need to support NFS and
filesystems for removable media. But once the floodgates were opened, the “what if” era began;
many different groups started to work on improved filesystems. Some were system-specific, and
others (such as ReiserFS) were not tied to any particular OS.
Most systems have settled on one or two filesystems as mainstream defaults. These filesystems
are rigorously tested along with the rest of the system before stable releases are issued.
The predominant pattern is for systems to officially support one traditional-style filesystem
(UFS, ext4, or XFS) and one next-generation filesystem that includes volume management and
RAID features (ZFS or Btrfs). Support for the latter options is usually best on physical hardware;
cloud systems can use them for data partitions, but sometimes not for the boot disk.
Although other filesystem implementations are often just a package installation away, add-on
filesystems do bring risk and potential instability. Filesystems are foundational, so they need to
be 100% stable and reliable under all use scenarios. Filesystem developers work hard to achieve
this level of robustness, but the risk can’t be entirely eliminated.

Unless you’re setting up a storage pool or data disk for a specific application, we recommend
against straying from your systems’ supported filesystems. That’s what the documentation and
administrative tools most likely assume.
The upcoming sections describe the most common filesystems and their management in a bit
more detail. We first describe the traditional filesystems UFS, ext4, and XFS, then move on to
the next-generation systems ZFS (this page) and Btrfs (this page).
20.10 TRADITIONAL FILESYSTEMS: UFS, EXT4, AND XFS
UFS, ext4, and XFS have separate code bases and histories, but over time they’ve become eerily
similar to one another from an administrative perspective.
These filesystems exemplify the old school approach in which volume management and RAID
are implemented separately from the filesystem itself. The filesystems limit themselves to plain-
vanilla file storage on block devices of defined size. Their features are more or less limited to
those outlined in Chapter 5.

Older filesystems in this category were subject to subtle corruption if power was interrupted in
the middle of a write operation, because then disk blocks could contain inconsistent data
structures. The fsck command was used at boot time to check filesystems for this kind of
problem and to automatically patch the most common issues.
Modern filesystems include a feature called journaling that averts the possibility of this type of
corruption. When a filesystem operation occurs, the required modifications are first written to the
journal. Once the journal update is complete, a “commit record” is written to mark the end of the
entry. Only then is the normal filesystem modified. If a crash occurs during the update, the
filesystem can later replay the journal log to reconstruct a perfectly consistent filesystem.
In most cases, only metadata changes are journaled. The actual data to be stored is written
directly to the filesystem. Some filesystems can use the journal for data too, but at a significant
performance cost.
Journaling reduces the time needed to perform filesystem consistency checks (see the fsck
section on this page) to approximately one second per filesystem. Barring some type of hardware
failure, the state of a filesystem can almost instantly be assessed and restored.

The Berkeley Fast File System implemented by McKusick et al. in the 1980s was an early
standard that spread to many UNIX systems. With some small adjustments, it eventually became
known as the UNIX File System (UFS) and formed the basis of several other filesystem
implementations, including Linux’s ext series. UFS remains the default filesystem used by
FreeBSD.
The “second extended filesystem,” ext2, was for a long time the mainstream Linux standard. It
was designed and implemented primarily by Rémy Card, Theodore Ts’o, and Stephen Tweedie.
Although the code for ext2 was written specifically for Linux, it is functionally similar to the
Berkeley Fast File System.
Ext3 added journaling, and ext4 is a comparatively modest update that raises a few size limits,
increases the performance of certain operations, and allows the use of “extents” (disk block
ranges) for storage allocation rather than just individual disk blocks. Ext4 is the default
filesystem on Debian and Ubuntu.
XFS was developed by Silicon Graphics, Inc., later known as SGI. It was the default filesystem
for IRIX, SGI’s version of UNIX, and was one of the first extent-based filesystems. That made it
particularly suitable for sites that processed large media files, as many SGI customers did. XFS is
the default filesystem on Red Hat and CentOS.
Filesystem terminology
Largely because of their common history, many filesystems share some descriptive terminology.
The implementations of the underlying objects have often changed, but the terms are still widely
used by administrators as labels for fundamental concepts.
“Inodes” are fixed-length table entries, each of which holds information about one file. The term
is probably short for “index nodes,” although its exact etymology is unclear. Inodes were
originally preallocated at the time a filesystem was created, but some filesystems now create
them dynamically as they are needed. Either way, an inode usually has an identifying number,
which you can see with ls -i.
Inodes are the “things” pointed to by directory entries. When you create a hard link to an existing
file, you create a new directory entry, but you do not create a new inode.
A superblock is a record that describes the characteristics of the filesystem. It contains
information about the length of a disk block, the size and location of the inode tables, the disk
block map and usage information, the size of the block groups, and a few other important
parameters of the filesystem. Because damage to the superblock could erase crucial information,
several copies of it are maintained in scattered locations.

The kernel caches disk blocks to increase efficiency. All types of blocks can be cached, including
superblocks, inode blocks, and directory information. Caches are normally not “write through,”
so there might be some delay between the point at which an application thinks it has written a
block and the point at which the block is actually saved to disk. Applications can request more
predictable behavior for a file, but this option lowers throughput.
The sync system call flushes modified blocks to their permanent homes on disk, possibly making
the on-disk filesystem fully consistent for a split second. This periodic save minimizes the
amount of data loss that might occur if the machine were to crash with many unsaved blocks.
Filesystems can do syncs on their own schedule or leave this up to the OS. Modern filesystems
have journaling mechanisms that minimize or eliminate the possibility of structural corruption
caused by a crash, so sync frequency now mostly has to do with how many data blocks might be
lost in a crash.
A filesystem’s disk block map is a table of the free blocks it contains. When new files are
written, this map is examined to devise an efficient layout scheme. The block usage summary
records basic information about the blocks that are already in use.
Filesystem polymorphism
Filesystems are software packages with multiple components. One part lives in the kernel (or
even potentially in user space under Linux; search for “FUSE”) and implements the nuts and
bolts of translating the standard filesystem API into reads and writes of disk blocks. Other parts
are user-level commands that initialize new volumes to the standard format, check filesystems
for corruption, and perform other format-specific tasks.
Long ago, the standard user-level commands knew about “the filesystem” that the system used,
and they simply implemented the appropriate functionality. mkfs or newfs created new
filesystems, fsck fixed problems, and mount mostly just invoked the appropriate underlying
system calls.
These days, many more filesystems exist, so systems have had to decide how to address this
cornucopia of options. For a long time, Linux tried to fit all filesystems into the standard mold of
mkfs and fsck by making those commands be wrappers. The wrappers called discrete commands
named, e.g., mkfs.fsname or fsck.fsname depending on the type of filesystem being manipulated.
These days, the pretense of homogeneity among filesystems has been stretched past the breaking
point, and most systems now advise you to call the filesystem-specific commands directly.
Filesystem formatting
     The general recipe for creating a new Linux filesystem is

On FreeBSD, the process for creating a UFS filesystem is similar, but with newfs:

The -L option to both mkfs and newfs sets a volume label for the filesystem such as “spare,”
“home,” or “extra.” This is just one option among many, but it’s an option that we recommend
you use on every filesystem. Labeling the filesystem frees you from having to track the device on
which it’s been installed. It’s particularly handy given that disk device names can change
whenever hardware is adjusted.
The available other_options are filesystem-specific, but their use is uncommon.
fsck: check and repair filesystems
Because of block buffering and the fact that disk drives are not really transactional devices,
filesystem data structures can potentially become self-inconsistent. If these problems are not
corrected quickly, they propagate and snowball.
The original fix for corruption was a command called fsck (“filesystem consistency check,”
spelled aloud or pronounced “FS check” or “fisk”) that carefully inspected all data structures and
walked the allocation tree for every file. It relied on a set of heuristic rules about what the
filesystem state might look like after failures at various points during an update.
The original fsck scheme worked surprisingly well, but because it involved reading all the data
on a disk, it could take hours on a large drive. An early optimization was a “filesystem clean” bit
that could be set in the superblock when the filesystem was properly unmounted. When the
system restarted, it would see the clean bit and know to skip the fsck check.
Now, filesystem journals let fsck pinpoint the activity that was occurring at the time of a failure.
fsck can simply rewind the filesystem to the last known consistent state.

Disks are normally fscked automatically at boot time if they are listed in the system’s /etc/fstab
file. The fstab file has legacy “fsck sequence” fields that ordered and parallelized filesystem
checks. But now that fscks are fast, the only thing that matters is that the root filesystem be
checked first.
You can run fsck by hand to perform an in-depth examination more akin to the original fsck
procedure, but be aware of the time required.
      Linux ext-family filesystems can be set to force a recheck after they have been remounted a
      certain number of times or after a certain period of time, even if all the unmounts were
“clean.” This precaution is probably good hygiene, and in most cases the default value (usually
around 20 mounts) is acceptable. However, on systems that mount filesystems frequently, such
as desktop workstations, even that frequency of fscks can become tiresome. To increase the
interval to 50 mounts, use the tune2fs command:

If a filesystem appears damaged and fsck cannot automatically repair it, do not experiment with
it before making an ironclad backup. The best insurance policy is to dd the entire disk to a
backup file or backup disk.
Most filesystems create a lost+found directory at the root of each filesystem in which fsck can
deposit files whose parent directory cannot be determined. The lost+found directory has some
extra space preallocated so that fsck can store orphaned files there without having to allocate
additional directory entries on an unstable filesystem. Don’t delete this directory. (Some systems
have a mklost+found command you can use to re-create this directory if it is deleted.)
Since the name given to a file is recorded only in the file’s parent directory, names for orphan
files are not available and so the files placed in lost+found are named with their inode numbers.
The inode table does record the UID of the file’s owner, however, so getting a file back to its
original owner is relatively easy.
Filesystem mounting
A filesystem must be mounted before it becomes visible to processes. The mount point for a
filesystem can be any directory, but the files and subdirectories beneath it are not accessible
while a filesystem is mounted there. See Filesystem mounting and unmounting for more
information.
After installing a new disk, mount new filesystems by hand to be sure that everything is working
correctly. For example, the command

mounts the filesystem in the partition represented by the device file /dev/sda1 (device names will
vary among systems) on a subdirectory of /mnt, which is a traditional path used to contain
temporary mounts.
You can verify the size of a filesystem with the df command. The example below uses the Linux
-h flag to request “human readable” output. Unfortunately, most systems’ df defaults to an
unhelpful unit such as “disk blocks,” but there is usually a flag to make df report something
specific such as kibibytes or gibibytes.
Setup for automatic mounting
You will generally want to configure the system to mount local filesystems at boot time. The
/etc/fstab file lists the device names and mount points of all the system’s disks (among other
things).
mount, umount, swapon, and fsck all read the fstab file, so it’s helpful if the data presented
there is correct and complete. mount and umount use the catalog to figure out what you want
done if you specify only a partition name or mount point on the command line. For example,
with the Linux fstab configuration shown on this page, the command

would have the same effect as typing

The command mount -a mounts all regular filesystems listed in the filesystem catalog; it is
usually executed from the startup scripts at boot time. (The noauto mount option excludes a given
filesystem from automatic mounting by mount -a.)
The -t fstype argument constrains the operation to filesystems of a certain type. For example,

mounts all local ext4 filesystems. The mount command reads fstab sequentially. Therefore,
filesystems that are mounted beneath other filesystems must follow their parent partitions in the
fstab file. For example, the line for /var/log must follow the line for /var if /var is a separate
filesystem.
The umount command for unmounting filesystems accepts a similar syntax. You cannot
unmount a filesystem that a process is using as its current directory or on which files are open.
Several commands can identify the processes that are interfering with your umount attempt; see
this page.
     The FreeBSD fstab file is the most traditional of our example systems. Here’s a sample
     from a system with only one real filesystem beyond the root (/spare):
Each line holds six fields separated by whitespace. Each line describes a single filesystem. The
fields are traditionally aligned for readability, but alignment is not required.

     See Chapter 21 for more information about NFS.

The first field gives the device name. The fstab file can include mounts from remote systems, in
which case the first field contains an NFS path. The notation server: /export denotes the /export
directory on the machine named server.
The second field specifies the mount point, and the third field names the type of filesystem. The
exact type name used to identify local filesystems varies among machines.
The fourth field specifies mount options to be applied by default. There are many possibilities;
see the man page for mount for the ones that are common to all filesystem types. Individual
filesystems usually introduce options of their own.
The fifth and sixth fields are vestigial. They are supposedly a “dump frequency” column and a
column that controls fsck parallelism. Neither is important on contemporary systems.

The devices listed for /dev/fd and /proc are dummy entries. These virtual filesystems are task-
specific and don’t require any additional information to be mounted. The other devices are
identified by their GPT partition labels, which is a more robust option than using actual device
names. To find out the label of an existing partition, run
  gpart show -l disk
to print the partition table of the appropriate disk. To set the label on a partition, use
  gpart modify -i index -l label disk

A cautionary note: partition tables are sometimes referred to as “disk labels.” Make sure when
reading documentation that you distinguish between the label of an individual partition and the
“label” of the disk itself. Overwriting a disk’s partition table is potentially disastrous.
UFS filesystems also have labels of their own, and these show up beneath the /dev/ufs directory.
The UFS labels and partition labels are separate, but they can be (and probably should be) set to
the same value. In this example, /dev/ufs/spare would work just as well as /dev/gpt/spare. To
find a filesystem’s current label, run
tunefs -p device
To set the label, run

  tunefs -L label device.
Unmount the filesystem before setting the label.
Below are some additional examples culled from an Ubuntu system’s fstab. The general format
is the same, but Linux systems use a different way to avoid naming disk devices.

The first line addresses the /proc filesystem, which in fact is presented by a kernel driver and has
no actual backing store. As in the FreeBSD example above, the proc device listed in the first
column is just a placeholder.
The second and third lines use filesystem IDs (UUIDs, which we’ve truncated to make the
excerpt more readable) instead of device names to identify volumes. This system is similar to the
UFS label system used by FreeBSD, except that the identifiers are long random numbers instead
of text strings. Use the blkid command to discover the UUID of a particular filesystem.
Filesystems can also have administratively assigned labels; use e2label or xfs_admin to read or
set them. If you want to use labels in fstab (which is tidier), just substitute LABEL=label for
UUID=long-random-number.

GPT disk partitions can have UUIDs and labels of their own that are independent of the UUIDs
and labels of the filesystems they contain. For use of these options to identify partitions in the
fstab file, the incantations are PARTUUID= and PARTLABEL=. However, common practice seems to
have converged on the use of filesystem UUIDs.
You can also identify devices with pathnames beneath the /dev/disk directory. Subdirectories
such as /dev/disk/by-uuid and /dev/disk/by-partuuid are automatically maintained by udev.
USB drive mounting
USB storage devices come in many flavors: personal “thumb” drives, digital cameras, and large
external disks, to name a few. Most of these are supported by UNIX systems as data storage
devices.
In the past, special tricks were necessary to manage USB devices. But now that operating
systems have embraced dynamic device management as a fundamental requirement, USB drives
are just one more type of device that shows up or disappears without warning.
From the perspective of storage management, the issues are two-fold:

      Getting the kernel to recognize a device and to assign a device file to it
      Finding out what assignment has been made

The first step usually happens automatically. Once a device file has been assigned, you can use
the normal procedures described in Disk device files to find out what it is.For additional
information about dynamic device management, see Chapter 11, Drivers and the Kernel.
Swapping recommendations
Raw partitions or logical volumes, rather than structured filesystems, are normally used for swap
space. Instead of using a filesystem to keep track of the swap area’s contents, the kernel
maintains its own simplified mapping from memory blocks to swap space blocks.
On some systems, it’s also possible to swap to a file in a filesystem partition. With older kernels
this configuration can be slower than using a dedicated partition, but it’s still handy in a pinch. In
any event, logical volume managers eliminate most of the reasons you might want to use a swap
file rather than a swap volume.
The more swap space you have, the more virtual memory your processes can allocate. The best
virtual memory performance is achieved when the swap area is split among several drives. Of
course, the best option of all is to not swap; consider adding RAM if you find yourself needing to
optimize swap performance.
The proper amount of swap space to allocate depends on how a machine is used. There is no
penalty to overprovisioning except that you lose the extra disk space. We suggest half the amount
of RAM as a rule of thumb, but never less than 2GB on a physical server.

If a system will hibernate (personal machines, usually), it needs to be able to save the entire
contents of memory to swap in addition to saving all the pages that would be swapped in normal
operation. On these machines, increase the swap space recommended above by the amount of
RAM.
Cloud and virtualized instances have their own peculiarities with respect to swap space. Paging is
always a performance killer, so some sources recommend running without swap space entirely; if
you need more memory, you need a larger instance. On the other hand, small instances usually
have such meager RAM allotments that they can barely boot without a swap area. The general
rule is that it’s fine for instances to have swap space as long as you don’t use it at steady state (or
pay extra for it). Whatever approach you decide to take, check your base images to see how
they’re set up. Some come with swap preconfigured and some don’t.
Some Amazon EC2 instances come with a local “instance store.” This is essentially a slice of a
local hard disk on the machine that runs the hypervisor. The contents of the instance store don’t
persist across starts and stops. The store is included in the price of the instance, so you may as
well use it for swap space if nothing else.
      On Linux systems, you initialize swap areas with mkswap, which takes the device name of
      the swap volume as an argument. mkswap writes some header information to the swap
area. That data includes a UUID, which is why swap partitions count as “filesystems” from the
perspective of /etc/fstab and can be identified there by UUID.
You can manually enable swapping to a particular device with swapon device. However, you
will generally want to have this function automatically performed at boot time. Just list swap
areas in the regular fstab file and give them a filesystem type of swap.
To review the system’s active swapping configuration, run swapon -s on Linux systems or
swapctl -l on FreeBSD.
20.11 NEXT-GENERATION FILESYSTEMS: ZFS AND BTRFS
Although ZFS and Btrfs are usually referred to as filesystems, they represent vertically integrated
approaches to storage management that include the functions of a logical volume manager and a
RAID controller. Although the current versions of both systems have a few limitations, most fall
into the “not yet implemented” category rather than the “can’t do for architectural reasons”
category.
Copy-on-write
Both ZFS and Btrfs avoid overwriting data in place and instead use a scheme known as “copy on
write.” To update a block of metadata, for example, the filesystem modifies the in-memory copy
and then writes it to a previously vacant disk block. Of course, that data block probably has a
parent block that points to it, so the parent is rewritten as well, as is the parent’s parent, and so on
back to the topmost level of the filesystem. (In practice, caching and careful design of data
structures optimize-out most of these writes, at least in the short term.)
The advantage of this architecture is that the on-disk copy of the filesystem remains perpetually
consistent. Before the root block is updated, the filesystem looks exactly as it did the last time the
root was updated. A few “empty” blocks have been modified, but nothing points to them, so it
makes no difference. The filesystem as a whole moves directly from one consistent state to
another.
Error detection
ZFS and Btrfs also take data integrity far more seriously than do traditional filesystems. These
systems store checksums for every disk block, and they verify all blocks read to ensure that
misreads are detected. On storage pools that include mirroring or parity, bad data is automatically
reconstructed from a known-good copy.
Disk drives implement their own layers of error detection and error correction, and although they
fail frequently, they’re not supposed to do so without reporting an error back to the host
computer. Nevertheless, they sometimes do return bad data without an error indication.
One commonly cited rule of thumb is to expect an instance of silent data corruption for every
75TB of data read. A 2008 study by Bairavasundaram et al. examined service records of more
than 1.5 million disk drives in NetApp servers and found that 0.5% of drives showed evidence of
silent read errors in each year of service. (Interestingly, one key finding of this study was that
enterprise-grade hard disks were an order of magnitude less likely to experience these types of
errors.)
These error rates are small, but by all indications they’re staying about the same even as disk
capacities and the volumes of data stored on disks expand exponentially. Soon we’ll have hard
disks so large that you can’t read the entire contents without a better-than-even chance of
encountering a silent error. The extra validation done by ZFS and Btrfs is starting to look really
important. (A related issue is the risk of random bit errors in RAM. They are infrequent but they
do happen. All production servers should use—and monitor!—ECC memory.)

Parity RAID does not address this issue, at least in normal use. Parity can’t be checked without a
reading of the contents of an entire stripe, and it’s inefficient to expand every disk access into a
full-stripe read. Scrubbing can help find latent errors, but only if they’re reproducible.
Performance
All the traditional filesystems that remain in common use have similar performance. It’s possible
to contrive workloads for which one filesystem or another has an edge, but general-purpose
benchmarks rarely show much difference.
Copy-on-write filesystems access storage media somewhat differently from traditional
filesystems, and they lack the decades of iterative refinement that have brought the old-guard
filesystems to their current state of polish. Usually, the traditional filesystems set the upper
bound on filesystem performance.
In many benchmarks, ZFS and Btrfs show performance comparable to traditional filesystems.
But at their worst, these filesystems can be about half as fast as the traditional options.
Judging from Linux benchmarks (the only platform on which direct comparison is possible, since
Btrfs is Linux-only), Btrfs currently has a slight performance edge over ZFS. However, the
results vary widely by access pattern. It is not uncommon for one of these filesystems to perform
well on a particular benchmark while the other lags far behind.

The performance picture is complicated by the fact that each of these filesystems has some
potential tricks up its sleeve to increase performance. Benchmarks usually don’t take account of
these end-arounds. ZFS lets you add caching SSDs to a storage pool; it automatically copies
frequently read data to the cache and avoids hitting the hard disks entirely. On Btrfs, you can use
chattr +C to disable copy-on-write semantics for the data in specific files (usually large or
frequently modified ones), thereby skirting some common low-performance scenarios.
For general use as root filesystems and home directory storage, ZFS and Btrfs perform well and
offer many useful advantages. They can also work well as data storage for specific server
workloads. However, in these latter scenarios, it’s worth taking some time to double-check their
behavior in your particular environment.
20.12 ZFS: ALL YOUR STORAGE PROBLEMS SOLVED
ZFS was introduced in 2005 as a component of OpenSolaris, and it quickly made its way to
Solaris 10 and to various BSD-based distributions. In 2008, it became usable as a root filesystem,
and it has been the front-line filesystem of choice for Solaris ever since. UFS remains the default
root filesystem on FreeBSD, but ZFS has been an officially supported option since FreeBSD 10.
ZFS is more than just a filesystem, RAID controller, and volume manager wrapped into one. As
originally conceived for OpenSolaris, it was a comprehensive rethinking of storage-related
administration that addressed everything from the way filesystems were mounted to the way they
were exported to other systems over NFS and SMB.

Modern BSD and Linux systems need to accommodate a variety of filesystems, so they’ve been
forced to back off a bit from ZFS’s original comprehensive approach. Nevertheless, ZFS remains
a thoughtfully designed system that solves quite a few administrative problems through its
architecture rather than through the addition of features.
ZFS on Linux
Although ZFS is free software, its use on Linux has been hampered by the fact that the source
code is covered by Sun Microsystems’ Common Development and Distribution License
(CDDL). The Free Software Foundation maintains that the CDDL is incompatible with the GNU
Public License, which covers the Linux kernel. Although add-on versions of ZFS for Linux have
long been available through the OpenZFS project (openzfs.org), the FSF’s position has
discouraged Linux distributions from bundling ZFS into their base systems.
After nearly a decade of impasse over this issue, the FSF’s position is at last being challenged by
Canonical Ltd., developers of Ubuntu. After a legal review, Canonical formally disputed the
FSF’s interpretation of the GPL and included ZFS in Ubuntu 16.04 in the form of a loadable
kernel module. So far (mid 2017), no lawsuit has resulted. If Canonical remains unpunished, it’s
possible that ZFS might become a fully supported root filesystem on Ubuntu and that other
distributions might follow suit in supporting it.
If nothing else, the story of ZFS is an interesting case in which the GPL has actively impeded the
development of an open source software package and blocked its adoption by users and
distributors. If you’re interested in the legal details, Richard Fontana’s wrap-up of open source
legal news for 2016 at goo.gl/PC9i3t includes a helpful summary.
ZFS architecture
Exhibit C shows a schematic of the major objects in the ZFS system and their relationship to
each other.

Exhibit C: ZFS architecture

A ZFS “storage pool” is analogous to a “volume group” in other logical volume management
systems. Each pool is composed of “virtual devices,” which can be raw storage devices (disks,
partitions, SAN devices, etc.), mirror groups, or RAID arrays. ZFS RAID is similar in spirit to
RAID 5 in that it uses one or more parity devices to implement redundancy for the array.
However, ZFS calls the scheme RAID-Z and uses variable-sized stripes to eliminate the RAID 5
write hole. All writes to the storage pool are striped across the pool’s virtual devices, so a pool
that contains only individual storage devices is effectively an implementation of RAID 0,
although the devices in this configuration are not required to be of the same size.
Unfortunately, the current ZFS RAID is a bit brittle: you cannot add new devices to an array
once it has been defined; nor can you permanently remove a device. As in most RAID
implementations, devices in a RAID set must be the same size. You can force ZFS to accept
mixed sizes, but the size of the smallest volume then dictates the overall size of the array. To use
disks of different sizes efficiently in combination with ZFS RAID, you must partition the disks
ahead of time and define the leftover regions as separate devices.
Most configuration and management of ZFS is done through two commands: zpool and zfs. Use
zpool to build and manage storage pools. Use zfs to create and manage the entities created from
pools, chiefly filesystems and raw volumes used as swap space, database storage, or backing for
SAN volumes.
Example: disk addition
Before we descend into the details of ZFS, here’s a high-level example. Suppose you’ve added a
new disk to your FreeBSD system and the disk has shown up as /dev/ada1. (An easy way to
determine the correct device is to run geom disk list.)
The first step is to add the disk to a new storage pool:

Step two is… well, there is no step two. ZFS creates the pool “demo,” creates a filesystem root
inside that pool, and mounts that filesystem as /demo. The filesystem is automatically remounted
when the system boots.

It would be even more impressive if we could simply add our new disk to the existing storage
pool of the root disk, which on FreeBSD is called “zroot” by default. (The command would be
sudo zpool add rpool ada1.) Unfortunately, the root pool can contain only a single virtual
device. Other pools can be painlessly extended in this manner, however.
Filesystems and properties
It’s fine for ZFS to automatically create a filesystem on a new storage pool—by default, ZFS
filesystems consume no particular amount of space. All filesystems that live in a pool can draw
from the pool’s available space.
Unlike traditional filesystems, which are independent of one another, ZFS filesystems are
hierarchical and interact with their parent and child filesystems in several ways. You create new
filesystems with zfs create:

The -r flag to zfs list makes it recurse through child filesystems. Most other zfs subcommands
understand -r, too. Ever helpful, ZFS automounts the new filesystem as soon as you create it.
To simulate traditional filesystems of fixed size, you can adjust the filesystem’s properties to add
a “reservation” (an amount of space reserved in the storage pool for the filesystem’s use) and a
quota. This adjustment of filesystem properties is one of the keys to ZFS management, and it’s
something of a paradigm shift for administrators who are accustomed to other systems. Here, we
set both values to 1GB:

The new quota is reflected in the AVAIL column for /demo/new_fs. Similarly, the reservation
shows up immediately in the USED column for /demo. That’s because the reservations of
/demo’s descendant filesystems are included in its size tally. (The REFER column shows the
amount of data referenced by the active copy of each filesystem. /demo and /demo/new_fs have
similar REFER values because they’re both empty filesystems, not because there’s any inherent
relationship between the numbers.)
Both property changes are purely bookkeeping entries. The only change to the actual storage
pool is the update of a block or two to record the new settings. No process goes out to format the
1GB of space reserved for /demo/new_fs. Most ZFS operations, including the creation of new
storage pools and new filesystems, are similarly lightweight.
Using this hierarchical system of space management, you can easily group several filesystems to
guarantee that their collective size does not exceed a certain threshold; you need not specify
limits on individual filesystems.
You must set both the quota and reservation properties to properly emulate a traditional fixed-
size filesystem. The reservation alone simply ensures that the filesystem has enough room
available to grow at least that large. The quota limits the filesystem’s maximum size without
guaranteeing that space is available for this growth; another object could snatch up all the pool’s
free space, leaving no room for /demo/new_fs to expand.

On the other hand, there are few reasons to set up a filesystem this way in real life. We show the
use of these properties simply to demonstrate ZFS’s space accounting system and to emphasize
that ZFS is compatible with the traditional model, should you wish to enforce it.
Property inheritance
Many properties are naturally inherited by child filesystems. For example, if we wanted to mount
the root of the demo pool in /mnt/demo instead of /demo, we could simply set the root’s
mountpoint parameter:

Setting the mountpoint parameter automatically remounts the filesystems, and the mount point
change affects child filesystems in a predictable and straightforward way. The usual rules
regarding filesystem activity still apply, however; see this page.

Use zfs get to see the effective value of a particular property; zfs get all dumps them all. The
SOURCE column tells you why each property has its particular value: local means that the
property was set explicitly, and a dash means that the property is read-only. If the property value
is inherited from an ancestor filesystem, SOURCE shows the details of that inheritance as well.

Vigilant readers might notice that the available and referenced properties look suspiciously similar to
the AVAIL and REFER columns shown by zfs list. In fact, zfs list is just a different way of
displaying filesystem properties. If we had included the full output of our zfs get command
above, there would be a used property in there, too. Use the -o option to specify the properties you
want zfs list to show.
It wouldn’t make sense to assign values to used and to the other size properties, so these properties
are read-only. If the specific rules for calculating used don’t meet your needs, other properties
such as usedbychildren and usedbysnapshots may give you better insight into how your disk space is
being consumed.
You can set additional, nonstandard properties on filesystems for your own use and for the use of
your local scripts. The process is the same as that for standard properties. For example, many
backup and snapshot utilities for ZFS read their configuration information from filesystem
properties.

The names of custom properties must include a colon to distinguish them from standard
properties.
One filesystem per user
Since filesystems consume no space and take no time to create, the optimal number of them is
closer to “a lot” than “a few.” If you keep users’ home directories on a ZFS storage pool, you
may find it helpful to make each home directory a separate filesystem.
There are several benefits:

      If you need to set disk usage quotas, home directories are a natural granularity at
      which to do this. You can set quotas on both individual users’ filesystems and on the
      filesystem that contains all users.
      Snapshots are per filesystem. If each user’s home directory is a separate filesystem,
      the user can access old snapshots through ~/.zfs. This feature alone is a huge time
      saver for administrators because it means that users can service most of their own file
      restore needs. (The .zfs directory is hidden by default. You can make it visible with
      zfs set snapdir=visible filesystem.)
      ZFS lets you delegate permission to perform various operations such as taking
      snapshots or rolling back the filesystem to an earlier state. If you prefer, you can give
      users control over these operations for their own home directories. We do not
      describe the details of ZFS permission management in this book, however; see the
      man page entry for zfs allow.
Snapshots and clones
Just like a logical volume manager, ZFS brings copy-on-write to the user level by allowing you
to create instantaneous snapshots. However, there’s an important difference: ZFS snapshots are
implemented per filesystem rather than per volume, so they have arbitrary granularity.
On the command line, you create snapshots with zfs snapshot. For example, the following
command sequence illustrates creation of a snapshot, use of the snapshot through the filesystem’s
.zfs/snapshot directory, and reversion of the filesystem to its previous state.

You assign a name to each snapshot at the time it’s created. The complete specifier for a
snapshot is usually written in the form filesystem@snapshot.
Use zfs snapshot -r to create snapshots recursively. The effect is the same as executing zfs
snapshot on each contained object individually: each subcomponent receives its own snapshot.
All the snapshots have the same name, but they’re logically distinct because the filesystem
portion is different.
ZFS snapshots are read-only, and although they can bear properties, they are not true filesystems.
However, you can instantiate a snapshot as a full-fledged, writable filesystem by “cloning” it:

The snapshot that is the basis of the clone remains undisturbed and read-only. However, the new
filesystem (demo/subclone in this example) retains a link to both the snapshot and the filesystem
on which it’s based, and neither of those entities can be deleted as long as the clone exists.
Cloning isn’t a common operation, but it’s the only way to create a branch in a filesystem’s
evolution. The zfs rollback operation demonstrated above can only return a filesystem to its
most recent snapshot, so to use it you must permanently delete (zfs destroy) any snapshots made
since the snapshot that is your reversion target. Cloning lets you go back in time without losing
access to recent changes.
For example, suppose that you’ve discovered a security breach that occurred some time within
the last week. For safety, you want to return a filesystem to its state of a week ago to be sure
today that it contains no hacker-installed back doors. At the same time, you don’t want to lose
recent work or the data for forensic analysis. The solution is to clone the week-ago snapshot to a
new filesystem, zfs rename the old filesystem, and then zfs rename the clone in place of the
original filesystem.

For good measure, also zfs promote the clone; this operation inverts the relationship between the
clone and the filesystem of origin. After promotion, the main-line filesystem has access to all the
old filesystem’s snapshots, and the old, moved-aside filesystem becomes the “cloned” branch.
Raw volumes
You create swap areas and raw storage areas with zfs create, just as you create filesystems. The -
V size argument makes zfs treat the new object as a raw volume instead of a filesystem. The size
can use any common unit, for example, 128m.
Since the volume does not contain a filesystem, it is not mounted; instead, it shows up in the
/dev/zvol directory and can be referenced as if it were a hard disk or partition. ZFS mirrors the
hierarchical structure of the storage pool in these directories, so sudo zfs create -V 128m
demo/swap creates a 128MB swap volume located at /dev/zvol/demo/swap.
You can create snapshots of raw volumes just as you can with filesystems, but because there’s no
filesystem hierarchy in which to put a .zfs/snapshot directory, the snapshots show up in the same
directory as their source volumes. Clones work too, just as you’d expect.
By default, raw volumes receive a space reservation equal to their specified size. You’re free to
reduce the reservation or to do away with it entirely, but note that this configuration can make
writes to the volume return an “out of space” error. Clients of raw volumes might not be
designed to deal with such an error.
Storage pool management
Now that we’ve waded into some of the features that ZFS offers at the filesystem and block-
client level, we can go for a longer swim in ZFS’s storage pools.
Up to now, we’ve used a pool called “demo” that we created from a single disk back on this
page. Here it is in the output of zpool list:

The pool named “zroot” contains the bootable root filesystem. Bootable pools are currently
restricted in several ways: they can contain only a single virtual device, and that device must be
either a mirror array or a single disk drive; it cannot be a striping set or a RAID-Z array. (This is
either an implementation limit or a strong push in the direction of robustness for the root
filesystem; we’re not sure which.)
zpool status adds more detail about the virtual devices that make up a storage pool and reports
their current status.

Time to get rid of this demo pool and set up something a bit more sophisticated. We’ve attached
five 1TB drives to our example system. We first create a pool called “monster” that includes
three of those drives in a RAID-Z single-parity configuration.

ZFS also understands raidz2 and raidz3 for double and triple parity configurations. The
minimum number of disks is always one more than the number of parity devices. Here, one drive
out of three is used for parity, so roughly 2TB is available for use by filesystems.
For illustration, we then add the remaining two drives configured as a mirror:

zpool initially balks at this configuration because the two virtual devices have different
redundancy schemes. This particular configuration is OK since both vdevs have some
redundancy. In actual use, do not mix redundant and nonredundant vdevs since there’s no way to
predict which blocks might be stored on which devices; partial redundancy is useless.

ZFS distributes writes among all a storage pool’s virtual devices. As demonstrated in the
preceding example, it is not necessary for all virtual devices to be the same size. (In this example
the disks are all the same size, but the virtual devices are not.)However, the components within a
redundancy group should be of similar size. If they are not, only the smallest size is used on each
component. Multiple simple disks used together in a storage pool is essentially a RAID 0
configuration.
You can add additional vdevs to a pool at any time. However, existing data won’t be
redistributed to take advantage of parallelism. Unfortunately, you cannot currently add additional
devices to an existing RAID array or mirror. This is an area in which Btrfs has a distinct
advantage, since it accommodates all sorts of reorganizations in a relatively clean and automatic
manner.
ZFS has an especially nice implementation of read caching that makes good use of SSDs. To set
up this configuration, just add the SSDs to the storage pool as vdevs of type cache. The caching
system uses an adaptive replacement algorithm developed at IBM that is smarter than a normal
LRU (least recently used) cache. It knows about the frequency at which blocks are referenced as
well as their recentness of use, so reads of large files are not supposed to wipe out the cache.
Hot spares are handled as vdevs of type spare. You can add the same disk to multiple storage
pools; whichever pool experiences a disk failure first gets to claim the spare disk.
20.13 BTRFS: “ZFS LITE” FOR LINUX
Oracle’s Btrfs filesystem project (“B-tree file system,” officially pronounced “butter FS” or
“better FS,” though it’s hard not to think “butter face”) aimed to repeat many of ZFS’s advances
on the Linux platform during the long interregnum when ZFS seemed like it might be lost to
Linux because of licensing issues.
Although Btrfs remains under active development, it’s been a standard part of the Linux kernel
trunk since 2009. It’s available and ready to use on nearly all Linux systems, and SUSE
Enterprise Linux has even made it a supported option for the root filesystem. Because the code
base evolves quickly, it’s probably best to avoid Btrfs on stability-oriented distributions such as
Red Hat for now; old versions have known issues.
Btrfs vs. ZFS
Because they share some technical underpinnings, comparisons between Btrfs and ZFS are
probably inevitable. However, Btrfs is not a ZFS clone, and it doesn’t seek to reproduce ZFS’s
architecture. For example, you mount Btrfs volumes just like those of other filesystems, by
running the mount command or by listing them in the /etc/fstab file.
Although Btrfs volumes and their subvolumes exist in a unified namespace, there’s no
hierarchical relationship among them. To make a change to a group of Btrfs subvolumes, you
must modify each of them individually. Btrfs commands do not operate recursively, and volume
properties are not inheritable. This isn’t an omission so much as a design choice: why load up the
filesystem (the developers ask) with features that you can emulate in a shell script?
Btrfs reflects this preference for simplicity in a variety of ways. For example, Btrfs storage pools
can include only one group of disks in one particular configuration (e.g., RAID 5), whereas ZFS
pools can include multiple disk groups as well as caching disks, intent logs, and hot spares.
As is common in the software arena, debates over the relative merits of ZFS and Btrfs tend to
become heated and to focus on stylistic distinctions. However, several important differences
between the two systems rise above the level of nitpicking and personal preference.

      Btrfs is the clear winner when it comes to changing your hardware configuration;
      ZFS didn’t even show up for this fight. You can add or remove disks at any time, or
      even change RAID type, and Btrfs redistributes existing data accordingly while
      remaining on-line. In ZFS, such changes are usually impossible without your
      dumping your data to external media and starting over.

      Even without memory-intensive features (such as deduplication) enabled, ZFS
      functions best with a generous amount of RAM. 2GB is the recommended minimum.
      That’s a lot of memory for a virtual server.
      ZFS’s ability to cache frequently read data on separate cache SSDs is a killer feature
      for many use cases, and one for which Btrfs currently has no answer.
      As of 2017, the Btrfs implementations of parity raid (RAID 5 and 6) are not yet ready
      for production use. That’s not our opinion; it’s the official word from the developers.
      This is a significant missing feature.
Setup and storage conversion
In this section we demonstrate a few common Btrfs procedures analogous to those shown for
ZFS in previous sections. We first set up Btrfs for use on a set of two 1TB hard disks configured
for RAID 1 (mirroring):

We could name any of the component devices in the mount command line, but it’s simplest to
just use the label we assigned to the group, “demo.”

The btrfs filesystem usage command shows how the space on these disks is currently being
used:
btrfs subcommands can be abbreviated to any unique prefix. For example, btrfs filesystem
usage is also accessible as btrfs f u. We spell out commands for clarity and propriety.
The interesting thing to note in the output above is the small initial allocations into the RAID 1
groups for data, metadata, and system blocks. Most disk space remains in an unallocated pool
that has no intrinsic structure. The mirroring we requested isn’t imposed on the disks as a whole,
just on the blocks that are actually in use. It’s not a rigid structure so much as a policy to be
implemented at the level of block groups.
This distinction is key to understanding how Btrfs can adapt to changing requirements and
hardware provisioning. Here’s what happens when we store some files into the new filesystem
and then add a third disk:
The new disk, /dev/sdd, has become available to the pool, but the existing block groups are fine
as they were, so none of them reference the new disk. Future allocations would automatically
take advantage of the new disk. If we like, we can force Btrfs to level the data among all disks:

Conversion among RAID levels is also a form of balancing. Now that we have three disks
available, we can convert to RAID 5:

If we had glanced at the usage data during the conversion, we’d have seen block groups for both
RAID 1 and RAID 5 active simultaneously. Disk removals work similarly: Btrfs incrementally
copies all blocks to groups that don’t include the leaving disk, and eventually no data remains
there.
Volumes and subvolumes
Snapshots and quotas are filesystem-level entities in Btrfs, so it’s helpful to be able to define
portions of the file tree as distinct entities. Btrfs calls these “subvolumes.” A subvolume looks a
lot like a regular filesystem directory, and in fact, it remains accessible as a subdirectory of its
parent volume, as shown below.

The subvolume is not automatically mounted; it’s visible here as part of the parent volume.
However, you can mount a subvolume independently of its parent with the subvol mount option.
For example,

There is no way to prevent a subvolume from showing up within its parent volume when the
parent is mounted. To create the illusion of multiple, independent, noninteracting volumes, just
make them subvolumes of the root and mount each of them separately with the subvol option.
The root itself is not required to be mounted anywhere. In fact, Btrfs lets you specify a volume
other than the root to be the default mount target when no subvol is requested; see btrfs
subvolume set-default.

To see or manipulate the full Btrfs hierarchy under this configuration, just mount the root on a
scratch directory with subvol=/. It’s fine for volumes to be mounted several times and accessible
through multiple paths.
Volume snapshots
Btrfs’s version of volume snapshots works a lot like cp, except that copies are shallow and
initially share all their storage with the parent volume:

Unlike ZFS snapshots, Btrfs snapshots are writable by default. In fact, there is no such thing as a
“snapshot” per se in Btrfs; a snapshot is just a volume that happens to share some storage with
another volume:

For an immutable snapshot, just pass the -r option to btrfs subvolume snapshot. Btrfs does not
make a fundamental distinction between read-only snapshots and writable copies in the way that
ZFS does. (In ZFS, writable copies are “clones.” To create one, first make a read-only snapshot,
then create a clone based on that snapshot.)

Btrfs does not enforce any particular naming or location conventions when it comes to defining
subvolumes and snapshots, so it’s up to you to decide how these entities should be organized and
named. The Btrfs documentation at btrfs.wiki.kernel.org suggests a couple of conventions for
your consideration.
Btrfs also has no “rollback” operation that resets a volume to its state as of a particular snapshot.
Instead, you can just move the original volume aside and mv or copy a snapshot in its place:

Note that this change confuses direct mounts of the subvolume. They’ll need to be remounted
afterward.
Shallow copies
The analogy between Btrfs snapshots and cp is more than just coincidence. You cannot create
snapshots—as such—of files or of directories that are not subvolume roots. But interestingly, you
can create shallow copies of arbitrary files and directories with cp --reflink, even across
subvolume boundaries.
This option activates Btrfs-specific magic inside cp that negotiates directly with the filesystem to
arrange for copy-on-write duplication. The semantics are identical to those of a normal cp and
also perilously close to those of a snapshot.
Btrfs doesn’t track shallow copies for you as it would with snapshots, and it also doesn’t
necessarily guarantee perfect point-in-time consistency for actively modified directory
hierarchies. But in other respects, the two operations are markedly similar. One nice feature of
shallow copies is that they require no special permissions; any user can take advantage of them.
If you specify the cp option in the form --reflink=auto, cp shallow-copies when it can and
behaves normally otherwise. That makes it a tempting target for a ~/.bashrc alias:
20.14 DATA BACKUP STRATEGY
On a good day, your main focus within the storage environment is to ensure that performance
remains good and that sufficient free space is available. Unfortunately, not every day is a good
day. With the Google Labs study finding that a disk drive has less than a 75% chance of
surviving for five years, the deck is stacked against us. Always have systems in place to protect
valuable data against catastrophic loss, and be prepared to activate your recovery procedure at
short notice.
RAID and other data replication schemes protect against the failure of a single facility or piece of
hardware. However, there are many other ways to lose data that these technologies do not
address. For example, if you experience a security breach or an infection by ransomware, your
data can be altered or corrupted even though the physical layer remains perfectly intact.
Automated replication of compromised data to multiple disks or sites only increases the misery.
You need immutable, point-in-time backups of critical data that you can revert to as a fallback
option.

In past decades, media such as magnetic tapes were a popular storage method for off-line
backups. However, the capacity of these media proved unable to keep up with the exponentially
growing sizes of hard drives and SSDs. Along with the physical challenges of transporting and
storing tapes and of maintaining finicky mechanical tape drives, the capacity issues ultimately
relegated tape media to the status of 35mm camera film: it’s still technically on the market, but
you have to wonder who’s actually buying the stuff.
Today, most cloud platforms let you capture point-in-time backups in the form of snapshots,
usually on an automated schedule. You pay a monthly fee for the storage consumed by each
snapshot and can set your own retention policies.
Regardless of the exact technology you use to implement backups, you need a written plan that
answers at least the following questions.
Overall strategy:

      What data is to be backed up?

      What system or technology will perform the backups?
      Where will backup data be stored?
      Will backups be encrypted? If so, where will encryption keys be stored?
      How much will it cost to store backups over time?

Timelines:
      How often will backups be performed?
      How often will backups be validated and restore-tested?

      How long will backups be retained?

People:

      Who will have access to backup data?
      Who will have access to the encryption keys that protect backup data?
      Who will be in charge of verifying the execution of backups?
      Who will be in charge of validating and restore-testing backups?

Use and protection:

      How will backup data be accessed or restored in an emergency?

      How will you ensure that neither a hacker nor a bogus process can corrupt, modify, or
      delete backups? (That is, how will you achieve immutability?)
      How will backup data be protected against being taken hostage by an adversarial
      cloud provider, vendor, or government?

The best answers to these questions vary by organization, type of data, regulatory environment,
technology platform, and budget, just to name a few potential factors.
Take time today to map out a backup plan for your environment or to review your existing
backup plan.
20.15 RECOMMENDED READING
LUCAS, MICHAEL W., AND ALLAN JUDE. FreeBSD Mastery: ZFS. Tilted Windmill Press, 2015.
JUDE, ALLAN, AND MICHAEL W. LUCAS. FreeBSD Mastery: Advanced ZFS. Tilted Windmill Press,
2016.

The two titles above are the go-to references for modern ZFS. Although they purport to be
FreeBSD-specific, most of the material applies to ZFS on Linux as well. The Advanced ZFS
book is particularly useful in its coverage of topics as varied as jails, permission delegation,
caching strategies, and performance analysis.
LUCAS, MICHAEL W., AND ALLAN JUDE. FreeBSD Mastery: Storage Essentials. Tilted Windmill
Press, 2015.
MCKUSICK, MARSHALL KIRK, GEORGE V. NEVILLE-NEIL, AND ROBERT N. M. WATSON. The Design
and Implementation of the FreeBSD Operating System (2nd Edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2014. This book addresses a variety of kernel-related subjects, but
it includes complete chapters on UFS, ZFS, and the VFS layer.
