21 The Network File System

The Network File System protocol, commonly known as NFS, lets you share filesystems among
computers. NFS is nearly transparent to users, and no information is lost when an NFS server
crashes. Clients can simply wait until the server returns and then continue as if nothing had
happened.
NFS was introduced by Sun Microsystems in 1984. It was originally implemented as a surrogate
filesystem for diskless clients, but the protocol proved to be well designed and useful as a general
file sharing solution. These days, all UNIX vendors and Linux distributions offer some version of
NFS. The NFS protocol is an open standard that is documented in RFCs (see RFCs 1094, 1813,
and 7530 in particular).
21.1 MEET NETWORK FILE SERVICES
The goal of a network file service is to grant shared access to files and directories that are stored
on the disks of remote systems. User applications must be able to read and write to these files
with the same system calls they use for local files; that files are stored elsewhere on the network
should be transparent to applications. If more than one network client or application attempts to
modify a file simultaneously, the file sharing service must resolve any conflicts that arise.
The competition

     See Chapter 22 for more details on SMB and Samba.

NFS is not the only file sharing system around. The Server Message Block (SMB) protocol
underlies the file sharing capabilities built into Windows and macOS. However, UNIX and Linux
can also speak SMB by running the Samba add-on package. If you run a hybrid network that
includes a variety of different operating systems, you may find that SMB is the path that presents
the fewest compatibility hurdles.
NFS is most commonly used in shops where UNIX and Linux are predominant. In those contexts
it offers a somewhat more natural fit and a higher degree of integration. But even in these
environments, SMB remains a plausible option. It’s uncommon—but not unheard of—for sites
consisting exclusively of UNIX and Linux systems to rely on SMB as their primary file sharing
protocol.
Sharing files over a network seems like a simple task, but in fact it’s a confoundingly complex
problem that abounds with edge cases and subtleties. Many protocol issues have come to light
only through bugs encountered in unusual situations. Both NFS and SMB show the scars of
battles fought to maintain security, performance, and reliability over decades of development and
widespread use. Today’s administrators can be confident that these protocols will not regularly
corrupt data or otherwise incur the wrath of irate users, but it has taken a lot of work and
experience to get to this point.
Storage area network (SAN) systems are another option for high-performance storage
management on a network. SAN servers need not understand filesystems because they serve only
disk blocks, unlike NFS and SMB, which operate at the level of filesystems and files rather than
raw storage devices. A SAN affords fast read/write access, but it’s unable to manage concurrent
access by multiple clients without the help of a clustered filesystem.

For big data projects, several open source distributed filesystems have come into common use.
GlusterFS and Ceph implement both POSIX-compliant filesystems and RESTful object storage
distributed among a cluster of nodes for fault tolerance. Commercial versions of both systems are
sold by Red Hat, which acquired both developers. Both systems are production-ready, highly
capable filesystems worthy of consideration for use cases like big data processing and high
performance computing.
Cloud-based systems have additional options. Refer to this page.
Issues of state
One decision made when designing a network filesystem is to determine what part of the system
will track the files that each client has open, information referred to generically as “state.” A
server that records the status of files and clients is said to be stateful; one that does is stateless.
Both approaches have been used over the years, and both have benefits and drawbacks.
Stateful servers keep track of all open files across the network. This mode of operation
introduces many layers of complexity (more than you might expect) and makes recovery in the
event of a crash far more difficult. When the server returns from a hiatus, a negotiation between
the client and server must occur to reconcile the last known state of the connection. Statefulness
lets clients maintain more control over files and facilitates the robust management of files opened
in read/write mode.
On a stateless server, each request is independent of the requests that have preceded it. If either
the server or the client crashes, nothing is lost in the process. Under this design, it is painless for
servers to crash or reboot, since they do not maintain any context. However, it’s impossible for
the server to know which clients have opened a file for writing, so it cannot manage concurrency.
Performance concerns
Network filesystems should present a seamless experience to users. Accessing a file over the
network should be no different from accessing a file on a local filesystem. Unfortunately, wide
area networks have high latencies, which make operations behave erratically, and low bandwidth,
which yields slow performance on large files. Most file service protocols, including NFS,
incorporate techniques to minimize performance problems on both local and wide area networks.
Most protocols try to minimize the number of network requests. For example, read-ahead
caching preloads portions of a file into a local memory buffer to avoid a delay when a new
section of the file is read. A little extra network bandwidth is consumed in an effort to avoid the
latency of a full round-trip exchange with the server.
Similarly, some systems cache writes in memory and send updates in batches, reducing the delay
incurred when communicating write operations to the server. These types of batch operations are
referred to generically as request coalescing.
Security
Any service that grants convenient access to files on a network has great potential to cause
security problems. Local filesystems implement complex access control algorithms and
safeguard files with granular permissions. On a network, these tasks are greatly complicated by
differences in configurations among machines and by vagaries such as race conditions, bugs in
file service software, and unresolved edge cases in file sharing protocols.
The rise of directory and centralized authentication services has improved the security of network
filesystems. The bottom line is that no client can be trusted to authenticate itself sanely, so a
trusted, central system must verify identities and approve access to files. Most file sharing
services can be integrated with a variety of different authentication providers.
File sharing protocols do not typically address the issues of privacy and integrity—or at least,
they do not do so directly. As with authentication, this responsibility is generally outsourced to
another layer such as a Kerberos, SSH, or a VPN tunnel. However, recent versions of SMB have
added strong encryption and integrity checking. Many sites that run NFS on a trusted LAN
choose to forgo cryptography because an easy and high-performance solution is unavailable.
21.2 THE NFS APPROACH
The newest version of the NFS protocol has been refined to increase platform independence, to
improve performance over wide area networks such as the Internet, and to add strong, modular
security features. Most implementations also include diagnostic utilities to help debug
configuration and performance problems.
NFS is a network protocol, so in theory it could be implemented in user space just like most other
network services. However, the traditional approach has been for parts of the NFS
implementation (on both server and client sides) to live inside the kernel, mostly to improve
performance. This general pattern continues even on Linux, where locking functions and certain
system calls have proved difficult to export to user space. Fortunately, the kernel-resident parts
of NFS need no configuration and are largely transparent to administrators.

NFS is not an off-the-shelf solution for all file sharing problems. High availability can only be
achieved with warm standbys, but NFS has no built-in provisions for synchronizing with backup
servers. The sudden disappearance of an NFS server from the network can result in clients
holding stale file handles that can be cleaned up only with a reboot. Strong security is possible
but is overly complex. Despite these drawbacks, NFS remains the most common choice for
UNIX and Linux file sharing on a LAN.
Protocol versions and history
The first public release of the NFS protocol was version 2 in 1989. The original protocol made
some expensive tradeoffs to favor consistency over performance and was quickly replaced. It’s
highly unlikely that you’ll encounter this version in use today.
NFS version 3, which dates from the early 1990s, eliminates this bottleneck with a coherency
scheme that permits asynchronous writes. It also updates several other aspects of the protocol
that were found to have caused performance problems, and it improves the handling of large
files. The net result is that NFS version 3 is quite a bit faster than version 2.
NFS version 4, dating from 2003 but not used widely until later in that decade, is a major
overhaul that includes many new fixes and features. Highlighted enhancements include

      Compatibility and cooperation with firewalls and NAT devices
      Integration of the lock and mount protocols into the core NFS protocol
      Stateful operation
      Strong, modular security
      Support for replication and migration
      Support for both UNIX and Windows clients

      Access control lists (ACLs)
      Support for Unicode filenames
      Good performance even on low-bandwidth connections

The various NFS protocol versions cannot talk to one another, but NFS servers (including those
on all our example systems) typically implement all three versions. In practice, all combinations
of NFS clients and servers can interoperate with some version of the protocol. Always use the V4
protocol if both sides support it.
NFS remains actively developed and in widespread use. Version 4.2, written by some of the
original stakeholders from Sun’s heyday, reached RFC draft status in early 2015. The Elastic File
System service from AWS, which became generally available in mid-2016, adds NFSv4.1
filesystems for use by EC2 instances.

Although V4 is a significant step forward in many ways, it hasn’t much altered the process of
configuring and administering NFS. In some ways this is a feature; for example, you still use the
same configuration files and commands to administer all versions of NFS. In other ways it’s a
problem; some aspects of the configuration process feel jury-rigged (particularly on FreeBSD),
and some options have become ambiguous or overloaded, with different meanings or
configuration formats depending on which version of NFS you are using.
Remote procedure calls
When Sun developed the first versions of NFS in the 1980s, they realized that many of the
network-related problems that needed solving for NFS would apply to other network-based
services, too. They developed a more general framework for remote procedure calls known as
RPC or SunRPC, and built NFS on top of that. This work opened the door for applications of all
kinds to run procedures on remote systems as if they were being run locally.
Sun’s RPC system was primitive and somewhat hackish; far better systems exist today to fill this
need (as do infinitely more horrifying monstrosities than SunRPC; check out SOAP).
Nevertheless, NFS still relies on Sun-style RPCs for much of its functionality. Operations that
read and write files, mount filesystems, access file metadata, and check file permissions are all
implemented as RPCs. The NFS protocol specification is written generically, so a distinct RPC
layer is not technically required. However, we are aware of no NFS implementations that stray
from the original architecture in this regard.
Transport protocols
NFS version 2 originally used UDP because that was what performed best on the LANs and
computers of the 1980s. Although NFS does its own packet sequence reassembly and error
checking, UDP and NFS both lack the congestion control algorithms that are essential for good
performance on a large IP network.
To remedy these problems (and others), NFS migrated to a choice of UDP or TCP in version 3,
and to TCP only in version 4. The TCP option was first explored as a way to help NFS work
through routers and over the Internet. Over time, most of the original reasons for preferring UDP
over TCP have evaporated in the warm light of fast CPUs, cheap memory, and high-speed
networks.
State
A client must explicitly mount an NFS filesystem before using it, just as a client must mount a
filesystem stored on a local disk. However, NFS versions 2 and 3 are stateless, and the server
does not keep track of which clients have mounted each filesystem. Instead, the server simply
discloses a secret “cookie” at the conclusion of a successful mount negotiation. The cookie
identifies the mounted directory to the NFS server and so opens a way for the client to access its
contents. Cookies persist between reboots of the server, so a crash does not leave the client in an
unrecoverable muddle. The client can simply wait until the server is available again and resubmit
the request.
NFSv4, on the other hand, is a stateful protocol: both client and server maintain information
about open files and locks. When the server fails, the clients assist in the recovery process by
sending the server their pre-crash state information. A returning server waits for a predefined
grace period for former clients to report their state information before it permits new operations
and locks. The cookie management of V2 and V3 no longer exists in NFSv4.
Filesystem exports

     See this page for more information about the fstab file.

NFS servers maintain a list of directories (called “exports” or “shares”) that they make available
to clients over the network. By definition, all servers export at least one directory. Clients can
then mount these exports and add them to their fstab files.
In V2 and V3, each export is treated as an independent entity that is exported separately. In the
V4 specification, a server exports a single hierarchical pseudo-filesystem that incorporates all its
exported directories. Essentially, the pseudo-filesystem is the server’s own filesystem namespace
skeletonized to remove anything that is not exported.
For example, consider the following list of directories, with the directories to be exported in
boldface:

In NFS version 3, each exported directory must be separately configured. Client systems must
execute three different mount requests to obtain access to all the server’s exports.
In NFS version 4, however, the pseudo-filesystem bridges the disconnected portions of the
directory structure to create a single view for NFS clients. Rather than requesting a separate
mount for each of /www/domain1, /www/domain2, and /var/logs/httpd, the client can simply
mount the server’s entire pseudo-root directory and browse the hierarchy.
The directories that are not exported, /www/domain3 and /var/spool, do not appear during
browsing. In addition, individual files contained in /, /var, /www, and /var/logs are not visible to
the client because the pseudo-filesystem portion of the hierarchy includes only directories. Thus,
the client view of the NFSv4-exported filesystem is

The server specifies the root of the exported filesystems in a configuration file known as the
exports file, usually kept in /etc. Pure NFSv4 clients cannot peruse the list of mounts on a
remote server. Instead, they simply mount the pseudo-root and then all available exports become
accessible through that mount point.
That’s the story according to the RFC specification. In practice, the situation is somewhat fuzzy.
The Solaris implementation conformed to this specification. Linux made a halfhearted attempt at
support for the pseudo-filesystem in the early NFSv4 code, but later revised it to support the
scheme more fully; today’s version appears to respect the intent of the RFC. FreeBSD does not
implement the pseudo-filesystem as described by the RFC. The FreeBSD export semantics are
essentially the same as in version 3; all subdirectories within an export are available to clients.
File locking
File locking (as implemented by the flock, lockf, or fcntl systems calls) has been a sore point on
UNIX systems for a long time. On local filesystems, it has been known to work less than
perfectly. In the context of NFS, the ground is shakier still. By design, early versions of NFS
servers are stateless: they have no idea which machines are using any given file. However, to
implement locking, state information is needed. What to do?
The traditional answer was to implement file locking separately from NFS. In most systems, two
distinct daemons, lockd and statd, attempted to make a go of it. Unfortunately, the task was
difficult for a variety of subtle reasons, and NFS file locking under lockd and statd is generally
unreliable.
NFSv4 removed the need for lockd and statd by folding locking (and hence, statefulness and all
that it implies) into the core protocol. This change introduces significant complexity but obviates
many of the related problems of earlier NFS versions. Unfortunately, separate lockds and statds
are still needed to support V2 and V3 clients if your site has them. Our example systems all ship
with the earlier versions of NFS enabled, so the separate daemons still run by default.
Security concerns
In many ways, NFS V2 and V3 are poster children for everything that is or ever has been wrong
with UNIX and Linux security. The protocol was originally designed with essentially no concern
for security, and convenience has its price. NFSv4 has addressed the security concerns of earlier
versions by mandating support for strong security services and establishing better means of user
identification.
All versions of the NFS protocol are intended to be security-mechanism independent, and most
servers support multiple “flavors” of security. A few of the common flavors include

      AUTH_NONE – no authentication
      AUTH_SYS – UNIX-style user and group access control
      RPCSEC_GSS – a stronger flavor that enables flexible security schemes

Historically, most sites used AUTH_SYS authentication, which depends on UNIX user and
group identifiers. In this scheme, the client simply sends the local UID and GID of the user
requesting access to the server. The server compares the values to those from its own
/etc/passwd file (or a network database equivalent such as NIS or LDAP) and determines
whether the user should have access. Thus, if users mary and bob share the same UID on two
different clients, they will have access to each other’s files. Furthermore, users that have root
access on a system can su to whatever UID they wish; the server will then give them access to
the corresponding user’s files.

Enforcing passwd file consistency among systems is essential in environments that use
AUTH_SYS. But even this is only a security fig leaf; any rogue host (or heaven forbid, Windows
machine) can “authenticate” its users however it likes and thereby subvert NFS security.

     See this page for more information about Kerberos.

To prevent such problems, most sites can use a more robust security mechanism such as
Kerberos in combination with the NFS RPCSEC_GSS layer. This configuration requires both the
client and server to participate in a Kerberos realm. The Kerberos realm authenticates clients
centrally, avoiding the problems of self-identification described above. Kerberos can also provide
strong encryption and guaranteed integrity for files transferred over the network. All protocol-
conformant NFS version 4 systems must implement RPCSEC_GSS, but it’s optional in version
3.

     See this page for more information about firewalls.
NFS version 4 requires TCP as a transport protocol and communicates over port 2049. Since V4
does not rely on any other ports, opening access through a firewall is as simple as opening TCP
port 2049. As with all access list configurations, be sure to specify source and destination
addresses in addition to the port. If your site doesn’t need to provide NFS services to hosts on the
Internet, block access through the firewall or use a local packet filter.
File service over wide area networks with NFSv2 and V3 is not recommended because of the
long history of bugs in the RPC protocols and the lack of strong security mechanisms.
Administrators of NFS version 3 servers should block access to TCP and UDP ports 2049 and
also the portmap port, 111.

Given the myriad and obvious shortcomings of AUTH_SYS security, we strongly recommend
discontinuing all use of NFSv3. If you have ancient operating systems that can’t be updated to
NFSv4 compatibility, at least implement packet filters to restrict network connectivity.
Identity mapping in version 4
Before launching into the following discussion, we should warn you that we consider all
implementations of AUTH_SYS security to be more or less broken for security purposes. We
strongly suggest Kerberos and RPCSEC_GSS authentication; it’s the only reasonable choice.
As discussed in Chapter 8, User Management, UNIX operating systems identify users through a
collection of UIDs and GIDs in the local passwd file or an LDAP directory. NFS version 4, on
the other hand, represents users and groups as string identifiers of the form user@nfs-domain and
group@nfs-domain. NFSv4 clients and servers run an identity mapping daemon that translates
UNIX identifier values to strings that match this format.
When a V4 client performs operations that return identities, such as listing the owners of a set of
files with ls -l (the underlying operation is a series of stat calls), the server’s identity mapping
daemon uses its local passwd file to convert the UID and GID of each file object to a string, such
as ben@admin.com. The client’s identity mapper then reverses the process, converting
ben@admin.com into local UID and GID values, which may or may not be the same as the
server’s. If a string value does not match any local identity, the nobody user account is assigned
as a placeholder.
At this point, the remote filesystem call (stat) has completed and returned UID and GID values
to its caller (here, the ls command). Since ls was called with the -l option, it needs to display text
names instead of numbers. So, ls in turn retranslates the IDs back to textual names using the
getpwuid and getgrgid library routines. These routines once again consult the passwd file or its
network database equivalent. What a long, strange trip it’s been.

Confusingly, the identity mapper is used only when retrieving and setting file attributes, typically
ownerships. Identity mapping plays no role in authentication or access control, all of which is
handled in the traditional form by RPC. The identity mapper may do a better job of mapping than
the underlying NFS protocol, causing the apparent file permissions to conflict with the
permissions the NFS server will actually enforce.
Consider, for example, the following commands on an NFSv4 client:
First, ben is shown to have UID 1000 and john to have UID 1010. An NFS-exported home
directory called ben appears to have permissions 755 and is owned by john. However, ben is able
to create a file in the directory even though the ls -l output indicates that he lacks write
permission.
On the server, john has UID 1000. Since john has UID 1010 on the client, the identity mapper
performs UID conversion as described above, with the result that “john” appears to be the owner
of the directory. However, the identity mapping daemon plays no role in access control. For the
file creation operation, ben’s UID of 1000 is sent directly to the server, where it is interpreted as
john’s UID and permission is granted.

How do you know which operations are identity mapped and which are not? It’s simple:
whenever a UID or GID appears in the filesystem API (as with stat or chown), it is mapped.
Whenever the user’s own UIDs or GIDs are used implicitly for access control, they are routed
through the designated authentication system.
For this reason, enforcing consistent passwd files or relying on LDAP is essential for users of
AUTH_SYS “security.”
Unfortunately for administrators, identity mapping daemons are not standardized across systems,
so their configuration processes may be different. Specifics for our example systems are covered
here.
Root access and the nobody account
Although users should generally be given identical privileges wherever they go, it’s traditional to
prevent root from running rampant on NFS-mounted filesystems. By default, the NFS server
intercepts incoming requests made on behalf of UID 0 and changes them to look as if they came
from some other user. This modification is called “squashing root.” The root account is not
entirely shut out, but it is limited to the abilities of a normal user.
A placeholder account named “nobody” is defined specifically to be the pseudo-user as whom a
remote root masquerades on an NFS server. The traditional UID for nobody is 65,534 (the 16-bit
twos-complement equivalent of UID -2).
Although the Red Hat NFS server defaults to UID -2, the nobody account in the passwd file uses
UID 99. You can leave things as they are, add a passwd entry for UID -2, or change anonuid and
anongid to 99 if you wish. It really doesn’t matter. Some systems also have an nfsnobody account.

You can change the default UID and GID mappings for root in the exports file. Some systems
have an all_squash option to map all client UIDs to the same pseudo-user UID on the server. This
configuration eliminates all distinctions among users and creates a sort of public-access
filesystem.

The intent behind these precautions is nice, but their ultimate value is not as great as it might
seem. Remember that root on an NFS client can su to whatever UID it wants, so user files are
never really protected. The only real effect of root squashing is to prevent access to files that are
owned by root and not readable or writable by the world.
Performance considerations in version 4
NFSv4 was designed to achieve good performance over wide area networks. Most WANs have
higher latency and lower bandwidth than those of LANs. NFS takes aim at these problems with
the following refinements:

      An RPC called COMPOUND clumps multiple file operations into one request,
      reducing the overhead and latency incurred from multiple remote procedure calls.
      A delegation mechanism allows client-side caching of files. Clients can maintain
      local control over files, including those open for writing.

These features are part of the core NFS protocol and do not require much attention from system
administrators.
21.3 SERVER-SIDE NFS
An NFS server is said to “export” a directory when it makes the directory available for use by
other machines. Exports are presented to NFSv4 clients as a single filesystem hierarchy through
the pseudo-filesystem.
In NFS version 3, the process used by clients to mount a filesystem is separate from the process
used to access files. The operations use separate protocols, and the requests are served by
different daemons: mountd for mount discovery and requests, and nfsd for actual file service.
On some systems, these daemons are called rpc.nfsd and rpc.mountd as a reminder that they
rely on RPC as an underlying mechanism (and hence require the portmap daemon to be
running). In this chapter, we omit the rpc prefix for readability.

NFSv4 does not use mountd at all. If you absolutely must run old clients that only support
NFSv3, mountd must remain active.
Both mountd and nfsd should start when the system boots, and both should remain running as
long as the system is up. Both Linux and FreeBSD automatically run the daemons when you
enable NFS service.
NFS uses a single access-control database that tells which filesystems should be exported and
which clients can mount them. The operative copy of this database is usually kept in a file called
xtab and also in tables internal to the kernel. xtab is a binary file maintained for use by the
server daemon.
Maintaining a binary file by hand is not much fun, so most systems assume that you would rather
maintain a text file, usually /etc/exports, that enumerates the system’s exported directories and
their access settings. The system can then consult this text file at boot time to automatically
construct the xtab file.

/etc/exports is the canonical, human-readable list of exported directories. Its contents are read by
exportfs -a on Linux, and at a simple restart of the NFS server on FreeBSD. Hence, when you
edit /etc/exports, run exportfs -a to activate your changes on Linux, or run service nfsd restart
on FreeBSD. If you serve V3 clients from FreeBSD, restart mountd as well (service mountd
reload).
NFS deals with the logical layer of the filesystem. Any directory can be exported; it doesn’t have
to be a mount point or the root of a physical filesystem. However, for security, NFS does pay
attention to the boundaries between filesystems and does require each device to be exported
separately. For example, on a machine that has set up /chimchim/users as a separate partition,
you could export /chimchim without implicitly exporting /chimchim/users.
Clients are usually allowed to mount subdirectories of an exported directory if they wish,
although the protocol does not require this feature. For example, if a server exports
/chimchim/users, a client could mount only /chimchim/users/joe and ignore the rest of the
users directory.
Linux exports
     On Linux, the exports file consists of a list of exported directories in the leftmost column
     followed by the hosts that are allowed to access them and associated options on the right.
Whitespace separates the filesystem from the list of clients, and each client is followed
immediately by a parenthesized list of comma-separated options. Lines can be continued with a
backslash. For example, the line

lets /home be mounted read/write by all machines in the users.admin.com domain, and read-only
by all machines on the 172.17.0.0/24 class C network. If a system in the users.admin.com domain
resides on the 172.17.0.0/24 network, that client will be granted read-only access. The least
privileged rule wins.

Filesystems listed in the exports file without a specific set of hosts are usually mountable by all
machines. That’s a sizable security hole.
The same sizable security hole can be created accidentally by a misplaced space. For example,
the line

permits any host read/write access except for *.users.admin.com, which has read-only
permission, the default. Oops.
There is unfortunately no way to list multiple client specifications for a single set of options. You
must repeat the options for all desired clients. Table 21.1 lists the types of client specifications
that can appear in the exports file.

Table 21.1: Client specifications in the Linux /etc/exports file

Table 21.2 shows the most commonly used export options understood by Linux.

Table 21.2: Common export options in Linux
The subtree_check option (the default) verifies that every file accessed by a client lies within an
exported subdirectory. If you turn off this option, only the fact that the file is within an exported
filesystem is verified. Subtree checking can cause occasional problems when a requested file is
renamed while the client has the file open. If you anticipate many such situations, consider
setting no_subtree_check.

async tells the NFS server to ignore the protocol spec and reply to requests before they are written
to disk. This might result in a slight performance boost, but might also result in corrupted data if
the server restarts unexpectedly. The default behavior is sync.
The replicas option is merely a convenience that helps clients discover mirrors if the server goes
off-line. The actual replication of the filesystem must be handled out of band through some other
mechanism such as rsync or DRBD (replication software for Linux). The replica referral feature
was added in NFSv4.1.
Early versions of the Linux NFSv4 implementation required administrators to designate a
pseudo-filesystem root with the fsid=0 flag in /etc/exports. This is no longer required. To create a
pseudo-fileystem as described by the RFC, just list exports as normal and, from an NFSv4 client,
mount / on the server. The subdirectories under the mount point will be the exported filesystems.
If you do designate an export as fsid=0, that filesystem and all its subdirectories are exported for
V4 clients.
FreeBSD exports
     In keeping with longstanding UNIX tradition, the exports format used on FreeBSD is
     entirely different from that of Linux. Each line in the file (except for lines that start with #,
which are comments) is composed of three components: a list of directories to export, the options
to apply to those exports, and the set of hosts to which the export applies. As on Linux, a
backslash denotes a line continuation.

The line above exports /var/www and all of its subdirectories read-only to all hosts matching the
pattern www*.admin.com. To implement different mount options for different clients, simply
repeat the line and specify different values. For example,

allows read/write access for all hosts in the named IPv6 network. Kerberos is used for
authentication, integrity, and privacy.

On FreeBSD, exports are per server-filesystem. Multiple exports to the same set of client hosts
from the same filesystem must be named on the same line. For example,

It would be an error for www1 and www2 to be on separate lines with the same host
designations, assuming that www1 and www2 reside within the same filesystem.

To enable NFSv4 you must designate a root by prefixing a line with V4:, for example,

Only one effective V4 root path is allowed. However, it can be specified more than once with
different options for different clients. The root can appear anywhere in the exports file.
The V4: line does not actually export any filesystems. It simply chooses a base directory for
NFSv4 clients to mount. To activate it, list an export within the root:

Despite the V4 root designation, the FreeBSD NFS server does not implement the pseudo-
filesystem as described by the RFC. When a V4 root is designated and at least one export is
present under that root, a V4 client can mount the root and access all of the files and directories
within it regardless of their export status. This information is not clear in the exports(5)
documentation, and the ambiguity can be quite dangerous. Do not designate the server’s own
filesystem root (/) as the V4 root; otherwise, the server’s entire root filesystem will be available
to clients.
Because of the V4 root, V2 and V3 clients have a different path to mount than V4 clients have.
For example, given the following exports

a V2 or V3 client in the 10.0.0.0/24 network mounts /exports/www, but because of the pseudo-
filesystem designation on /exports, a V4 client must mount the export as /www. Alternatively, a
V4 client can mount / and access the www directory under that mount point.
Use network ranges for best performance when exporting to a large number of clients. For IPv4
you can use CIDR notation or a subnet mask. For IPv6 you must use CIDR; the -mask option is not
permitted. For example:

FreeBSD has fewer export options than Linux affords. Table 21.3 summarizes them.

Table 21.3: Common export options in FreeBSD
nfsd: serve files
Once a client’s mount request has been validated, the client can request various filesystem
operations. These requests are handled on the server side by nfsd, the NFS operations daemon.
(In reality, nfsd simply makes a nonreturning system call to NFS server code embedded in the
kernel.) nfsd does not need to run on an NFS client machine unless the client exports filesystems
of its own.
nfsd has no configuration file; options are passed as command-line arguments. You start and stop
nfsd with your system’s standard service mechanisms, i.e., systemctl on Linux systems running
systemd, and the service command on FreeBSD. Table 21.4 shows which file and option to
adjust in order to change the arguments passed to nfsd.

Table 21.4: Where to set startup options for nfsd

On Linux systems, run systemctl restart nfs-config.service nfs-server.service to enable nfsd
configuration changes. In FreeBSD, use service nfsd restart and service mountd restart.

The -N option to nfsd disables the specified version of NFS. For example, to disable versions 2
and 3, add -N 2 -N 3 to the appropriate file and option specified in Table 21.4 and restart the
service. This is a good idea if you are sure you don’t need to support older clients.
nfsd takes a numeric argument that specifies how many server threads to fork. Selecting the
appropriate number of nfsds is important and is unfortunately something of a black art. If the
number is too low or too high, NFS performance can suffer.
The optimal number of nfsd threads depends on the operating system and the hardware in use. If
you notice that ps usually shows the nfsds in state D (uninterruptible sleep) and that some idle
CPU is available, consider increasing the number of threads. If you find the load average (as
reported by uptime) rising as you add nfsds, you’ve gone too far; back off a bit from that
threshold.
Run nfsstat regularly to check for performance problems that might be associated with the
number of nfsd threads. See this page for more details on nfsstat.

     On FreeBSD, the --minthreads and --maxthreads options to nfsd enable automatic
     management of the number of threads within the specified bounds. On FreeBSD, see man
rc.conf and refer to the options prefixed with nfs_ for more NFS server settings.
21.4 CLIENT-SIDE NFS
NFS filesystems are mounted in much the same way as local disk filesystems. The mount
command understands the notation hostname:directory to mean the path directory on the host
hostname. As with local filesystems, mount maps the remote directory on the remote host into a
directory within the local file tree. After the mount completes, you access an NFS-mounted
filesystem just like a local filesystem. The mount command and its associated NFS extensions
represent the most significant concerns to the system administrator of an NFS client.
Before an NFS filesystem can be mounted, it must be properly exported (see this page). On an
NFSv3 client, you can verify that a server has properly exported its filesystems by running the
showmount command:

This example reports that the directory /home/ben on the server monk has been exported to the
client system harp.atrust.com.

If an NFS mount is not working, first verify that the filesystems have been properly exported on
the server. Make sure that after updating the server’s exports file, you ran exportfs -a (Linux) or
service nfsd restart and service mountd reload (FreeBSD). Next, recheck the showmount
output.
If the directory is properly exported on the server but showmount returns an error or an empty
list, double-check that all the necessary processes are running on the server (portmap and nfsd;
add mountd, statd, and lockd for V3). Make sure the hosts.allow and hosts.deny files allow
access to those daemons and that you are on the right client system.
The path information displayed by showmount (e.g., /home/ben above) is valid only for NFS
version 2 and 3 servers. NFS version 4 servers export a single unified pseudo-filesystem and do
not use the mount protocol. The traditional NFS concept of separate mount points doesn’t jibe
with version 4’s model, so showmount simply doesn’t apply to the V4 world.
Unfortunately, NFSv4 has no good replacement for showmount. On the server, the command
exportfs -v shows the existing exports, but of course this works only locally. If you don’t have
direct access to the server, you can try to mount the server’s V4 root and traverse the directory
structure manually. You can also mount any subdirectory of the exported root filesystem.
To actually mount the filesystem in versions 2 and 3, you’d use a command such as

To accomplish the same under version 4 on a Linux system, you’d type
In this case, the options after -o specify that the filesystem be mounted read/write (rw), that
operations be interruptible (intr), and that retries be done in the background (bg). Table 21.5
introduces the most common Linux mount options.

Table 21.5: NFS mount flags and options for Linux

The client side of NFS usually tries to autonegotiate a suitable version of the protocol. You can
specify a specific version by passing -o nfsvers=n.

On FreeBSD, mount is a wrapper that calls /sbin/mount_nfs for NFS mounts. This wrapper sets
NFS options and invokes the nmount system call. To mount a version 4 server on FreeBSD,
type:

If you don’t specify a version explicitly, mount negotiates one automatically in descending
order. In fact, a simple mount server:/ /mnt does the trick in this case because mount can infer
from the format that the filesystem you’re referring to is NFS.
Filesystems mounted hard (the default) cause processes to hang when their servers go down. This
behavior is particularly bothersome when the processes in question are standard daemons, so we
do not recommend serving critical system binaries over NFS. In general, the intr option reduces
the number of NFS-related headaches.
Jeff Forys, one of our technical reviewers, advises, “Most mounts should use hard, intr, and bg,
because these options best preserve NFS’s original design goals. soft is an abomination, an ugly
Satanic hack! If the user wants to interrupt, cool. Otherwise, wait for the server and all will
eventually be well again with no data lost.”

Automount solutions such as autofs, discussed starting here, also prescribe some remedies for
mounting ailments.
The read and write buffer sizes are negotiated to the highest value supported by both client and
server. You can set them to any value between 1KiB and 1MiB.
You can see the available space on an NFS mount with df, just as you would on a local
filesystem:

umount works on NFS filesystems just like it does on local filesystems. If the NFS filesystem is
in use when you try to unmount it, you get an error such as

Use fuser or lsof to find processes with open files on the filesystem. Kill them, or in the case of
shells, change directories. If all else fails or your server is down, try running umount -f to force
the filesystem to be unmounted.
Mounting remote filesystems at boot time

     See this page for more information about the fstab file.

You can use the mount command to establish temporary network mounts, but you should list
mounts that are part of a system’s permanent configuration in /etc/fstab so that they are mounted
automatically at boot time. Alternatively, mounts can be handled by an automatic mounting
service such as autofs.
The following fstab entries mount the /home filesystem from the server monk:

You can make your changes take effect immediately (without rebooting) by running mount -a -t
nfs.
The flags field of /etc/fstab specifies options for NFS mounts; these options are the same ones you
would specify on the mount command line.
Restricting exports to privileged ports
NFS clients are free to use any TCP or UDP source port they like when connecting to an NFS
server. However, some servers may insist that requests come from a privileged port (a port
numbered lower than 1,024). Others allow this behavior to be set as an option. The use of
privileged ports delivers little actual security.
Nevertheless, most NFS clients adopt the traditional (and still recommended) approach of
defaulting to a privileged port to avert the potential for conflict. Under Linux, you can accept
mounts from unprivileged ports with the insecure export option.
21.5 IDENTITY MAPPING FOR NFS VERSION 4
We introduced the general ideas behind NFSv4’s identity mapping system starting here. In this
section we discuss the administrative aspects of the identity mapping daemon.
All systems that participate in an NFSv4 network should have the same NFS domain. In most
cases, it’s reasonable to use your DNS domain as the NFS domain. For example, admin.com is a
straightforward choice of NFS domain for the server ulsah.admin.com. Clients in subdomains
(e.g., books.admin.com) may or may not want to use the same domain name (e.g., admin.com) to
facilitate NFS communication.

Unfortunately for administrators, NFSv4 UID mapping has no standard implementation, so the
details of administration differ slightly among systems. Table 21.6 names the mapping daemons
on Linux and FreeBSD and notes the location of their configuration files.

Table 21.6: NFSv4 identity mapping daemons and their configuration files

Other than having their NFS domains set, identity mapping services require little assistance from
administrators. The daemons are started at boot time by the same scripts that manage other NFS
daemons. After making configuration changes, you’ll need to restart the identity mapper daemon.
Options such as verbose logging and alternative management of the nobody account are usually
available.
21.6 NFSSTAT: DUMP NFS STATISTICS
nfsstat displays various statistics maintained by the NFS system. nfsstat -s shows server-side
statistics, and nfsstat -c shows information for client-side operations. By default, nfsstat shows
statistics for all protocol versions. For example:

This example is from a relatively healthy NFS client. If more than 3% of RPC calls time out, it’s
likely that your NFS server or network has a problem. You can usually discover the cause by
checking the badxid field. If badxid is near 0 with timeouts greater than 3%, packets to and from the
server are getting lost on the network. You might be able to solve this problem by lowering the
rsize and wsize mount parameters (read and write block sizes).

If badxid is nearly as high as timeout, then the server is responding, but too slowly. Either replace the
server or increase the timeo mount parameter.

Running nfsstat and netstat occasionally and becoming familiar with their output helps you
discover NFS problems before your users do. We suggest including this data as part of your site’s
monitoring and alerting system.
21.7 DEDICATED NFS FILE SERVERS
Fast, reliable file service is an essential element of a production computing environment.
Although you can certainly roll your own file servers from workstations and off-the-shelf hard
disks, doing so is often not the best-performing or easiest-to-administer solution (though it is
usually the cheapest).
Dedicated NFS file server products have been on the market for many years. They offer a host of
potential advantages over the homebrew approach:

      They are optimized for file service and typically deliver the best possible NFS
      performance.

      As storage requirements grow, they can scale smoothly to support tera-bytes of
      storage and hundreds of users.
      They are more reliable than stand-alone boxes thanks to their simplified software,
      redundant hardware, and use of disk mirroring.
      They usually handle file service for both UNIX and Windows clients. Most even
      contain integrated HTTPS, FTP, and SFTP servers.
      They often include backup and checkpoint facilities that are superior to those found
      on vanilla UNIX systems.

Some of our favorite dedicated NFS servers are made by NetApp. Their products run the gamut
from very small to very large, and their pricing is OK. EMC is another player in the high-end
server market. They make good products, but be prepared for sticker shock and build up your
tolerance for marketing buzzwords.

In an AWS environment, the Elastic File System service is a scalable NFSv4.1 server-as-a-
service that exports filesystems to EC2 instances. Each filesystem can support multiple GiB/s
throughput, depending upon the size of the filesystem. See aws.amazon.com/efs for more
information.
21.8 AUTOMATIC MOUNTING
Mounting filesystems at boot time by listing them in /etc/fstab can cause administrative
headaches on large networks. First, it’s tedious to maintain the fstab file on hundreds of
machines, even with help from scripts and configuration management systems. Each host may
have slightly different needs and so require individual attention. Second, if shared filesystems are
mounted from many different hosts, clients become dependent on many different downstream
servers. Chaos ensues when one of those servers crashes. Every command that accesses that
server’s mount points will hang.
You can moderate these problems with an automounter, a type of daemon that mounts
filesystems when they are referenced and unmounts them when they are no longer being used. In
addition to deferring mounts until they are actually needed, most automounters can also accept a
list of “replicas” (identical backup copies) for a filesystem. These backups let the network
continue to function even when a primary server becomes unavailable.

As described by Edward Tomasz Napierała, author of the FreeBSD automounter, this magic
requires the cooperation of several related pieces of software:

      autofs, a kernel-resident filesystem driver that watches a filesystem for mount
      requests, pauses the calling program, and invokes the automounter to mount the
      target filesystem before returning control to the caller
      automountd and autounmountd, which read the administrative configuration and
      actually mount or unmount filesystems
      automount, an administrative utility

For the most part, automounters are transparent to users. Instead of mirroring an actual
filesystem, the automounter “makes up” a virtual filesystem hierarchy according to the
specifications given in its configuration files. When a user references a directory within the
automounter’s virtual filesystem, the automountd intercepts the reference and mounts the actual
filesystem the user is trying to reach. The NFS filesystem is mounted beneath the autofs
filesystem in normal UNIX fashion.
The idea of an automounter originally comes from Sun. The Linux version functionally mimics
that of Sun, although it is in fact an independent implementation. FreeBSD maintains yet another
implementation, having sacrificed a once widely used automounter, amd, in the FreeBSD 10.1
release.
The various automount implementations understand three different kinds of configuration files,
referred to as “maps”: direct maps, indirect maps, and master maps. Direct and indirect maps
contain information about the filesystems to be automounted. A master map lists the direct and
indirect maps that automount should pay attention to. Only one master map can be active at
once; the default master map is kept in /etc/auto_master on FreeBSD and in /etc/auto.master
on Linux.
A direct map can also be managed as an NIS database or in an LDAP directory, but doing so is
tricky.

On most systems, automount is a stand-alone command that reads its configuration files, sets up
any necessary autofs mounts, and exits. Actual references to automounted filesystems are
handled (through autofs) by a separate daemon process, automountd. This daemon does its work
silently and does not need additional configuration.
      On Linux systems, the daemon is called automount instead of automountd, and the setup
      function is performed by a system startup script (systemd for modern distributions). Linux
details are given here. In the following discussion, we refer to the setup command as automount
and the daemon as automountd.
If you change the master map or one of the direct maps that it references, you must rerun
automount to pick up the changes. With the -v option, automount shows you the adjustments
it’s making to its configuration. You can add -L to achieve a dry run effect that lets you examine
your configuration and debug problems.
automount (autounmountd on FreeBSD) accepts a -t argument that tells how long (in seconds)
an automounted filesystem can remain unused before being unmounted. The default is 300
seconds (10 minutes). Since an NFS mount whose server has crashed can cause programs that
touch it to hang, it’s good hygiene to clean up automounts that are no longer in use; don’t raise
the timeout too much. (The other side of this issue is the time required to mount a filesystem.
System response is faster and smoother if filesystems aren’t being continually remounted.)
Indirect maps
Indirect maps automount several filesystems under a common directory. However, the path of the
directory is specified in the master map, not in the indirect map itself. For example, an indirect
map might look like this:

The first column names the subdirectory in which each automount should be installed, and
subsequent items list the mount options and the NFS path of the filesystem. This example
(perhaps stored in /etc/auto.harp) tells automount that it can mount the directories /harp/users,
/harp/devel, and /harp/info from the server harp, with info being mounted read-only and devel
being mounted soft.

In this configuration, the paths on harp and the local host are the same. However, this
correspondence is not required.
Direct maps
Direct maps list filesystems that do not share a common prefix, such as /usr/src and /cs/tools. A
direct map (e.g., /etc/auto.direct) that described both of these filesystems to automount might
look something like this:

Because they do not share a common parent directory, these automounts must each be
implemented with a separate autofs mount. This configuration requires more overhead, but it has
the added advantage that the mount point and directory structure are always accessible to
commands such as ls. Running ls on a directory full of indirect mounts can be confusing to users
because automount doesn’t show the subdirectories until their contents have been accessed. (ls
doesn’t look inside the automounted directories, so it does not cause them to be mounted.)
Master maps
A master map lists the direct and indirect maps that automount should pay attention to. For each
indirect map, it also specifies the root directory to be used by the mounts defined in the map.
A master map that referenced the direct and indirect maps shown in the previous examples would
look something like this:

The first column is a local directory name for an indirect map or the special token /- for a direct
map. The second column identifies the file in which the map is stored. You can have several
maps of each type. When you specify mount options at the end of a line, they set the defaults for
all mounts within the map. Linux administrators should always specify the -fstype=nfs4 mount flag
for NFS version 4 servers.
      On most systems, the default options set on a master map entry do not blend with the
      options specified in the direct or indirect map to which it points. If a map entry has its own
list of options, the defaults are ignored. Linux merges the two sets, however. If the same option is
specified in both places, the map entry’s value overrides the default.
Executable maps
If a map file is executable, it’s assumed to be a script or program that dynamically generates
automounting information. Instead of reading the map as a text file, the automounter executes it
with an argument (the “key”) that indicates which subdirectory a user has attempted to access.
The script prints an appropriate map entry; if the specified key is not valid, the script can simply
exit without printing anything.
This powerful feature makes up for many of the deficiencies in automounter’s rather strange
configuration system. In effect, you can easily define a site-wide automount configuration file in
a format of your own choice. You can write a simple script to decode the global configuration on
each machine. Some systems come with a handy /etc/auto.net executable map that takes a
hostname as a key and mounts all exported filesystems on that host.
Since automount scripts run dynamically as needed, it’s unnecessary to distribute the master
configuration file after every change or to convert it preemptively to the automounter format; in
fact, the global configuration file can have a permanent home on an NFS server.
Automount visibility
When you list the contents of an automounted filesystem’s parent directory, the directory appears
empty no matter how many filesystems have been automounted there. You cannot browse the
automounts in a GUI filesystem browser.
An example:

The photos filesystem is alive and well and is automounted under /portal. It’s accessible through
its full pathname. However, a review of the /portal directory does not reveal its existence. If you
had mounted this filesystem through the fstab file or a manual mount command, it would
behave like any other directory and would be visible as a member of the parent directory.
One way around the browsing problem is to create a shadow directory that contains symbolic
links to automount points. For example, if /automounts/photos is a link to /portal/photos, you
can ls the contents of /automounts to discover that photos is an automounted directory.
References to /automounts/photos are still routed through the automounter and work correctly.
Unfortunately, these symbolic links require maintenance and can go out of sync with the actual
automounts unless they are periodically reconstructed by a script.
Replicated filesystems and automount
In some cases, a read-only filesystem such as /usr/share might be identical on several different
servers. In this case, you can tell automount about several potential sources for the filesystem. It
then chooses a server according to its own idea of which servers are closest, given network
routes, NFS protocol versions, and response times to an initial query.
Although automount itself does not see or care how the filesystems it mounts are used,
replicated mounts should represent read-only filesystems such as /usr/share or /usr/local/X11.
There’s no way for automount to synchronize writes across a set of servers, so replicated
read/write filesystems are of little practical use.
You can assign explicit priorities to determine which replica to select first. The priorities are
small integers, with larger numbers indicating lower priority. The default priority is 0, most
eligible.
An auto.direct file that defines /usr/man and /cs/tools as replicated filesystems might look like
this:

Note that server names can be listed together if the source path on each is the same. The (1) after
monk in the first line sets that server’s priority with respect to /usr/man. The lack of a priority
after harp indicates an implicit priority of 0.
Automatic automounts (V3; all but Linux)
Instead of listing every possible mount in a direct or indirect map, you can tell automount a little
about your filesystem naming conventions and let it figure things out for itself. The key piece of
glue that makes this work is that the mountd running on a remote server can be queried to find
out what filesystems the server exports. In NFS version 4, the export is always /, which
eliminates the need for this automation.
“Automatic automounts” can be configured in several ways, the simplest of which is the -hosts
mount type on FreeBSD. If you list -hosts as a map name in your master map file, automount then
maps remote hosts’ exports into the specified automount directory:

For example, if harp exported /usr/share/man, that directory could then be reached through the
automounter at the path /net/harp/usr/share/man.
The implementation of -hosts does not enumerate all possible hosts from which filesystems can be
mounted; that would be impossible. Instead, it waits for individual subdirectory names to be
referenced, then runs off and mounts the exported filesystems from the requested host.
A similar but finer-grained effect can be achieved with the * and & wild cards in an indirect map
file. Also, a number of macros available for use in maps expand to the current hostname,
architecture type, and so on. See the automount(1M) man page for details.
Specifics for Linux
     The Linux implementation of automount has diverged a bit from the original Sun
     standards. The changes mostly relate to the naming of commands and files.
First, automount is the daemon that actually mounts and unmounts remote filesystems. It fills
the same niche as the automountd daemon on other systems and generally does not need to be
run by hand.
The default master map file is /etc/auto.master. Its format and the format of indirect maps are as
described previously. The documentation can be hard to find, however. The master map format is
described in auto.master(5) and the indirect map format in autofs(5); be careful, or you’ll get
autofs(8), which documents the syntax of the autofs command. (As one of the man pages says,
“The documentation leaves a lot to be desired.”) To cause changes to the master map to take
effect, run the command /etc/init.d/autofs reload, which is equivalent to automount in Sun-
land.
The Linux implementation does not support the Solaris-style -hosts clause for automatic
automounts.
21.9 RECOMMENDED READING
Table 21.7 lists the various RFCs for the NFS protocol.

Table 21.7: NFS-related RFCs
