22 SMB

Chapter 21, The Network File System, covers the most popular system for sharing files among
UNIX and Linux systems. However, UNIX systems also need to share files with systems, such as
Windows, that don’t natively support NFS. Enter SMB.
In the early 1980s, Barry Feigenbaum created the BAF protocol to afford shared network access
to files and resources. Before release, the name was changed from the author’s initials to Server
Message Block (SMB). The protocol was rapidly embraced by Microsoft and the PC community
because it gave “just like local” access to files on remote systems.
In 1996, a version called the Common Internet File System (CIFS) was released by Microsoft,
mostly as a marketing exercise. Sun Microsystems had also entered the fray in 1996 with its
WebNFS offering, and Microsoft saw an opportunity to market SMB with a more user-friendly
implementation and name. CIFS introduced (often-buggy) changes to the original SMB protocol.
As a result, Microsoft released SMB 2.0 in 2006 and then SMB 3.0 in 2012. Although it’s
common within the industry to refer to SMB fileshares as CIFS, the truth is that CIFS was
deprecated long ago; only SMB lives on.
If you’re working in a homogeneous UNIX and Linux environment, then this chapter probably
isn’t for you. But if you need a way to share files between UNIX and Windows systems, read on.
22.1 SAMBA: SMB SERVER FOR UNIX
Samba is a popular software package, available under the GNU Public License, that implements
the server side of the SMB protocol on UNIX and Linux hosts. It was originally created by
Andrew Tridgell, who first reverse-engineered the SMB protocol and published the resulting
code in 1992. Here, we focus on Samba version 4.
Samba is well supported and under active development to expand its functionality. It offers a
stable, industrial strength way to share files between UNIX and Windows systems. The real
beauty of Samba is that you install only one package on the server side; no special software is
needed on the Windows side.

In the Windows world, a filesystem or directory made available over the network is known as a
“share.” It sounds a bit strange to UNIX ears, but we follow this convention when referring to
SMB filesystems.
Although we explore only file sharing in this chapter, Samba can also implement a variety of
other cross-platform services, including

      Authentication and authorization
      Network printing
      Name resolution
      Service announcement (file server and printer “browsing”)

Samba can also perform the basic functions of a Windows Active Directory controller. This
configuration involves a certain amount of hubris, though; we suspect that being an AD
controller is probably a job best left to Windows servers.
There is certainly value in getting your UNIX and Linux systems added to an AD domain as
clients, however. This arrangement lets you share identity and authentication information site-
wide. See Chapter 17, Single Sign-On, for more information.
Likewise, we don’t recommend Samba as a print server. CUPS is probably your best bet there.
See Chapter 12 for more information about printing in UNIX and Linux with CUPS.

Most of Samba’s functionality is implemented by two daemons, smbd and nmbd. smbd
implements file and print services as well as authentication and authorization. nmbd is
responsible for the other major SMB components: name resolution and service announcement.
Unlike NFS, which requires kernel-level support, Samba requires no drivers or kernel
modifications and runs entirely as a user process. It binds to the sockets used for SMB requests
and waits for a client to request access to a resource. Once a request has been authenticated,
smbd forks an instance of itself that runs as the user who is making the requests. As a result, all
normal file access permissions (including group permissions) are obeyed. The only special
functionality that smbd adds on top of this is a file locking service that gives Windows systems
the locking semantics to which they are accustomed.
If you’re left wondering why you’d use SMB over, say, a more UNIX-integrated remote
filesystem such as NFS, the answer is ubiquity. Almost all OSs support SMB at some level.
Table 22.1 summarizes some of the main differences between SMB and NFS.

Table 22.1: SMB vs. NFS

Chapter 21 explores NFS in more detail.
22.2 INSTALLING AND CONFIGURING SAMBA
Samba is available for all our example systems. Most Linux distributions include it by default.
Patches, documentation, and other goodies are available from samba.org. Make sure you are
using the most current Samba packages available for your system, since many updates fix
security vulnerabilities.
If Samba is not already installed on your system, you can install it on FreeBSD with pkg install
samba44. On Linux systems, grab the samba-common package through your package manager
of choice.

You configure Samba in the /etc/samba/smb.conf file (/usr/local/etc/smb4.conf on FreeBSD).
The file specifies the directories to share, their access rights, and Samba’s general operational
parameters. Linux packages are kind enough to supply a heavily commented sample
configuration that’s a good starting point for new setups.
Samba comes with sensible defaults for its configuration options, and most sites need only a
small configuration file. Run the command testparm -v for a listing of all the Samba
configuration options and the values to which they are currently set. This listing includes your
settings from the smb.conf or smb4.conf file as well as any default values you have not
overridden. Note that once Samba is running, it checks its configuration file every few seconds
and loads any changes—no restart required!
The most common use of Samba is to share files with Windows clients. Access to these shares
must be authenticated through a user account by one of two options. The first option uses local
accounts, for which users specify a password that is managed separately from their other
accounts (such as their domain login). The second option integrates Active Directory
authentication and so piggybacks on the user’s domain login credentials.
File sharing with local authentication
The simplest way to authenticate users who want to access Samba shares is by creating a local
account for them on the UNIX or Linux server.
Because Windows passwords work quite differently from UNIX passwords, Samba cannot
control access to SMB shares by means of users’ existing account passwords. Hence, to use local
accounts, you must store (and maintain) a separate SMB password hash for every user.
Sometimes, however, simplicity outweighs user convenience, and this authentication system is
really simple. Here’s the start of an example smb.conf file that uses it:

The security = user parameter tells Samba to use local UNIX accounts. Be sure the workgroup name
is set to fit your environment. This is typically the Active Directory domain if you’re in a
Windows environment. If you’re not, you can omit this setting.
Samba has its own command, smbpasswd, for setting up Windows-style password hashes. For
example, here we add the user tobi and set a password for him:

The UNIX account should already exist before you attempt to set its Samba password. Users can
change their Samba password by running smbpasswd without any options:

This example changes the Samba password of the current user on the Samba server.
Unfortunately, Windows-only users must log in to a shell prompt on the server to change their
share password. The ability to log in remotely must be set up separately, most likely through
SSH.
File sharing with accounts authenticated by Active Directory
As simple as the basic process is, maintaining a separate authentication database for shares with
smbpasswd does seem archaic in today’s hyper-integrated world. In most cases, you’ll want
users to authenticate through some form of centralized authority such as Active Directory or
LDAP.
Recent years have brought great advances to UNIX and Linux in this area. Chapter 17, Single
Sign-On, covers the necessary components, including directory services, sssd, the nsswitch.conf
file, and PAM. Once you have deployed those components, configuring Samba to take advantage
of them is easy. (Historically, winbind was used integrate Active Directory with Samba. These
days, sssd is the preferred method.)
Here’s an example of the start of an smb.conf file for an environment in which Active Directory
performs user authentication (via sssd):

In this case, the realm parameter should be the same as the local Active Directory domain name.
The dedicated keytab file and kerberos method parameters enable Samba to work properly with Active
Directory’s Kerberos implementation.
The keytab file is created by sssd if you’ve set it up according to the instructions in Chapter 17.
For more information about keytabs in Samba, see goo.gl/ZxCUKA (deep link within
wiki.samba.org).
Configuring shares
After you’ve configured Samba’s general settings and authentication, you can specify in the
smb.conf file which directories should be shared through SMB. Each share that you expose
needs its own stanza in the configuration file. The name of the stanza becomes the share name
that is advertised to SMB clients.
Here’s an example:

Here, SMB clients see a mountable share named \\sambaserver\bookshare. It yields access to the file
tree located at /storage/bookshare on the server.

Sharing home directories
You can automatically convert users’ home directories into distinct SMB shares with the magic
stanza name [homes] in the smb.conf file:

For example, this configuration would allow user janderson to access her home directory through
the path \\sambaserver\janderson from any Windows system on the network.
At some sites, the default permissions on home directories let users browse one another’s files.
Because Samba relies on UNIX file permissions to implement access control, Windows users
coming in through Samba can then read one another’s home directories, too. However,
experience shows that this behavior tends to confuse Windows users and make them feel
exposed.

The variable %S listed as the value of valid users in the example above expands to the username
associated with each share; it thus restricts access to the owner of the home directory. Omit this
line if that is not the behavior you want.
Samba uses its magic [homes] section as a last resort. If a particular user’s home directory has an
explicitly defined share in the configuration file, the parameters set there override the values set
through [homes].

Sharing project directories
Samba can map Windows access control lists (ACLs) to either traditional UNIX file permissions
or ACLs, if the underlying filesystem supports them. But in practice, we find that ACLs are too
complex for most users to deal with.

    See this page for more information about ACLs.

Instead of using ACLs, we normally set up a special share for each user group that needs a
collective work area. When a user attempts to mount this share, Samba checks that the applicant
is in the appropriate UNIX group before allowing access. In the example below, a user must be a
part of the eng group to mount the share and access files:

This configuration does not require you to create a pseudo-user to act as the owner of the shared
directory. You just need a UNIX group (here, eng) that includes the intended users of the share.

Users mount the share under their own accounts, but to facilitate collaboration, we would prefer
that any files created within the share be owned by group eng. That way, other team members
can access newly created files by default.
The first step toward ensuring this behavior is to use the force group option to coerce mounters’
effective group IDs to eng, the UNIX group that controls access to the share. However, this step
alone is not enough to ensure that new files and directories are assigned a group owner of eng.
As explained here, the setgid option on a directory makes new files created within that directory
inherit the directory’s group owner—or at least, it does so on Linux. (FreeBSD does not honor
the setgid bit on a directory; however, its default behavior is to inherit the group, just as Linux
does with the setgid bit turned on. Setting the setgid bit on FreeBSD does no harm, however.)
We can ensure that new files are owned by eng by setting the group of the share’s root to eng and
then turning on the setgid bit on that directory:

These measures are sufficient to manage files created in the root of the share. However, to make
the system work for complex hierarchies of files, we also need to ensure that newly created
directories’ setgid bits are also turned on. The example configuration above implements this
requirement with the force directory mode and directory mask options.
22.3 MOUNTING SMB FILE SHARES
Mounting for SMB file shares works quite differently from how it’s done for other network
filesystems. In particular, SMB volumes are mounted by a specific user rather than being
mounted by the system itself.
You need local permission to perform an SMB mount. You also need the password for an
identity that the remote SMB server will allow to mount the share. A typical command line on
Linux is

And the equivalent on FreeBSD:

Windows conceptualizes network mounts as being established by a particular user (hence the
username=joe option above), whereas UNIX regards them as more typically belonging to the
system as a whole. Windows servers generally cannot deal with the concept that several different
people might be accessing a mounted Windows share.
From the perspective of the UNIX client, all files in the mounted directory appear to belong to
the user who mounted it. If you mount the share as root, then all files belong to root, and garden-
variety users might not be able to write files on the Windows server.

The mount options uid, gid, fmask, and dmask let you tweak these settings so that ownership
and permission bits are more in tune with the intended access policy for that share. Check the
mount.cifs (Linux) or mount_smbfs (FreeBSD) man page for more information about these
options.
22.4 BROWSING SMB FILE SHARES
Samba includes a command-line utility called smbclient that lets you list file shares without
actually mounting them. It also defines an FTP-like interface for interactive access. This feature
can be useful when you are debugging or when a script needs access to a share.
For example, here’s how to list shares available to user dan on the server hoarder:

To connect to a share and transfer files, omit the -L flag and include the share name:

Once you’re connected, type help for a list of available commands.
22.5 ENSURING SAMBA SECURITY
It’s important to be aware of the security implications of sharing files and other resources over a
network. For a typical site, you need to do two things to ensure a basic level of security:

      Explicitly specify which clients can access the resources shared by Samba. This part
      of the configuration is controlled by the hosts allow clause in the smb.conf file. Make
      sure that it contains only the IP addresses, address ranges, or hostnames that it should.

      You can include a hosts deny clause in the smb.conf file as well, but note that denials
      have priority. If you include a hostname or address in both the hosts deny clause and the
      hosts allow clause, that host will not be able to access the resource.

      Block access to the server from outside your organization. Samba uses encryption
      only for password authentication. It does not use encryption for its data transport. In
      almost all cases, you should block access from outside your organization to prevent
      users from accidentally downloading files in plain text across the Internet.

      Blocking is typically implemented at the network firewall level. Samba uses UDP
      ports 137–139 and TCP ports 137, 139, and 445.

Since the release of Samba version 3, excellent security documentation has been available on
Samba’s wiki, wiki.samba.org.
22.6 DEBUGGING SAMBA
Samba usually runs without requiring much attention. If you do experience a problem, you can
consult two primary sources of debugging information: the smbstatus command and Samba’s
logging facilities.
Querying Samba’s state with smbstatus
smbstatus shows currently active connections and locked files; it’s the first place to look when
issues arise. This information is especially useful for tracking down locking problems (e.g.,
“Which user has file xyz open read/write exclusive?”).

The first section of output lists the users that have connected. The Service column in the next
section shows the actual shares they’ve mounted. The last section, from which we’ve removed a
couple of columns to save space, lists any active file locks.

If you kill the smbd associated with a certain user, all that user’s locks disappear. Some
applications handle this situation gracefully and reacquire any locks they need. Others freeze and
die a horrible death, with much clicking required on the Windows side just to close the unhappy
application. As dramatic as this may sound, we have yet to see any file corruption resulting from
such a procedure.
Be careful when Windows claims that files have been locked by another application; it is often
right. Fix the problem on the client side by closing the offending application instead of brute-
forcing the locks on the server.
Configuring Samba logging
Configure logging parameters in your smb.conf file:

Higher log levels produce more information. Logging uses system resources, so don’t ask for too
much detail unless you are actively debugging.

The following example shows log entries generated by an unsuccessful connection attempt:

A successful attempt looks like this:

The smbcontrol command is handy for altering the debug level of a running Samba server
without altering the smb.conf file. For example,
This command sets the global debug level to 4 and sets the debug level for authentication-related
matters to 10. The smbd argument specifies that all smbd daemons on the system should have
their debug levels set. To debug a specific established connection, use the smbstatus command
to determine which smbd daemon handles the connection, then pass its PID to smbcontrol to
debug just that one connection. At log levels over 100, you’ll start to see encrypted passwords in
the logs.
Managing character sets
Starting with version 3.0, Samba encodes all filenames in UTF-8. If your server runs with a UTF-
8 locale, which we recommend, this a great match. Type echo $LANG to see if your system is
running in UTF-8 mode.
If you are in Europe and are still using one of the ISO 8859 locales on the server, you may find
that Samba-created filenames that include accented characters (e.g., ä, ö, ü, é, or è) do not display
correctly when you run ls. The solution is to tell Samba to use the same encoding as your server:

Make sure the filename encoding is correct right from the start. Otherwise, files with improperly
encoded names accumulate. Fixing them later is a surprisingly complex task.
22.7 RECOMMENDED READING
RED HAT. Red Hat Enterprise Linux System Administrator’s Guide: File and Print Servers.
goo.gl/LPjNXa (deep link into access.redhat.com/documentation).
SAMBA PROJECT. Samba Wiki Page. wiki.samba.org. This wiki is updated relatively frequently and
is an authoritative source of information, though portions are somewhat disorganized.
