23 Configuration Management

A longstanding tenet of system administration is that changes should be structured, automated,
and applied consistently among machines. But that’s easier said than done when you’re
confronted with a heterogeneous fleet of systems and networks in various states of health.
Configuration management software automates the management of operating systems on a
network. Administrators write specifications that describe how servers should be configured, and
the configuration management software then brings reality into conformance with the
specifications. Several open source implementations of configuration management are in
widespread use. In this chapter, we introduce the basics of configuration management and
describe the major players.
As an automation tool, configuration management is closely affiliated with the DevOps
philosophy of IT operations, which we describe in more detail starting here. People sometimes
conflate DevOps and configuration management, so you may occasionally hear these terms used
interchangeably. Nevertheless, they are distinct. In this chapter, we show several examples that
demonstrate how configuration management enables—but not is not identical to—several key
elements of DevOps.
“Configuration management system” is a bit of a handful to read and write, so we often shorten
that term to “CM system” (or even simply CM). (Unfortunately, the abbreviation CMS is already
in widespread use for “content management system.”)
23.1 CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT IN A NUTSHELL
The traditional approach to sysadmin automation is an intricate complex of home-grown shell
scripts supplemented by ad hoc fire fighting when scripts fail. This scheme works about as well
as you might expect. Over time, systems managed in this way usually degenerate into a chaotic
wreckage of package versions and configurations that can’t be reliably reproduced. It’s
sometimes called the snowflake model of system administration because no two systems are ever
alike.

     See Chapter 7 for more information about shell scripting.

Configuration management is a better approach. It captures desired state in the form of code.
Changes and updates can then be tracked over time in a version control system, which creates an
audit trail and a point of reference. The code also acts as informal documentation of a network.
Any administrator or developer can read the code to determine how the system is configured.
When all a site’s servers are under configuration management, the CM system effectively acts as
both an inventory database and a command-and-control center for the network. CM systems also
offer “orchestration” features, which let you apply changes and run ad hoc commands remotely.
You can target groups of hosts whose hostnames match particular patterns or whose
configuration variables match a given set of values. Managed clients report information about
themselves to the central database for analysis and monitoring.
Most configuration management “code” uses a declarative—as opposed to procedural—idiom.
Rather than writing scripts that tell the system what changes to make, you describe the state you
want to achieve. The configuration management system then uses its own logic to adjust target
systems as necessary.
Ultimately, the job of a CM system is to apply a series of configuration specifications, aka
operations, to an individual machine. Operations vary in granularity, but they are typically coarse
enough to correspond to items that might plausibly appear on a sysadmin’s to-do list: create a
user account, install a software package, and so on. A subsystem such as a database might require
anywhere between 5 and 20 operations to fully configure. Full configuration of a freshly booted
system might entail dozens or hundreds of operations.
23.2 DANGERS OF CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT
Configuration management is a major improvement over the ad hoc approach, but it is not a
magic wand. A few sharp edges are particularly important for administrators to be aware of in
advance.
Although all major CM systems use similar conceptual models, they describe these models with
different lexicons. Unfortunately, the terminology used by a particular CM system often has
more to do with conforming to a marketing theme than with maximizing clarity.

The result is a general lack of conformity and standardization among systems. Most
administrators will encounter several CM systems throughout the course of their careers and will
develop preferences derived from that experience. Unfortunately, knowledge of one system is not
directly portable to another.
As a site grows, so too must the infrastructure needed to support its configuration management
system. A site with a few thousand servers needs a handful of systems dedicated to running the
CM workloads. This overhead imposes both direct and indirect costs in the form of hardware
resources and ongoing maintenance. CM system upgrades can be major projects in their own
right.
A certain level of operational maturity and rigor is necessary for a site to fully embrace
configuration management. Once a host is under the control of a CM system, it must not be
modified manually, or it immediately reverts to the status of a snowflake system.
On more than one occasion, we have seen cases in which hurried (or lazy) administrators have
manually updated a configuration-managed host and set their changes to be immutable, thus
overriding the expected state and preventing the CM system from applying future changes. This
kind of hack results in great confusion when an admin’s colleagues cannot quickly determine
why the expected configuration is not being applied. In one case, it caused a major service
outage.

Although some CM systems are easier to pick up than others, they are all notorious for having a
steep learning curve, especially for administrators who lack prior experience with automation. If
you match this description, consider practicing on a lab of virtual machines to hone your skills
before you tackle your production network.
23.3 ELEMENTS OF CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT
In this section, we review the components of a CM system and the concepts used to configure it
at a greater level of detail. Then, starting here, we survey four of the most commonly used CM
systems: Ansible, Salt, Puppet, and Chef.
Rather than adopt any particular CM system’s terminology, we use the clearest and most directly
descriptive term we can find for each concept. Table 23.2 maps the correspondences between our
vocabulary and those of the four CM systems listed above. If you’re already familiar with one of
those CM systems, you might find it helpful to refer to this table as you read the material below.
Operations and parameters
We’ve already introduced the concept of operations, which are the small-scale actions and
checks used by a CM system to achieve a particular state. Every CM system includes a large set
of supported operations, and more arrive with each new release.
Here are some sample operations that all CM systems can handle right out of the box:

      Create or remove a user account or set its attributes
      Copy files to or from the system being configured
      Synchronize directory contents

      Render a configuration file template
      Add a new line in a configuration file
      Restart a service
      Add a cron job or systemd timer

      Run an arbitrary shell command
      Create a new cloud server instance
      Create or remove a database account
      Set database operating parameters

      Perform Git operations

This is just a sampling; most CM systems define hundreds of operations, including many that
perform potentially complex niche operations, such as setting up specific databases, run-time
environments, or even pieces of hardware.
If operations seem suspiciously similar to shell commands, your intuition is accurate. They are
scripts, usually written in the implementation language of the CM system itself and exploiting the
system’s standard tools and libraries. In many cases, they run standard shell commands under the
hood as part of their implementation.
Just as UNIX commands accept arguments, most operations accept parameters. For example, a
package management operation would accept parameters that specify the package name, version,
and whether the package is to be installed or removed.
Parameters vary according to the operation. As a convenience, they usually have default values
that are suitable for the most common use cases.
CM systems let you use variable values (see the next section) to define parameters. They can also
infer parameter values according to the environment of the system, such as the network it lives
on, whether a particular configuration property is present, or whether the system’s hostname
matches a given regular expression.
A well-behaved operation knows nothing about the host or hosts to which it might eventually be
applied. The implementation is written to be relatively generic and OS-agnostic. Binding
operations to specific systems occurs at a higher level of the configuration management
hierarchy.

Despite CM systems’ focus on declarative configuration, operations must ultimately run like any
other command. Execution has a start and an end. It can succeed or fail. It reports its status back
to the calling environment.
However, operations differ from typical UNIX commands in a few important ways:

      Most operations are designed to be applied repeatedly without causing problems.
      Borrowing a term from linear algebra, you’ll sometimes see this latter property
      referred to as “idempotence.”
      Operations know when they change the system’s actual state.
      Operations know when the system state needs to be changed. If the current
      configuration already conforms to the specification, the operation exits without doing
      anything.

      Operations report their results to the CM system. Their report data is richer than a
      UNIX-style exit code and can aid in debugging.
      Operations strive to be cross-platform. They usually define a constrained set of
      functions that are common to all supported platforms, and they interpret requests in
      accordance with the local system.

Some operations can’t be made idempotent without a little help from a sysadmin who knows
more about the context. For example, if an operation runs a garden-variety UNIX command, the
CM system has no direct way of knowing what effect that command had on the system.
You also have the option of writing your own custom operations. They’re just scripts, and the
CM system typically provides a well-greased path for integrating your custom operations with
the standard ones.
Variables
Variables are named values that influence how configurations are applied to individual machines.
They commonly set parameter values and fill in the blanks in configuration templates.
Variable management in CM systems is often quite rich. A few points of note:

      Variables can typically be defined in many different places and contexts within the
      configuration base.
      Each definition has a scope in which it’s visible. Scope types vary by CM system and
      might encompass a single machine, a group of machines, or a particular set of
      operations.
      Multiple scopes can be active in any given context. Scopes can be nested, but more
      commonly they are simply coactive.

      Because multiple scopes can define values for the same variable, some form of
      conflict resolution is necessary. Some systems merge values, but most use precedence
      rules or definition order to pick a winning value.

Variables are not limited to having scalar values; arrays and hashes are also acceptable variable
values in all CM systems. Some operations accept nonscalar parameter values directly, but such
values are more typically used above the level of individual operations. For example, an array
might be enumerated in a loop to apply the same operation more than once with different
parameters.
Facts
CM systems investigate each configuration client to determine descriptive facts such as the IP
address of the primary network interface and the OS type. This information is then accessible
from within the configuration base through variable values. As with any other variable, these
values can be used to define parameter values or to expand templates.
It can take awhile to determine all the facts associated with a particular system. Therefore, CM
systems generally cache facts, and they do not necessarily rebuild the cache on every run. If you
find that a particular configuration flow is encountering stale configuration data, you might need
to explicitly invalidate the cache.
All CM systems let target machines add their own values to the fact database, either by including
a static file of declarations or by running custom code on the target machine. This feature is
useful both for extending the types of information that can be accessed through the facts database
and for moving static configuration information onto client machines.
Client-side hints can be particularly useful for managing cloud and virtual servers. You simply
apply cloud-level markers (such as EC2 tags) as an instance is created, and the configuration
management system can then flesh out the appropriate configuration by checking the markers.
Keep in mind the security implications of this approach, however: the client controls the facts
that it reports, so make sure that a compromised client can’t exploit the configuration
management system to gain additional privileges.

Depending on the CM system, you may be able to transcend your local context when sniffing
around in the variable or fact space. In addition to accessing the configuration information for the
current host, you may also be able to access data for other hosts, or even to introspect the state of
the configuration base itself. This is a useful feature for coordinating a distributed system such as
a cluster of servers.
Change handlers
If you change a web server’s configuration file, you had better restart the web server. That’s the
basic concept behind handlers, which are operations that run in response to some sort of event or
situation rather than as part of a baseline configuration.
In most systems, a handler runs whenever one or more of a designated set of operations reports
that it has modified the target system. The handler isn’t told anything about the exact nature of
the change, but because the association between operations and their handlers is fairly specific,
additional information isn’t needed.
Bindings
Bindings complete the basic configuration model by associating specific sets of operations to
specific hosts or groups of hosts. You can also bind operations to a dynamic set of clients that’s
defined by the value of a fact or variable. CM systems can also define host groups by looking up
information in a local inventory system or by calling a remote API.
In addition to their basic linking role, bindings in most CM systems also act as variable scopes.
This feature lets you customize the behavior of the operations you’re assigning by defining or
customizing variable values for the clients that are targeted.
A given host can match criteria for many different bindings. For example, a node might live on a
certain subnet, be managed by a particular department, or fill an explicitly designated role (e.g.,
Apache web server). The CM system takes account of all of these factors and activates the
operations associated with each binding.
Once you set up the bindings for a host, you can invoke your CM system’s top-level “configure
everything” mechanism to make the CM system identify all the operations that should run on the
target and execute them in order.
Bundles and bundle repositories
A bundle is a collection of operations that perform a specific function, such as installing,
configuring, and running a web server. CM systems let you package bundles into a format that’s
suitable for distribution or reuse. In most cases, a bundle is defined by a directory, and the name
of the directory defines the name of the bundle.
CM vendors maintain public repositories that include both officially blessed and user-contributed
bundles. You can use these “as is” or modify them to suit your needs. Most CM systems provide
native commands for interacting with repositories.
Environments
It’s often useful to segregate configuration-managed clients into multiple “worlds,” such as the
traditional categories of development, test, and production. Large installations can create even
finer distinctions to support processes such as the gradual (“staged”) rollout of new code into
production.
These different worlds are known generically as “environments,” both inside and outside the
configuration management context. This seems to be the single term on which all configuration
management systems agree.
When properly implemented, environments are not just groups of clients. They’re an additional
axis of variation that can affect multiple aspects of the configuration. The development and
production environments might both include web servers and database servers, for example, but
the details of how those roles are defined might vary among environments.
For example, it’s common for the database and web server to run on the same machine in the
development environment. However, the production environment usually has multiple servers of
each type. A production environment might also define server types that don’t exist in the
development environment, such as those that do load balancing or act as DMZ proxies.

The environment system is usually thought of as a sort of pipeline for configuration code. As a
thought experiment, you can imagine that fixed groups of clients run the development, test, and
production environments. As a given configuration base is validated, it propagates from one
environment to the next, ensuring that changes are properly vetted before they reach the all-
important production systems.
On most CM systems, different environments are just different versions of the same
configuration base. If you’re a Git user, think of them as tags in a Git repository: the
development tag points to the most recent version of the configuration base, and the production
tag might point to a commit that’s several weeks old. The tags move forward as releases make
their way through testing and deployment.
Different environments can provide different variable values to clients. For example, the
database credentials used in development likely differ from those used on production systems, as
do the details of the network configuration and perhaps the users and groups who are permitted
access.
See Chapter 26, Continuous Integration and Delivery, for more information about environments.
Client inventory and registration
Because CM systems define lots of ways to segregate clients into categories, the overall universe
of machines under configuration management must be well defined. The inventory of managed
hosts can live in a flat file or in a proper relational database. In some cases, it may even be
entirely dynamic.
The exact mechanism through which configuration code is distributed, parsed, and executed
varies among CM systems. Most systems actually give you several options in this regard. Here
are a few common approaches:

      A daemon runs continuously on each client. The daemon pulls its configuration code
      from a designated CM server (or server group).
      A central CM server pushes configuration data to each client. This process can run on
      a regular schedule, or it can be initiated by administrators.
      Each managed node runs a client that wakes up periodically, reads configuration data
      from a local clone of the configuration base, and applies the relevant configuration to
      itself. There is no central configuration server.

Configuration information is sensitive and often includes secrets such as passwords. To protect
this data, all CM systems define some way for clients and servers to authenticate each other and
to encrypt private information.

The process of putting a new client under configuration management can be made as simple as
installing the appropriate client-side software. If the environment has been configured to support
automatic bootstrapping, a new client can automatically contact its configuration server,
authenticate itself, and initiate the configuration process. OS-specific initialization mechanisms
typically kick off this chain of events the first time the client is bootstrapped. The flow is
depicted in Exhibit A.

Exhibit A: Initialization process for a new CM-managed client
23.4 POPULAR CM SYSTEMS COMPARED
Currently, four major players own the market for general configuration management on UNIX
and Linux systems: Ansible, Salt, Puppet, and Chef. Table 23.1 shows some general information
about these packages.

Table 23.1: Major configuration management systems

All of these packages are relatively young. The oldest, Puppet, debuted in 2005. It still claims the
largest market share, in large part because of its early head start. Chef was released in 2009,
followed by Salt in 2011 and Ansible in 2012.
The general category of configuration management software was pioneered by Mark Burgess’s
CFEngine in 1993. CFEngine is still around and is still actively developed, but the majority of its
user base has been siphoned away by newer systems. See cfengine.com for current information.
Microsoft has its own CM solution in the form of PowerShell Desired State Configuration.
Although it originates in the Windows world and is primarily designed to configure Windows
clients, Microsoft has also published extensions for configuring Linux systems. It’s worth noting
that all four of the systems in Table 23.1 can configure Windows clients as well.

A number of projects focus on specific subdomains of configuration management, notably new-
system provisioning (e.g., Cobbler) and software deployment (e.g., Fabric and Capistrano). The
general proposition behind these systems is that by more closely modeling a specific problem
domain, they can provide a simpler and more targeted set of features.
Depending on your needs, you may or may not find that these specialized systems provide a
reasonable rate of return on your learning investment. Generic configuration management
systems like those in Table 23.1 are not perfectly suited to all possible activities.
The systems in Table 23.1 work with pretty much any type of contemporary UNIX-compatible
client machine, although there’s always a support frontier. Chef has a modest edge in
compatibility and supports even AIX.
     See Chapter 25 for more information about containers.

OS support on the configuration server side (for those systems that use a configuration server) is
more limited. Chef, for example, requires RHEL or Ubuntu for its server. Containerized versions
of the server can run anywhere, though, so this isn’t as much an obstacle as it might seem.
Terminology
Table 23.2 shows the terms used by each of our example CM systems for the entities outlined in
Elements of configuration management.

Table 23.2: Configuration management Rosetta Stone
Business models
All the products we discuss are freemium-model packages, which means that the basic systems
are open source and free, but that each system has a corporate backer that sells support,
consulting services, and add-on packages.
In theory, vendors have a potential motivation to withhold useful functionality from the open
source releases to motivate add-on sales. In the configuration management space, however, this
effect has not been evident. The open source versions of the software are full-featured and more
than adequate for most sites.
Add-on services are mostly of interest to large organizations. If your site falls into this category,
you may want to evaluate configuration management systems with respect to the functionality
and pricing of the full-stack offerings. The main upsells are usually support, custom
development, training, GUIs, and reporting and monitoring solutions. In this book, we discuss
only the basic, free versions.
Architectural options
In theory, CM systems don’t require servers. Software could run only on the machines being
configured. You’d copy the configuration base to each target host and simply run a command to
say, “Here, configure yourself according to these specifications.”
In practice, it’s nice not to have to fuss with the details of getting configuration information
pushed out to clients and executed. CM systems always make some provision for centralized
control, even if the master machine is defined as “wherever you happen to be logged in and have
a clone of the configuration base.”
Ansible uses no daemons at all (other than sshd), which is an appealing simplification.
Configuration runs happen when an administrator (or cron job) on the server runs the ansible-
playbook command. ansible-playbook executes the appropriate remote commands over SSH,
leaving no trace of its presence on the client machine after configuration has completed. The only
requirements for client machines are that they be accessible through SSH and have Python 2
installed. (Depending on the system, you might need a Python add-on or two as well. For
example, Fedora requires the python-dnf package.)
Salt, Puppet, and Chef include both master- and client-side daemons. Typical deployment
scenarios run daemons on both sides of the relationship, and this is the environment you’ll see
described in most documentation. It’s possible to run each of these without a server also, but this
configuration is less common.

It’s tempting to assume that CM systems with daemons must be more heavyweight and more
complex than those without (i.e., Ansible). However, that isn’t necessarily true. In Salt and
Puppet, the daemons are facilitators and accelerators. They’re useful but optional, and they don’t
change the fundamental architecture of the system, although they do enable some advanced
features. If you prefer, you are free to run these systems without daemons and to replicate the
configuration base by hand. Salt even has an SSH-based mode that works similarly to Ansible.
Given that, why would you want to mess around with a bunch of optional daemons? Several
reasons:

      It’s faster. Ansible works hard to overcome the performance limits imposed by SSH
      and by its lack of client-side caching, but it is still noticeably more sluggish than Salt.
      When you’re reading a system administration book, ten seconds sounds insignificant.
      In the midst of resolving an outage, it feels endless, especially when repeated across
      dozens or hundreds of clients.
      Some features can’t exist without central coordination. For example, Salt lets clients
      notify the configuration master of events such as full disks. You can then respond to
      these events through the normal configuration management facilities. Having a
      central connection point facilitates a variety of interclient data-sharing features.
      Only the master-side daemon is really a potential source of administrative
      complexity. CM systems work hard to make client bootstrapping a one-line
      operation, regardless of whether a daemon is involved.
      The presence of active agents on both client and server opens a variety of
      architectural options not available in one-sided configurations.

In terms of architecture, Chef is the outlier among configuration management systems in that its
server daemon is a top-tier entity within the conceptual model. Salt and Puppet serve
configuration data directly from plaintext files on disk; to make changes, you simply edit the
files. By contrast, the Chef server is an opaque and authoritative source of configuration
information. Changes must be uploaded to the server with the knife command or they will not be
available to clients. (However, even Chef has a serverless mode of operation in the form of chef-
solo.)

We mention all this not to promote serverful systems per se, but simply to point out that the main
fault line among CM systems runs between Chef and everything else. Ansible, Salt, and Puppet
all have about the same, modest level of overall complexity. Chef requires significantly more
investment to maintain and master, especially when its extensive line of add-on modules is added
to the mix.
Because of its serverless model, Ansible is often tagged as a sort of “easy option” for
configuration management. But in fact, the basic architectures of Salt and Puppet are similarly
approachable. A strong case could be made that Salt is the simplest system of all, if you disregard
its advanced facilities and somewhat peculiar documentation. Don’t write off Salt and Puppet as
advanced options.
The converse is also true: Ansible is more than just a gimped-out starter system for short-
attention-span sysadmins. It’s a legitimate option for complex sites, although its sluggish
performance becomes increasingly more apparent in this context.
Language options
Ansible and Salt are written in Python. Puppet and Chef are written in Ruby. But except in the
case of Chef, this information is probably less relevant than it might initially appear.
No Python code appears in the average Ansible or Salt configuration. Both of these systems use
YAML (an alternate syntax for expressing JavaScript object notation, aka JSON), as their
primary configuration language. YAML is just structured data, not code, so it has no inherent
behavior other than the interpretation assigned by the configuration management system.
Here’s a simple example from Salt that keeps the SSH service enabled and running:

To make YAML files more dynamically expressive, both Ansible and Salt augment them with a
templating system, Jinja2, as a preprocessor. Jinja has its roots in Python, but it’s not just a
simple Python wrapper. In use, it feelsmore like a template system than a real programming
language. Even Salt, which relies more heavily on Jinja than does Ansible, cautions against
putting too much logic into Jinja code.
In fairness, Salt is actually format- and preprocessor-agnostic, and it supports several input
pipelines (including raw Python) right out of the box. However, departing from the greased path
of Jinja and YAML means leaving the documentation and the rest of the world behind. It’s
probably best deferred until you’re quite familiar with Salt.
The bottom line is that unless you write your own custom operation types or use explicit escapes
into Python, you won’t be encountering much Python in the Ansible and Salt worlds. Extending
the CM system with your own code can in fact be quite easy and quite helpful, however.

Jon Corbet, one of our technical reviewers, agrees that these systems don’t expose much
Python…until things go horribly wrong. “At that point,” he adds, “familiarity with Python
tracebacks and data structure representations helps a lot.”
Both Puppet and Chef use Ruby-based, domain-specific languages as their primary configuration
systems. Chef’s version is a lot like a configuration management analog of Rails from the web
development world. That is, it has been extended with a few concepts that are designed to
facilitate configuration management, but it’s still recognizably Ruby. For example:
Most configuration management tasks can be achieved without delving below the surface of
Ruby, but Ruby’s full power is available if you need it. You’ll appreciate this hidden depth more
and more as your comfort with Ruby and Chef increases.
By contrast, Puppet has put in quite a bit of work to be conceptually independent of Ruby and to
use it only as an implementation layer. Although the language remains Ruby under the hood and
is amenable to the insertion of Ruby code, the Puppet language has its own idiosyncratic
structure that is more akin to a declarative system such as YAML than a programming language:

In our opinion, Puppet hasn’t done administrators any favors with this architecture. Instead of
letting you leverage your existing knowledge of Ruby (or parlay your Puppet experience into a
more general familiarity with Ruby), Puppet just defines its own insulated world.
Dependency management options
No matter how your configuration management system structures its data, the work list for a
given client ultimately boils down to a set of operations for the client to execute. Some of those
operations have execution-order dependencies, and some don’t.
For example, consider the following Ansible tasks for installing a www user account, such as
might be used to own the files for a web application:

We want the www user to have its own dedicated group, also named www. Ansible’s user module
does not create groups automatically, so we must do that in a separate step. And the group
creation must precede the creation of the www account; it’s an error to specify a nonexistent group
in a user operation.

Ansible executes operations in the order in which they are presented by the configuration, so this
configuration snippet works just fine. Chef works this way, too, in part because it’s much harder
to rearrange code than data. Even if it wanted to, Chef couldn’t reliably break your code into
pieces and reassemble the pieces as it sees fit.
By contrast, Puppet and Salt allow dependencies to be explicitly declared. For example, in Salt,
the equivalent set of states would be

We inverted the order of the operations here for dramatic effect. But because of the require
declaration, the operations run in the correct order regardless of how they appear in the source
file. The following command applies the configuration:
The require parameter can be added to any operation (“state,” in Salt) to ensure that the named
prerequisites run before the current operation. Salt defines several types of dependency
relationships, and declarations can appear on either side of a relationship.
Puppet works similarly. It also helps to ease the pain of declaring dependencies by inferring them
automatically in some common circumstances. For example, a user configuration that names a
particular group automatically becomes dependent on the resource that configures that group.
Nice!
So… Why would you want to declare your dependencies explicitly when configuration order
seems natural and effortless? Apparently, lots of administrators have been asking this question,
as both Salt and Puppet have moved to a hybrid dependency model in which presentation order is
significant. However, it’s only a factor within a given configuration file; inter-file dependencies
must still be explicitly declared.
The main benefit of declaring dependencies is that it makes configurations more resilient and
explicit. The CM system is not obliged to abort the configuration process at the first sign of
trouble, because it knows which subsequent operations might be affected by a failure. It can abort
one dependency chain while allowing others to continue. Nice, but in our view not a significant
payback for the extra work of declaring dependencies.
In theory, a CM system that knows dependency information can parallelize the execution of
independent operation chains on a particular host. However, neither Salt nor Puppet attempts this
feat.
General comments on Chef
We’ve seen deployments of the mainline CM packages at organizations of various sizes, and they
all display something of a tendency toward entropy. The Ansible access options section includes
some hints for keeping things organized. However, an even more fundamental rule is to avoid
taking on more complexity than is helpful for your environment.
In practice, this means you need to be clear about whether you’re living in Chef territory or not.
Chef thinks big. To get the most out of Chef, you should have

      Hundreds or thousands of machines under configuration management
      An administrative staff of nonuniform privileges and experience (Chef’s internal
      permissions system and multiple interfaces are quite helpful here)
      Specific reporting, compliance, or regulatory requirements to enforce

      The patience to train new team members without prior Chef experience

Sure, you can run Chef stand-alone on a single machine for free. Nobody’s stopping you! But
you’ll still have to pay the cognitive overhead for many of the enterprise-level features you aren’t
using. They’re baked into the architecture and the documentation.
We like Chef. It’s complete, robust, and scalable—more so than the alternatives. But at heart, it’s
just another configuration management system that does the same basic stuff as Ansible, Salt,
and Puppet. Keep Chef in perspective, and resist the temptation to adopt it just “because it’s the
most powerful” (or “because it uses Ruby,” for that matter).
We have found that bringing beginners up to speed with Chef can be a significant challenge,
especially for those without prior configuration management experience. Chef requires a
developer mindset more than the other systems do. Prior programming experience is helpful.
Chef’s attribute precedence system is powerful but can also be a source of frustration. Its peculiar
combination of foodie and Internet-meme nomenclature is annoying and uninformative.
Resolving dependencies among cookbooks can be challenging; sometimes an upstream
dependency breaks, and all your systems develop problems unless you remembered to pin all
your dependencies to a particular version.
General comments on Puppet
Puppet is the oldest of the four main CM systems and the one with the largest installed base. It
has lots of users, lots of contributed modules, and a free web GUI. Still, it’s losing market share
fairly steadily to more recent competitors.
As a determinedly middle-of-the-road option, Puppet is under pressure from both ends of the
market. It’s famous for server-side bottlenecks that cause problems when managing thousands of
hosts, and several major Puppet deployments have abandoned it over the last couple of years
(most publicly, Lyft, which adopted Salt). These days, such large-scale scenarios seem to be
better handled with a tiered Chef or Salt network.
In the arena of small deployments, Ansible and Salt are mounting a serious challenge with their
relatively low barriers to entry. As discussed on this page, Puppet is not complex at heart.
However, it does drag along some historical baggage that tends to impede newcomers. For
example, relatively few operations are built into the Puppet core. Most sites will need to go
prospecting for user-contributed modules to complete their basic configurations.
Our subjective impression is that Puppet went through some false starts early in its design and
development. Although Puppet has worked hard to correct these issues, history and backward
compatibility take an inevitable toll on the current product.

It doesn’t help that Puppet transmutes the golden treasure of Ruby into the lump of coal that is
the Puppet configuration language. That was probably a sensible decision back in 2005, when
Ruby was obscure and Rails had not yet appeared on the scene to propel it to stardom. These
days, the Puppet configuration language just seems gratuitous.
None of these issues is a deal breaker, but Puppet seems to have no clear and compelling
advantage that might counterbalance such concerns. We are not aware of any bake-off or
comparative review written within the last few years in which Puppet emerged as a
recommended option.
Of course, if you’ve inherited an existing Puppet installation, there’s no need to start looking for
an immediate replacement. Puppet works fine; the distinctions among these systems are mostly a
matter of style and marginal advantage.
General comments on Ansible and Salt
Ansible and Salt are both nice systems, and we recommend one of these options for the majority
of sites.
We’ve taken a deeper look at both of these systems in Introduction to Ansible and Introduction to
Salt, which begin here and here, respectively. Each of those sections reviews the system’s
configuration syntax and the general flavor of day-to-day use.
Ansible and Salt look deceptively similar on the surface, mostly because they both use YAML
and Jinja as their default formats. Under the hood, however, they almost couldn’t be more
different. Accordingly, we defer our head-to-head comparison of Ansible and Salt until this page,
once we’ve discussed them both in a bit more detail.
Before we look into the systems themselves, however, we cast a jaundiced eye on YAML itself.
YAML: a rant
In theory, a YAML document should start with three dashes on a line by themselves, and the
Ansible documentation often follows this convention. However, this “start YAML document”
line is essentially vestigial. As far as we are aware, it can safely be omitted in all cases.
As mentioned earlier, YAML is just an alternate syntax for JSON. For example, this YAML for
Ansible:

maps to the following JSON:

In the JSON world, brackets enclose lists and curly braces enclose hashes. A colon separates a
hash key from its value. These delimiters can appear directly in YAML, but YAML also
understands indentation to indicate structure, much like Python. YAML marks items in a list with
a preceding dash.
Take a moment to verify that you understand how the YAML example above maps into JSON,
because Ansible and Salt are actually JSON-based worlds. The YAML is just a shorthand. We
pick on Ansible below, as its version of YAML is a bit more idiosyncratic, but most of the
general points apply to Salt as well. (Once again, Salt partisans will protest that Salt can’t be
blamed for YAML and Jinja because it has no actual dependencies on these systems. You’re free
to use any one of a number of alternatives. That’s all true. At the same time, it’s a lot like saying
that you’re not responsible for the country’s government because you didn’t vote.)
Clearly, the YAML version is more readable than the JSON version. The problem isn’t YAML
per se, but rather the compromises inherent in trying to force data of the complexity found in
configuration management systems into the mold of JSON.

YAML is good for representing simple data structures, but it’s not a tool that scales well to
arbitrary complexity. When cracks appear in the model, they have to be puttied over with a
variety of ad hoc fixes.
The example above already contains such a patch. Did you spot it?

Ignore the {{ item }} part; that’s just a Jinja expansion. The crime here is the name=value syntax,
which is really just a nonstandard shorthand for defining a sub-hash:

Or is it? Actually not, because Ansible doesn’t allow hash values that start with a Jinja
expansion. That Jinja term now must sport quotes:

And what if the operation accepts a “free form” argument?

Visually, this doesn’t look so bad. But think about what’s actually going on: shell is the operation
type, and warn is a parameter for shell just as state is a parameter for package in the previous example.
So what is that extra args dictionary doing there?

Well, shell typically has a complex string as its main argument (the shell command to run), so it’s
been made a special type of operation that accepts a string instead of a parameter hash as its
value. The args dictionary is actually a property of the task-item wrapper, not the shell operation.
Its contents are covertly stuffed down into the shell operation on your behalf to make the whole
construction work.
No problem; keep calm and carry on. But it’s a confusing subtlety that muddles a relatively basic
example.
The problem isn’t this specific scenario. It’s the constant drip of edge cases, ambiguities, and
compromises that are needed to coerce configuration data into JSON format. Does this particular
argument go in the operation? In the state? In the binding? It’s all just a big JSON hierarchy, so
the answer is rarely obvious.

Look again at the “Install cpdf on cloud servers” playbook on this page. Is it obvious that
with_items should be at the same level as package and not at the same level as name and state (which are
in fact logically beneath package)? Probably not.

The underlying intent behind the YAML approach is praiseworthy: use an existing format that
people already know, and represent configuration information as data instead of code. Still, these
systems have syntactic warts that would probably not be permitted in a real programming
language.
Despite the looseness of YAML as used in configuration management systems, its specification
is actually quite lengthy. In fact, it’s longer than the specification for the entire Go programming
language.
23.5 INTRODUCTION TO ANSIBLE
Ansible has no server daemon and installs no software of its own on clients, so it’s really just a
set of commands (most notably, ansible-playbook, ansible-vault, and ansible) that you install
on any system from which you wish to manage clients.

     See this page for more information about EPEL.

Standard OS-level packages are widely available for Ansible, although the package names vary
from system to system. On RHEL and CentOS, make sure you have the EPEL repository enabled
on the master systems. As with most things, OS-specific packages are often somewhat out of date
with respect to the trunk. If you don’t mind forgoing package management, Ansible is easy to
install from the GitHub repository (ansible/ansible) or through pip. (pip is a package manager for
Python. Try pip install ansible to pull the latest version from PyPI, the Python Package Index.
You might need to install pip from your distribution’s packaging system first.)
The default location of Ansible’s master configuration file is /etc/ansible/ansible.cfg. (As with
most add-ons, FreeBSD moves the ansible directory to /usr/local/etc.) The default ansible.cfg
file is short and sweet. The only change we’d recommend is to add the following lines to the end:

     See this page to allow sudo without a control terminal.

These lines turn on pipelining, an SSH feature that significantly improves performance.
Pipelining requires that sudo on clients not be configured to require interactive terminals;
however, that is the default.
If you keep your configuration data under /etc/ansible, you’ll need to use sudo to make changes,
and you tie yourself to one particular server machine. Alternatively, you can easily set up Ansible
for use under your own account. The server just runs ssh to reach other systems, so root
privileges are unnecessary unless you need to run privileged commands on the server side.
Fortunately, Ansible makes it a snap to combine system-wide and personal configurations. Don’t
remove the system-wide configuration; just shadow it by creating ~/.ansible.cfg and setting the
location of your inventory file and roles directory:
The inventory is the list of client systems, and roles are bundles that abstract various aspects of
client configuration. We return to both of these topics shortly.
Here, we define both locations as relative paths, which assumes that you’ll cd to your clone of
the configuration base and that you’ll follow the stated naming conventions. Ansible also
understands the shell’s ~ notation for home directories if you prefer to use fixed paths. (Ansible
allows ~ pretty much everywhere else, too.)
Ansible example
Before we delve into too much more detail, we first look at a small example that demonstrates a
few basic Ansible operations.
The following set of steps would set up sudo on a new system (as might be required, e.g., on
FreeBSD, which does not include sudo by default).
   1. Install the sudo package.
   2. Copy a standard sudoers file from a server and install it locally.

   3. Make sure the sudoers file has appropriate permissions and ownerships.
   4. Create a UNIX group called “sudo”.
   5. Add every system administrator with an account on the local machine to the sudo
      group.
The Ansible code below implements these steps. Because this code is designed to illustrate
several points about Ansible, it isn’t necessarily an example of idiomatic Ansible code.

The statements are applied in order, much as they would be in a shell script.
The expressions enclosed in double curly braces (e.g., "{{ admins }}") are variable expansions.
Ansible interpolates facts in a similar manner. This kind of parameter management flexibility is a
common characteristic of configuration management systems, and it’s one of their main
advantages over raw scripts. You define the general procedure in one place and the configuration
specifics elsewhere. The CM system then collapses the global specification and ensures that the
proper parameters are applied to each target host.
The file sudoers.j2 is a Jinja2 template that expands to become the sudoers file on the target
machine. The template can consist of static text or it can have internal logic and variable
expansions of its own.

Templates are usually kept along with configurations in the same Git repository, allowing for
one-stop shopping when configurations are applied. There’s no need to maintain a separate file
server from which templates can be copied. The configuration management system uses its
existing access to the target host to install templates, so credential management need be set up
only once.
We had to work around a couple of rough edges. Ansible’s user module, used here to add system
administrators to the sudo UNIX group, normally ensures that the specified account exists, and it
creates the account if it does not. In this scenario, we want to affect only accounts that already
exist, so we’re forced to manually check for the existence of each account before we permit user
to modify it. In a more typical scenario, the configuration management system would be
responsible for setting up administrators’ accounts as well as sudo access. The configuration
specifications for both functions would likely refer to the same admins variable, and so there would
be no possibility of conflict and no need to validate each account name.
To check for the existence of accounts, the configuration runs the shell command cut –d: -f1
/etc/passwd to obtain a list of existing accounts and captures (“registers”) the output under the
name userlist. It’s similar in principle to the sh line

Each account listed in the admins variable (with_items: "{{ admins }}") is considered separately. During
its turn, the account name is assigned to the variable item. (The name item is an Ansible
convention; the configuration does not specify it.) For each account found within the output of
the cut command (the when clause), the user clause is invoked.

There’s a bit of extra glue we haven’t shown that binds this configuration to a particular set of
target hosts and that tells Ansible to make the changes as root. When we activate that binding (by
running ansible-playbook example.yml), Ansible starts working to configure several target
hosts in parallel. If any operation fails, Ansible reports the error and stops working on the host
that generated it. Other hosts can continue until they’re done.
Client setup
Ansible needs three things from each configuration management client:

       SSH access
       sudo permission
       A Python 2 interpreter

Ansible does not actually require sudo access per se. It’s only needed if you want to run
privileged operations. But you typically will.
If the client is a Linux cloud server, it may be Ansible-accessible right out of the box. Systems
like FreeBSD that don’t install sudo or Python by default might need a bit more tweaking, but
you can do some of the initial bootstrapping through Ansible with raw operations, which execute
commands remotely without the usual Python wrapper. Or you can just write your own
bootstrapping script.
Several choices must be made when Ansible clients are set up. We suggest a reasonable game
plan in Ansible access options, but for now, let’s assume you’ve created a dedicated “ansible”
user on the client, that the appropriate SSH key is in your default set, and that you’re willing to
enter the sudo password by hand.
Clients don’t introduce themselves to Ansible, so you need to add them to Ansible’s host
inventory. By default, the inventory is a single file called /etc/ansible/hosts.

One nice feature of Ansible is that you can replace any flat configuration file with a directory of
the same name. Ansible then merges the contents of the files the directory contains. This feature
is useful for structuring your configuration base, but it’s also Ansible’s way of incorporating
dynamic information: if a particular file is executable, Ansible runs it and captures the output
instead of reading the file directly.Actually, Ansible is even smarter than this. It ignores certain
file types entirely, e.g., .ini files. So not only can you put in scripts, but also configuration files
for scripts.
This aggregation feature is so useful and so commonly used that we recommend bypassing the
larval flat-file stage of most configuration files and skipping directly to directories. For example,
we can define an Ansible client by adding the following line to /etc/ansible/hosts/static (or to
~/hosts/static within a personal configuration base):

     FreeBSD clients put Python in an unusual location, so you’ll need to tell Ansible about that:
This should all be on a single line in the hosts file. (On this page we present a much better way to
set these variables, but that method is just a generalization of this same idea.)
To check connectivity with a new host, run the setup operation, which returns the client’s fact
catalog:

The name “setup” is unfortunate, as no explicit setup is actually required. You can go directly to
actual configuration operations if you wish. In addition, you can run the setup operation as often as
you like to review the client’s fact catalog.
Check to be sure that privilege escalation through sudo is also working correctly:

Here, the command operation, which runs shell commands, is the default. We could have said -m
command explicitly with equivalent results. The -a flag introduces operation parameters; in this
case, the actual command to execute.

“Becoming” is Ansible’s odd locution for privilege escalation; you “become” another user. The
“other user” is root by default, but you can specify a different one with the -u option.
Unfortunately, you have to force Ansible to ask you for the sudo password (with --ask-become-
pass), and it does so regardless of whether the remote system actually prompts for the password.
Client groups
Groups are defined within the hosts directory as well, although the syntax can become a bit
awkward:

If this doesn’t look so bad, that’s because we’ve skirted the main problem areas. The .ini format
is flat(ish), so some tricks are needed if you want to define hierarchical groups or add extras
directly to the hosts file (e.g., variable assignments for a group). These features aren’t actually
that important in practice, however.

Note that we had to list client-four at the top of the file because that host is not included in any
groups. We can’t just append to the hosts file, because that would make client-four a member of
the dbservers group, even if we added a blank line as a separator.
This is another reason why configuration directories are helpful. In practice, we’d probably want
to put each group definition in a separate file.
Ansible lets you freely intermix client names and group names on command lines and within the
configuration base. Neither is specially marked, and both can be subject to globbing. Regular-
expression-style matching is also available for both; just start the pattern with a ~. There’s also a
set algebra notation for combining cohorts of clients in various ways.
For example, the following command uses a globbing expression to select the webservers group.
It executes the ping operation on each member of that group.
Variable assignments
As we saw here, variable values can be assigned within inventory files. But that’s gauche; don’t
do it that way.
Every host and group can have its own collection of variable definitions in YAML format. By
default, these definitions are stored under /etc/ansible/host_vars and /etc/ansible/group_vars in
files named for the host or group. You can use a .yml suffix if you want; Ansible finds the
appropriate files either way.
As with other Ansible configurations, these files can be converted to directories if you’d like to
add some additional structure or scripting. Ansible does its usual routine of ignoring
configuration files, running scripts, and combining all the results into a final package.
Ansible automatically defines a group called “all” for you. Just like other groups, “all” can have
its own group variables. For example, if you standardize on using client accounts named
“ansible” for configuration management, that’s a good fact to put in the global configuration
(here, in, say, group_vars/all/basics):

If multiple value declarations exist for a variable, Ansible selects a final value according to
precedence rules rather than declaration order. Ansible currently has 14 different precedence
categories, but the relevant point in this case is that host variables trump group variables.
Conflicts among overlapping groups are resolved at random, which can make for inconsistent
behavior and tricky debugging. Try to structure your variable declarations so that there’s no
possibility for overlaps.
Dynamic and computed client groups
Ansible’s grouping system really comes into its own when dynamic scripting is added to the mix.
The dynamic inventory scripts used with cloud providers, for example, don’t simply list all the
available servers. They also slice and dice those servers into ad hoc groupings according to
metadata from the cloud.
For example, Amazon’s EC2 lets you assign arbitrary tags to each instance. You might assign the
tag webserver to every instance that needs an NGINX stack and dbserver to every instance that needs
PostgreSQL. The ec2.py dynamic inventory script would then create groups named tag_webserver
and tag_dbserver. These groups can have their own group variables and can be named in bindings
(“playbooks”), just like any other group.
The situation gets murkier when it comes to grouping clients on criteria internal to Ansible, such
as the values of facts. You can’t do this directly. What you can do instead is target playbooks to
broader groups (such as “all”) and apply conditional expressions to individual operations which,
when the proper conditions do not apply, cause the operation to be skipped.
For example, the following playbook ensures that /etc/rc.conf contains a line to configure the
hostname on each FreeBSD client:

(If the last line looks like it needs some {{ }}, your instinct is good. This is actually just a bit of
Ansible syntactic sugar to help keep configurations tidy. when clauses are always going to be Jinja
expressions, so Ansible surrounds their contents with double braces for you automatically. This
feature is helpful, but it’s just one of a fairly extensive list of irregularities in Ansible’s YAML
parsing.)
In this example, every host in inventory is considered for the lineinfile operation. But thanks to the
when clause, only FreeBSD hosts actually run it. This approach works fine, but it doesn’t make the
FreeBSD hosts into a true group. They can’t, for example, have a normal group_vars entry,
although you can simulate the effect with some jury-rigging.

A structurally preferable but slightly more verbose alternative is to use a group_by operation, which
runs locally and classifies hosts according to an arbitrary key value for which you designate a
template:
The basic game plan is similar, but the classification occurs in a separate “play” (Ansible’s term
for what we call a binding; see this page). We then start a new play so that we can specify a
different set of target hosts, this time using the FreeBSD group that the first play defined for us.

The advantage of using group_by is that we perform the classification only once. We can then hang
any number of tasks off the second play with confidence that we’re targeting only the intended
clients.
Task lists
Ansible calls operations “tasks,” and a collection of tasks in a separate file is called a task list.
Like all but a few parts of an Ansible configuration, task lists are just YAML, so the files have a
.yml suffix.
The binding of task lists to specific hosts is done in higher-level objects called playbooks, which
are described here. For now, let’s focus on the operations themselves and not worry about how
they come to be applied to a particular host.
As an example, we revisit the “install sudo” example from this page with a slightly different
focus and implementation. This time, we create the administrator accounts from scratch and give
each one its own UNIX group of the same name. We then set up a sudoers file that lists the
administrators explicitly (instead of just assigning privileges to a “sudo” UNIX group).
Some input data is needed to drive these operations: in particular, the location of the sudoers file
and the names and usernames of administrators. We should put this information in a separate
variable file, say, group_vars/all/admins.yml:

The value of admins is an array of hashes; we iterate through this array to create all the accounts.
Here’s what the complete task list would look like:
From the perspective of YAML and JSON, the tasks form a list. Each dash at the left margin
starts a new task, which is represented by a hash.
In this example, every task has a name field that describes its function in English. The names are
technically optional, but if you don’t include them, Ansible tells you very little about what it’s
doing when you run the configuration (other than listing the module names: package, group, etc.).

Each task must have among its keys the name of exactly one operation module. The value of that
key is itself a hash that enumerates the operation parameters. Parameters that you do not
explicitly set assume default values.
The notation

is an Ansible extension to YAML that’s essentially equivalent to

There’s some potential weirdness here in the case of operations like shell that have “freeform”
arguments, but we won’t rehash that here. See the YAML rant here.
The one-line format is not only more compact, but it also lets you set parameters whose values
are Jinja expressions without quotes, as seen in the task that creates personal groups for admins.
In the normal syntax, a Jinja expression cannot appear at the start of a value unless the entire
value is in quotes. The quoting is benign, but it does add visual noise. Despite appearances, the
quotes do not force the value to be a string.
Now we’re ready to break out a few of the more notable aspects of this example task list in the
sections below.
state parameters
In Ansible, operation modules can often perform several different tasks depending on the state you
request. For the package module, for example, state=present installs the package, state=absent removes it,
and state=latest ensures that the package is both present and up to date. Operations often look for
different sets of parameters depending on the state being invoked.

In a few cases (e.g., the service module with state=restarted, which restarts a daemon), this model
wanders a bit from what might normally be conceived of as a “state,” but overall it works well.
The state can be omitted (as shown here when creating the sudo group), in which case it assumes a
default value, usually something positive and empowering such as present, configured, or running.
Iteration
with_items is an iteration construct that repeats a task once for each element it’s supplied with. For
quick reference, here’s another copy of the two tasks in our example that use with_items:

Note that with_items is an attribute of the task, not the operation that the task runs.

On each pass through a loop, Ansible sets the value of item to one of the items supplied to
with_items. In this case, we assigned the variable admins a list of hashes, so item is always a hash. The
notation item.username is shorthand for item['username']. Use whichever you prefer.

Each of these tasks loops through the admins array separately. One pass creates UNIX groups and
the other creates user accounts. Although Ansible does define a grouping mechanism for tasks
(called a block), that construct unfortunately does not support with_items.

If you really need the effect of a single loop that executes multiple tasks in sequence, you can
achieve it by moving the loop body into a separate file and including it into the main task list:

with_items is not the only loop available in Ansible. There are also loop forms dedicated to iterating
over hashes (termed “dictionaries” in Python), over lists of files, and over globbing patterns.
Interaction with Jinja
The Ansible documentation is not very specific about how YAML and Jinja interact, but it’s
important to understand the details. As constructs like with_items demonstrate, Jinja is not simply a
preprocessor that’s run over a file before it is handed off to YAML (as is the case in Salt). In fact,
Ansible parses YAML with Jinja expressions intact. It then Jinja-expands each string value
immediately before use. Parameters of iterated operations are reevaluated during each iteration.
Jinja has control structures of its own, including loops and conditionals. However, they are
inherently incompatible with Ansible’s delayed-evaluation architecture, and so they are not
allowed in Ansible’s YAML files (although they can be used in templates). Ansible constructs
such as when and with_items are not just window dressing for the equivalent Jinja. They represent a
rather different approach to structuring the configuration.
Template rendering
Ansible uses the Jinja2 template language both to add dynamic features to YAML files and to
flesh out configuration file templates installed by the template module. We use a template in this
example to set up the sudoers file. Here are the variable definitions again for reference:

And the task code:

The file sudoers.j2 is a mix of plain text and Jinja2 code for the dynamic bits. For example,
here’s a skeletal example that gives “sudo ALL” privileges to each admin:

The for loop wrapped by {% %} is Jinja2 syntax. Unfortunately, you can’t indent loop bodies
sensibly as you might in a real programming language, because doing so would cause the output
of the template to be indented as well.
The expanded version looks like this:

Note that variable values automatically flow through to templates. The values are available to
configuration files under exactly the same names used to define them; no prefix or additional
hierarchy is imposed. Autodiscovered fact variables are in the top-level namespace, too, but to
forestall potential name conflicts they all begin with the prefix ansible_.

Ansible’s module for installing static files is called copy. However, you may as well treat all
configuration files as templates, even if their contents initially consist of static text. You can then
add customizations in the future without having to touch the configuration code; just edit the
template. Reserve copy for binary files and for static files that will never need expansion, such as
public keys.
Bindings: plays and playbooks
Bindings are the mechanism through which tasks become associated with sets of client machines.
Ansible’s binding object is called a play. Here’s a simple example:

Just as multiple tasks can be concatenated to form a task list, multiple plays in sequence form a
“playbook.”

As in other systems, the basic elements of a binding are a set of hosts and a set of tasks.
However, Ansible’s system allows several additional options to be specified at the play level.
They’re listed in Table 23.3.

Table 23.3: Ansible play elements

The biggies here are the variable-related options, not so much because they appear in plays per
se, but because they’re available pretty much anywhere—even when executing includes. Ansible
can activate the same task list or playbook again and again with different sets of variable values.
It’s a lot like defining a function (e.g., “make a user account”) and then calling it with different
sets of arguments.
Ansible formalizes this system in its implementation of bundles (called “roles”), which we
discuss here. Roles are powerful, but under the hood, they’re just a set of standardized
conventions for doing includes, so they’re also easy to understand.
Here’s a simple play that demonstrates the use of handlers:
This playbook runs on hosts clickera and clickerb. It mirrors files from a central (local)
repository by running rsync (using the synchronize module), then restarts the NGINX web server if
any updates were made.
When a task with a notify clause makes changes to the system, Ansible runs the handler of the
requested name. Handlers themselves are just tasks, but they’re declared in a separate section of
the play.
Playbooks are the primary unit of execution in Ansible. You run them with ansible-playbook:

Ansible approaches multihost execution task by task. As it reads a playbook, each task is run in
parallel on the targeted hosts. When every host has completed the task, Ansible continues to the
next task. By default, Ansible runs tasks simultaneously on up to five hosts, but you can set a
different limit with the -f flag.
When debugging problems, it’s often helpful to include the -vvvv argument to increase the
amount of debugging output. You’ll see the exact commands that are executed on the remote
system and their detailed responses.
Roles
As we described generically starting here, bundles (our term) are the packaging mechanism
defined by a CM system to facilitate reuse and sharing of configuration fragments.
Ansible calls its bundles “roles,” and they are in fact nothing but a structured system of include
operations and variable precedence rules. They make it easy to put the variable definitions, task
lists, and templates associated with a configuration into a single directory, making them readily
available for reuse and sharing.
Each role is a subdirectory of a directory called roles that’s normally found at the top level of
your configuration base. You can also add site-wide role directories by setting the roles_path
variable in ansible.cfg, as shown here. All known role directories are searched whenever you
include a role in a playbook.
Role directories can have the subdirectories shown in Table 23.4.

Table 23.4: Subdirectories of an Ansible role

Roles are invoked through playbooks and nowhere else. Ansible looks for a file called main.yml
within each of the role’s subdirectories. If it exists, the contents are automatically incorporated
into any playbook that invokes the role. For example, the playbook

is roughly equivalent to
However, variable values from the default folder do not override values that have already been
set. In addition, Ansible makes it easy to refer to files from the files and templates directories,
and it sub-includes any roles mentioned as dependencies in the meta/main.yml file.
Files other than main.yml are ignored by the roles system, so you can break the configuration
into whatever pieces are appropriate and just include those parts into main.yml.

Ansible lets you pass a set of variable values to a particular instance of a role. In effect, this
makes the role act as a sort of parameterized function. For example, you might define a bundle
that’s used to deploy a Rails app. You could invoke that bundle several times within a playbook,
supplying the parameters of a different app for each invocation:

In this example, the rails_app role would probably depend on a role for nginx or some other web
server, so it would not be necessary to mention the web server role explicitly. If you wanted to
customize the web server installation, you could simply include the appropriate variable values in
the rails_app invocation, and those values would be propagated downward.

Ansible’s public role repository is located at galaxy.ansible.com. You can search for roles with
the ansible-galaxy command, but you’re better off using the web site. It lets you sort by rating or
download count, and you can easily click through to the GitHub repo that hosts the actual code
for each role. Several roles are usually available to address most common scenarios, so it’s worth
examining the code to determine which version will serve your needs best.

Once you’ve settled on a role implementation, copy the files to your roles directory by running
ansible-galaxy install. For example:
Recommendations for structuring the configuration base
Most configuration bases are organized hierarchically. That is, various pieces of the
configuration feed into a master playbook that controls the global state. However, you can also
define task-specific playbooks that are unrelated to the global scheme.
Try to keep task lists and handlers out of playbook files. Instead, put them in separate files and
interpolate them with include. This structure makes a clean separation between bindings and
behavior, and it puts all tasks on an equal footing. For extra style points, avoid freestanding task
lists entirely and standardize on roles.
It’s sometimes recommended that a single playbook should cover all the tasks that relate to each
logically distinct group of hosts. For example, all the roles and tasks that relate to web servers
should be included in a single webserver.yml playbook. This approach avoids replication of host
groups and provides a clear locus of control for each host group.
On the other hand, following this rule means that there’s no direct way to run a portion of the
global configuration, even for debugging. Ansible can run only playbooks; there is no simple
command that runs a specific task list on a given machine.

The official solution for this issue is tagging, which works fine but requires some setup. You can
include a tags field in or above any task to classify it. At the command line, use ansible-
playbook’s -t option to specify the subset of tags you want to run. In most debugging scenarios,
you’ll also want to use the -l option to limit execution to a specified test host.
Assign tags at as high a level as you can within the configuration hierarchy. Under normal
circumstances, you should have no temptation to assign tags to individual tasks. (If you do, it
may be a sign that the particular task list should be split up.) Instead, attach tags to the include or
roles clause that incorporates a specific task list or role into the configuration. The tags then cover
all the included tasks.
Alternatively, you can just construct scratch playbooks that run parts of the configuration base on
a test host. Setting up these scratch playbooks is a minor annoyance, but so is tagging.
Ansible access options
Ansible needs SSH and sudo access on every client system, which sounds straightforward and
familiar until you consider that the configuration management system holds the master keys to
the entire organization. It’s hard for daemon-based systems to be more secure than the root
account on the configuration server, but Ansible can potentially do better than this with some
thoughtful planning.
For simplicity, it’s best if SSH access is funneled through a dedicated account such as “ansible”
that has the same name on each client. That account should use a simple shell and should have a
minimal dot-file configuration.
On cloud servers, you can use a standard bootstrapping account (such as ec2-user on EC2) for
Ansible control. Just make sure that after the initial setup, the account has been properly locked
down and does not allow, e.g., su to root without a password.
You have some flexibility regarding the actual security design. But keep the following points in
mind:

      Ansible needs one credential (password or private key) to gain access to a remote
      system, and another to escalate privileges with sudo. Proper security hygiene
      suggests that these be separate credentials. A single compromised credential should
      not grant an intruder root access to a target machine.

      If both credentials are stored in the same place with the same form of protection
      (encryption, file permissions), they are effectively a single credential.
      Credentials can be reused on machines that are peers (e.g., web servers in a farm), but
      it should not be possible to use credentials from one server to access a more sensitive
      —or even substantially different—server.
      Ansible has transparent support for encrypted data through the ansible-vault
      command, but only if the data is contained in a YAML or .ini file.
      Administrators can remember only a few passwords.

      It’s unreasonable to demand more than one password for a given operation.

Some sites set up client-side “ansible” accounts with the NOPASSWD option in the sudoers file,
such that no password is required for the ansible account to run sudo. This is a terribly insecure
configuration. If you can’t bring yourself to type a password, at least install the PAM SSH agent
module and require a forwarded SSH key for sudo access. See this page for more information
about PAM.
Sites will arrive at their own tradeoffs, but we suggest the following system as a robust but
usable baseline that conforms to these guidelines:
      SSH access is controlled by key pairs that are used by Ansible only.
      Password-based SSH access is prohibited on client systems (by setting
      PasswordAuthentication no in /etc/ssh/sshd_config).

      SSH private keys are protected by a passphrase (set with ssh-keygen -p). All private
      keys have the same passphrase.
      Private SSH keys are kept in a known location on the Ansible master machine. They
      do not live within the configuration base, and administrators agree not to copy them
      elsewhere.
      Remote accounts (“ansible” accounts) have random UNIX passwords that are listed
      in the configuration base in encrypted form. All of them are encrypted with the same
      passphrase, but it’s different from the passphrase used for SSH private keys. You will
      need to add some Ansible glue to make sure the right passwords are used with the
      right client hosts.

In this scheme, both sets of credentials are encrypted, which makes them resistant to simple
violations of file permissions. This layer of indirection also lets you change the master
passphrases easily without changing the underlying keys.
Administrators need remember only two passphrases: the passphrase that gives access to SSH
private keys, and the Ansible vault password, which allows Ansible to decrypt the host-specific
sudo-passwords (as well as any other confidential information included in your configuration
base).

If you require more granularity for administrator permissions (which is likely), you can encrypt
multiple sets of credentials with different passphrases. If the sets are cumulative (as opposed to
disjoint), no individual administrator needs to remember more than two passphrases.

     See this page for more details on ssh-agent.

It’s assumed in this system that administrators will use ssh-agent to manage access to private
keys. All keys can be activated with a single ssh-add command, and the SSH password need be
entered only once per session. To work on a system other than the usual Ansible master, admins
can use SSH’s ForwardAgent option to tunnel keys through to the machine on which work is being
done. All other security information is included in the configuration base itself.
It’s true that ssh-agent and key forwarding are only as secure as the machines on which they run.
(Less so, really: like sudo with a grace period, they are only as secure as your personal account.)
However, the risk is mitigated by limits on time and context. Use the -t argument to ssh-agent or
ssh-add to cap the lifetime of activated keys, and terminate connections that have access to
forwarded keys once you are no longer using them.
If possible, private keys should never be deployed onto client systems. If clients need privileged
access to controlled resources (e.g., to clone a controlled Git repository), use the proxying
features built into SSH and Ansible, or use ssh-agent to make private keys temporarily available
to the client without copying them.
For some reason, Ansible cannot currently recognize encrypted files in the configuration base
and prompt you to enter the passphrase for decryption. You have to force its hand with the --ask-
vault-pass argument to the ansible-playbook and ansible commands. There’s a --vault-
password-file option available for noninteractive use, but of course, that reduces security. If you
decide to use a password file, it should be accessible only to the dedicated ansible account.
23.6 INTRODUCTION TO SALT
Out in the world, you might see Salt referred to as Salt, SaltStack, or Salt Open. These terms are
essentially interchangeable. The vendor’s name is SaltStack, and they use SaltStack as a generic
term to refer to the complete product line, which includes some enterprise add-ons that we don’t
discuss in this book. However, many people call the open source system SaltStack, too.
Salt Open is a more recently introduced name that designates only the open source components
of Salt. But currently, that name doesn’t seem to be used anywhere outside of saltstack.com.

SaltStack maintains its own package repository at repo.saltstack.com which hosts up-to-date
packages for every Linux packaging system. See the web site for instructions on how to add the
repo to your configuration. Some distributions include free-range Salt packages of their own, but
it’s generally best to go directly to the source.
You’ll need the salt-master package on the configuration server (the “master”). If you have any
dealings with cloud providers, also install the salt-cloud package. It wraps a variety of cloud
providers into a standard interface and simplifies the process of creating new cloud servers to be
managed through Salt. It’s essentially similar to cloud providers’ native CLI tools, but it handles
machines at both the Salt and cloud layers. New machines are automatically bootstrapped,
enrolled, and approved. Deleted machines are removed from Salt as well as the provider’s cloud.
     SaltStack doesn’t host a package repo for FreeBSD, but it is a supported platform. The web
     installer is FreeBSD aware:

By default, the web installer installs client-side software as well as the master server. If you don’t
want that, pass the -N option to saltboot.

     See Chapter 25 for more information about containers.

Salt’s configuration files go in /etc/salt, both on the master server and on clients (“minions”). It’s
theoretically possible to run the server daemon as an unprivileged user, but that requires
manually chowning a bunch of system directories that Salt expects to interact with. If you’re
tempted to head down this road, you’re probably better off using a containerized version of the
server or saving the configuration into a pre-baked machine image.
Salt has a simple access control system that you can configure to allow unprivileged users to
initiate Salt operations on minions. However, you must do manual permission hacking similar to
that required for nonroot operation. Considering that the master has direct root access to all
minions, we find this feature rather suspect from a security perspective. If you do use it, keep a
tight lid on the permissions that are granted.
Salt maintains a separation between configuration files that set variable values (the “pillar”) and
configuration files that define operations (“states”). The distinction goes all the way to the top:
you must set separate locations for these configuration hierarchies. They both default to living
under /srv, which is equivalent to the following /etc/salt/master file:

Here, base is a required common environment on top of which additional environments (e.g.,
development) can be layered. Variable definitions go in the /srv/pillar root, and everything else
lives in /srv/salt.
Note that the paths themselves are list elements, since they’re prefixed with dashes. You can
include multiple directories, which makes the salt-master daemon serve a merged view of the
listed directories to minions. This is a useful feature when you are organizing a large
configuration base, since it permits you to add structure that Salt wouldn’t natively understand.

Typically, you’ll want to manage the configuration base as a single Git repository that includes
both the salt and pillar subdirectories. This isn’t a good fit for the default layout because it
means that /srv would be the repo root; consider moving everything down a level to /srv/salt/salt
and /srv/salt/pillar.
The Salt documentation doesn’t do a very good job of explaining why the pillar and the states
have to be completely separate, but in fact this distinction is central to Salt’s architecture. The
salt-master daemon doesn’t pay the slightest attention to state files; it simply makes them
available to minions, who are responsible for parsing and executing them.
The pillar is entirely different. It’s evaluated on the master and propagated to minions as a single,
unified JSON hierarchy. Each minion sees a different view of the pillar, but none of them can see
the implementation machinery behind these views.
In part, this is a security measure: Salt makes a strong guarantee that minions cannot access each
other’s pillars. It’s also a data-sourcing distinction, as dynamic pillar content always originates
from the master. This makes for a nice complementarity with grains (Salt’s version of facts),
which originate on minions.

     See this page for more information about network firewalls.
Salt’s communication bus uses TCP ports 4505 and 4506 on the server. Make sure these ports are
allowed through any firewalls or packet filters that lie between the server and the prospective
clients. The clients themselves do not accept network connections, so this step needs to be done
only once, for the server.
When first investigating Salt, you might find it informative to run salt-master -l debug in a
terminal window (instead of as a system service). This makes salt-master run in the foreground
and print out activity on Salt’s communication bus as it occurs.
Minion setup
As on the master side, you have a choice of native packages from SaltStack’s repo or a universal
bootstrap script. The repo is hardly worth fussing with on minions, so we recommend the latter:

The bootstrap script works on any supported system. On systems without curl, wget and fetch
also work fine. See the saltstack/salt-bootstrap repository on GitHub for specific installation
scenarios and source code.

For production systems that are started automatically, minimize your exposure to external events
by downloading a locally cached version of the boot script. Install a specific version of the Salt
client, also from a local cache, or preload it on the machine image. Run the boot script with a -h
option to see all the options it supports.

     See Chapter 16 for more information about DNS.

By default, the salt-minion daemon tries to register itself with a master machine named “salt”.
(This “magic name” system was first popularized by Puppet.) You can use DNS wizardry to
make the name resolve appropriately, or you can set an explicit master in /etc/salt/minion
(/usr/local/etc/salt/minion on FreeBSD):

Restart salt-minion after modifying this file (usually, service salt_minion restart, note the
underscore rather than a dash).
salt-master accepts client registrations from any random machine that can reach it, but you must
approve each client with the salt-key command on the master configuration server before it
becomes active:

You can now check connectivity from the server with the test module:
In this example, new-client.example.com looks suspiciously like a hostname, but it really isn’t.
It’s just the machine’s Salt ID, a string that defaults to the hostname but can be set to anything
you like in the client’s /etc/salt/minion file:

IDs and IP addresses have nothing to do with each other. For example, even if 52.24.149.191
were the client’s actual IP address, you could not directly target it that way with Salt commands:

(Of course, you can do IP-based matching. It just has to be explicit. See this page.)
Variable value binding for minions
As we saw in the server setup section, Salt has separate filesystem hierarchies for state bindings
and variable-value bindings (the “pillar”). Each of these directory trees has a top.sls file at the
root that binds groups of minions to files within the tree. The two top.sls files both use the same
layout. (.sls is just Salt’s standard extension for YAML files.)
As an example, here’s the layout of a simple Salt configuration base that shows both the salt and
pillar roots:

To bind the variables defined in pillar/baseline.sls and pillar/freebsd.sls to our example client,
we could include the following lines in pillar/top.sls:

As in the master file, base is a required, common environment that can be overlaid in more
sophisticated setups. See this page for more about this.
It’s possible for baseline.sls and freebsd.sls to define some of the same variable values. For
scalar and array values, the last source listed in top.sls is the one that takes effect. Hashes,
however, are merged.
For example, if a minion binds to one variable file that looks like this:
and one that looks like this:

then Salt merges the two versions.
The pillar data presented to minions is
Minion matching
In the scenario above, what we probably want is to apply baseline.sls to all clients, and to apply
freebsd.sls to all clients that are running FreeBSD. Here’s how we can do that with selection
patterns in the pillar/top.sls file:

The star matches all client IDs in example.com. We could have just used '*' here, but we wanted
to emphasize that it’s a globbing pattern. The G@ prefix requests a match on grain values. The
grain being inspected is named os, and the value sought is FreeBSD. Globbing is allowed here, too.

A less magical way to write the matching expression for FreeBSD would be

The choice is up to you, but the @ notation expands cleanly to complex expressions that involve
parentheses and Boolean operations. Table 23.5 lists most of the common matching types,
although a few have been omitted.

Table 23.5: Salt minion match types

If Table 23.5 looks disturbingly complex, take heart; these are just options. Real-world selectors
look a lot more like our simple examples.
If you’re wondering what all those grains or pillar values are that you can match against, it’s easy
to find out. Just use

or

to obtain a complete list.
You can define named groups in the /etc/salt/master file. They’re called nodegroups, and they
are useful for moving complex group selectors out of top.sls files. However, they’re not really a
true grouping mechanism so much as a way to name patterns for reuse. As a result, their behavior
is a bit squirrelly. They can only be defined in terms of compound-type selectors (not, for
example, by a simple list of clients, unless you use an L@ clause), and you must use an explicit
match: type of nodegroup to match against them. There’s no global shorthand notation.
Salt states
Salt operations are called “states.” As in Ansible, they’re defined in YAML format, and in fact
they look vaguely similar to Ansible tasks. However, the fine-grained details are quite different.
You can include a series of state definitions in a .sls file.
States are bound to specific minions in the top.sls file at the root of the salt arm of the
configuration base. This file looks and functions exactly like the top.sls file for variable
bindings; see the examples here.
Take a look at the following Salt version of the same example we worked through with Ansible
starting on this page: we install sudo and create a corresponding sudo group to which we assign
administrators who should have sudo privileges. We then create a group of administrator
accounts, each of which has its own UNIX group of the same name. Finally, we then copy in a
sudoers file from the configuration base.
As it happens, we can use exactly the same variable file for Salt that we used for Ansible:

To make these definitions available to all minions, we put them in the configuration base at
pillar/example.sls and add a binding to top.sls:

Here’s a Salt version of the operations:
This version shows the operations in their most canonical form for easier comparison with the
equivalent Ansible task list that starts here. We can make a few additional changes to clean
things up a bit, but first, a look at this longer version.
Salt and Jinja
The first thing to notice is that the file includes a Jinja loop delimited by {% and %}. These
delimiters are similar to {{ and }} except that {% and %} do not return values. The contents of the
loop are interpolated into the YAML file as many times as the loop runs.

     See this page for general information about Python.

Although Jinja uses Python-like syntax, YAML already “owns” the indentation in a .sls file, so
Jinja is forced to define block-ending tokens such as endfor. In straight Python, blocks would
normally be defined through indentation.
Salt defines only a rudimentary iteration construct in its basic YAML scheme (see the comments
regarding names here). Conditionals and robust iteration have to be provided by Jinja, or by
whatever template language the .sls file is run through. (In fact, Salt does not care about YAML,
either. It just expands configuration files through a designated pipeline and consumes the final
JSON output, which must be fully literal.)

On one hand, this approach is clean. There’s no conceptual ambiguity about what’s going on, and
it’s easy to examine an expanded .sls file to make sure it means what you intended. On the other
hand, it means you’ll be using Jinja to provide any logic required by your configuration. The mix
of templating code and YAML can easily become somewhat dazzling. It’s a bit like writing the
logic of a web app using only HTML templates.
Several rules of thumb can help keep Salt configurations tidy. First, Salt has usable and well-
defined mechanisms for implementing variable-value overlays. Use these to keep as much
configuration as possible in the domain of data rather than code.
Many examples in the Salt documentation use Jinja conditionals when they aren’t the best
solution, for example. (In fairness, the examples are usually designed to illustrate some point
other than general tidiness.) The following .sls file installs the Apache web server, which has
different package names on different distributions:

This variation could be dealt with more elegantly through the pillar:
Although replacing one file with four might not initially seem like a simplification, it’s now an
extensible and code-free system. Multi-OS environments will encounter many such variations,
and they can all be dealt with in one place.
If a value has to be dynamically calculated, consider whether you can put the code at the top of
the .sls file and simply memorialize it for later use in a variable. For example, another way to
write the Apache package installation above would be

This at least has the advantage of separating the Jinja logic from the actual configuration.
If you must intermix Jinja logic with YAML, consider whether you can break out some of the
YAML segments into separate files. You can then interpolate these segments as appropriate.
Once again, the idea is simply to separate the code and YAML rather than alternating back and
forth between them.
For nontrivial calculations, you can abandon YAML altogether and replace it with pure Python,
or with one of the Python-based DSLs that Salt includes by default. See the Salt documentation
for “renderers” for more information.
State IDs and dependencies
To return to our sudo example from this page, here are its first two states again for reference:

You can see that the individual states are not items in a list (as they are in Ansible) but rather the
elements of a hash. The hash key for each state is an arbitrary string called the ID. As usual with
hashes, IDs must be unique or they’ll collide.

But wait! The potential domain for collisions is not just this particular file, but the entire client
configuration. State IDs must be globally unique, because Salt is eventually going to stuff them
all together into one big hash.
It’s a bit of a funny hash, though, because it preserves the order of keys. In a standard hash, keys
emerge in random order when the hash is enumerated. That’s the way that Salt used to work, too,
and as a result, all dependencies among states had to be explicitly declared. These days, the hash
preserves the order of presentation by default, although that can still be overridden if explicit
dependencies are declared (or if this behavior is turned off in the master file).
There’s still some trickiness, though. In the absence of other constraints, order of execution
conforms to the original .sls files. However, Salt still presumes that states are not logically
dependent on one another unless you say so. If a state fails to execute, Salt notes the error but
then continues and runs the next state.
If you want a dependent state not to run if its ancestors fail, you can declare that explicitly. For
example:

In this configuration, Salt won’t try to create a sudo group unless the sudo package was
successfully installed.
Requisites also come into play when ordering states from multiple files. Unlike Ansible, Salt
does not interpolate the contents of an include file at the point the include was encountered. It simply
adds the file to its to-read list. If multiple files attempt to include the same source, there is still be
only one copy of the source in the final assembly, and the order of states might not be what you
expected. In-order execution is guaranteed only within a file; if any states depend on externally
defined operations, they must declare explicit requisites.
The requisite mechanism is also used to achieve an effect analogous to Ansible’s notifications.
Actually, a handful of alternatives to require are syntactically interchangeable with it but imply
subtle shadings of behavior. One of those, watch, is particularly useful for doing things when
another state makes changes to the system.

For example, the following configuration sets the system’s time zone and the arguments to be
passed to ntpd when it starts up. This configuration always makes sure that ntpd is running and
configured to start at boot time. In addition, it restarts ntpd if either the system time zone or the
ntpd flags are updated.

Augeas is a tool that understands many different file formats and facilitates automated changes.
State and execution functions
In a .sls file, the names that appear directly under state IDs are the operations those states should
run. Some specific cases from our example scenario are pkg.installed and group.present.

These names include both a “module” part and a “function” part. Together, they are roughly
analogous to an Ansible module name together with a state value. For example, Ansible uses a
package module with state=present for installing packages, whereas Salt uses a dedicated pkg.installed
function within the pkg module.

Salt makes a big whoop-de-do of distinguishing operations that do things to target systems
(“execution functions”) from those that idempotently enforce a particular configuration (“state
functions”). State functions usually call their associated execution functions when they need to
make changes.
The general idea is that only state functions should be mentioned in .sls files, and only execution
functions should appear on command lines. Salt primly enforces these rules, sometimes to
confusing effect.

State and execution functions live in separate Python modules, but related modules usually share
the same name. For example, there’s both a timezone state module and a timezone execution module.
There can’t be any overlap in function names between the two modules, though, because that
would create ambiguity. The end result is that to set the time zone from a .sls file, you must use
timezone.system:

But to set a minion’s time zone from the command line, you use timezone.set_zone:

If you get it wrong and need to consult the documentation, you’ll find the two halves of timezone in
different sections of the manual. It’s also not always clear from behavior exactly which type of
function is which. For example, git.config_set, which sets Git repository options, is a state function,
but state.apply, which idempotently enforces configurations, is an execution function.

Ultimately, you just have to know which functions are which and the contexts to which they
belong. If you need to call a function from the “wrong” context—which is sometimes necessary
—you can use the adapter functions module.run (runs an execution function from a state context)
and state.single (runs a state function from an execution context). For example, the adapted
timezone calls above would be
and
Parameters and names
Once again, here are the first two states from this page for reference:

Indented under the name of each operation (that is, the module.function construction) is its list of
parameters. In Ansible, the parameters for an operation form one big hash. Salt wants them as a
list, with each entry prefaced by a dash. More specifically, Salt wants a list of hashes, though
there’s typically only one key in each hash.

Most parameter lists include a parameter called name, which is the standard label for “the thing
this operation is configuring.” Alternatively, you can supply a list of targets in a parameter called
names. For example:

If you provide a names parameter, Salt reruns the operation multiple times, substituting one item
from the names list into the name parameter on each pass. This is a mechanical process, and the
operation itself is not aware of the iteration. It’s a run-time (as opposed to parse-time) operation,
much like Ansible’s with_items construction. But because Jinja expansion has already completed,
there’s no opportunity to base the values of other parameters on the name. If you need to adjust
multiple parameters, ignore names and just iterate with a Jinja loop.

Some operations can handle multiple arguments at once. For example, pkg.installed can hand off
multiple package names at once to the underlying OS package manager, which may be useful for
efficiency or dependency resolution. Because Salt hides names iteration, such operations are forced
to use a separate parameter name to enable bulk operations. For example, the states

and
both install sudo and curl. The first version does it in two distinct operations, and the second
does it in one.
We stress this seemingly minor point because it’s easy to make mistakes with names. Because it’s
mechanical, names iterates even operations that pay no attention to the name parameter. On
reviewing the Salt log, you’ll see that multiple executions have run successfully, but somehow
the target system still doesn’t seem to be properly configured. So it’s helpful to understand
exactly what’s going on.
If you don’t specify an explicit name for a state, Salt copies the state ID to this field. You can use
this behavior to simplify state definitions a bit. For example,

becomes

or even just

YAML doesn’t allow hash keys without values, so now that group.present no longer has any listed
parameters, it has to become a simple string instead of a hash key with a parameter list as a value.
That’s fine; Salt checks for this explicitly.
The shorthand style is usually clearer than the long form. A separate ID field can theoretically
serve as a comment or an explanation, but most IDs seen in the wild simply restate behavior that
is already obvious. If you want comments, add comments.
The shorthand form has a potential problem, though: since state IDs must be globally unique,
short IDs named for common system entities are more vulnerable to ID collisions. Salt detects
and reports conflicts, so this is really more an annoyance than a serious issue. But if you’re
writing a Salt formula with the intention of reusing it in several configuration bases or you are
planning to share it with the Salt community, stick with IDs that are less likely to clash.

Salt allows several operations to be included in a single state. Since the two operations above
share a name field, we can combine them into a single state without having to state any explicit
names. However, there’s yet another YAML snare awaiting us:
The value of the sudo key now has to be a hash; it can’t be a hash with the string group.present
somehow tacked on. Accordingly, we now have to treat group.present as a hash key and provide an
explicit parameter list as a value, even though that list is empty. That’s true even if we drop the
refresh parameter from pkg.installed:

Just as we collapsed these two states, we can collapse our two states that do user account
management. A more idiomatic version of the state list from this page is thus
State binding to minions
As it happens, there’s not much more to say about Salt state bindings. They work exactly like
pillar bindings. There’s a top.sls file at the root of the state hierarchy, and it maps minion groups
to state files. Here’s a skeletal example:

In this configuration, all hosts apply states from bootstrap.sls and sitebase.sls from the root of
the state hierarchy. Ubuntu systems also run ubuntu.sls, and web servers (that is, minions that
have a top-level webserver entry in their grains databases) run states to configure NGINX and local
web apps.

Order in top.sls corresponds to the general order of execution on each minion. But as usual,
explicit dependency information within states overrides the default order.
Highstates
Salt refers to the bindings in top.sls as a minion’s “highstate.” There’s a bit of potential
terminological confusion in that Salt also uses “highstate” to mean “a parsed and assembled
JSON tree of states,” which it then processes to form a “lowstate”—also a JSON tree—which is
the low-level input to the execution engine.
You activate the highstate by telling the minion to run the state.apply function with no arguments:

The state.highstate function is equivalent to state.apply with no arguments. You’ll see both forms used.

Especially when debugging new state definitions, you might want a minion to run only a single
state file. That’s easily accomplished with state.apply:

Leave out the .sls suffix on the state file name; Salt will add it. Also keep in mind that the path to
the state file has nothing to do with your current directory. It’s always interpreted relative to the
state root as defined in the minion’s configuration file. This command does not redefine the
minion’s highstate in any way; it simply runs the specified state file.
The salt command accepts a variety of flags for targeting different sorts of minion groups, but
it’s easiest to just remember -C for “compound” and use one of the shorthands from Table 23.5.
For example, to highstate all Red Hat minions:

The default match type is ID globbing, so the command

is the command for “validate the entire site’s configuration.”
In keeping with Salt’s minion-centric execution model, all parallel executions begin
simultaneously, and minions do not report back until they have completed execution. The salt
command prints each minion’s results as soon as it receives them. There is no way to display
incremental results while a state file is executing.
If you have lots of minions or a complex configuration base, the salt command’s default output
can be quite a lot to look through because it reports on every operation considered by every
minion. Add the option --state-output=mixed to reduce this output to one line for operations that
succeed and cause no changes. The option --state-verbose=false suppresses output for no-
change operations entirely, but salt still prints a header and summary for each minion.
Salt formulas
Salt calls its bundles “formulas” (well, “formula,” really). Like Ansible roles, they’re just a
directory of files, although Salt formulas have an outer wrapper that includes some metadata and
versioning information as well. In actual use, you just need the inner formula directory.
Formula directories go in one of the salt roots defined in the master file. If you want, you can
create a root just for formulas. Formulas sometimes include example pillar data, but you’re
responsible for installing that yourself.
Salt does nothing special to support formulas, except that if you name a directory in a top.sls file
or include statement, Salt looks for an init.yml file within that directory and reads that. This
convention provides a clear default path into the formula. Many formulas also include stand-
alone states that you can reference by specifying both the directory and filename.
Nothing in Salt can be included in a configuration more than once, and that includes formulas.
You can make multiple inclusion requests, but they’ll be coalesced. As a result, formulas cannot
be instantiated multiple times in the way that Ansible roles can.

It doesn’t matter anyway, because Salt defines no way to pass parameters to a formula other than
by putting variable values in the pillar. (Jinja expressions can set the values of variables, but
those settings exist only within the context of the current file.)
To simulate the effect of invoking a formula repeatedly, you can supply pillar data in the form of
a list or hash that the formula can iterate through on its own. However, the formula must be
explicitly written with this structure in mind. You can’t impose it after the fact.
The central Salt repository for community-contributed formulas is currently just GitHub. Look
for the username salt-formulas. Each formula is a separate project.
Environments

     See this page for more information about environments.

Salt makes several gestures toward explicit support for environments (e.g., the separation of
development, test, and production universes). Unfortunately, its environment facilities are
somewhat peculiar, and they don’t map straightforwardly to the most common real-world use
cases. It’s possible to get environments up and running with a little bit of determination and a
tube of Jinja glue, but we find that in practice, many sites simply punt and run separate master
servers for each environment instead. This jibes well with security and compliance standards that
require separation of environments at the network layer.
As we saw back on this page, the /etc/salt/master file enumerates the various places where
configuration information can be stored. It also associates an environment with each set of paths:

Here, /srv/salt and /srv/pillar are the state and pillar root directories for the default environment,
called base. For simplicity, we have omitted mention of pillar data in the discussion below;
environment management works the same way for both arms of the configuration base.
Sites with more than one environment will typically add an additional layer to the configuration
directory hierarchy to represent that fact:

(Evidently, these example cowboys have no test environment. Don’t try this at home!)
An environment can list multiple root directories. If there’s more than one, the server
transparently merges their contents. However, each environment performs a separate merge, and
the final results remain segregated.
Inside top.sls files (the bindings that associate minions to particular states and pillar files), top-
level keys are always environment names. So far, we’ve only seen examples that used the base
environment, but of course any valid environment can go in this spot. For example:

The exact import of an environment’s appearance in a top.sls file depends on how you’ve
configured Salt. In all cases, environments must already be defined in the master file; top files
cannot create new environments. In addition, state files are required to originate from the
environment context in which they are mentioned.
By default, Salt does not associate minions with any particular environment, and minions can
receive state assignments from any or all of the environments in top.sls. In the snippet above, for
example, all minions run the global.sls state from the base environment. Depending on their IDs,
individual minions may also receive states from the production or development environments.
(When you set a minion’s ID to match the development or production pattern, you are
functionally associating it to the corresponding environment. However, Salt itself does not make
an explicit association—at least, not in this configuration.)
The Salt documentation encourages this way of configuring environments, but we have some
reservations. One potential issue is that minions end up as frankenservers that draw configuration
elements from multiple environments. You can’t trace any given minion’s configuration back to
one particular environment at one particular point in time, because every minion has multiple
parents.

This distinction is important because a single base environment must be shared among all other
environments. Which one should it be? The development version of the base environment? The
production version? A completely separate and staged configuration base? Exactly when should
you migrate the base environment to a new release?
There’s also some additional complexity lurking under the covers. Each environment is a full-
fledged Salt configuration hierarchy, so it can, in theory, have its own top.sls file. Each of those
top.sls files can, in theory, refer to multiple environments. When confronted with this situation,
Salt tries to merge all the top files into one composite frankenconfiguration. (Merging occurs at
the YAML level, though, so you’d better hope that multiple top files don’t try to assign states to
the same matching pattern within the same environment. If they do, some states will be silently
discarded.) Environments can demand the execution of one another’s states—states that they
don’t own, control, or know anything about. It would be horrifying if it weren’t so silly.
It’s not clear exactly what use cases this architecture attempts to enable. Although top file
merging is the default behavior, the docs repeatedly warn you away from setting things up this
way. Instead, you’re encouraged to designate a single top.sls file, most likely in base, to control
all environments.

If you do that, though, it soon becomes apparent that there’s some organizational friction
between this “external” top file and the rest of the environments. The top file is an integral part of
an environment’s configuration, so states and top files are normally co-developed; a change to
one often requires changes to the other. With a separate top file, you must effectively separate
each environment into two pieces that must be manually kept synchronized with each other. In
addition, the master top file must be shared with, synchronized with, and compatible with all
other environments. When you promote the test environment to production, for example, you
must make sure the master top.sls is adjusted to reflect the proper settings for that specific
version of the new production release.
Alternatively, you can hard-wire minions to a given environment, either by setting the value of
environment in the minion’s /etc/salt/minion file or by including the flag saltenv=environment on salt
command lines. Under this regime, a minion sees only the top.sls file of its assigned
environment. Within that top file, its view is also further limited to entries that appear under that
environment.
For example, a machine pinned to the development environment might see the top.sls file from
this page in the following abbreviated form (assuming that the top.sls file was found at the root
of the development state tree):

This mode of operation is quite a bit closer than the default to the traditional concept of
environments. There can be no unintended cross-talk among environments, which limits the
potential for unintended behavior. It also has the advantage that as a particular version of the
configuration base is promoted through the environment chain, different portions of the top.sls
file automatically apply themselves to clients.
The main disadvantage is that you lose the ability to factor out parts of the configuration that are
common to more than one environment. There’s no built-in way to “see” outside the context of
the current environment, so elements of the baseline configuration must be replicated into every
environment.
Rewritten to work in the context of this approach, the top.sls file from this page would look
something like this:

The base environment itself is now vestigial, so we’ve dropped it from the top.sls file and copied
that key’s former contents directly into the development and production environments.
Keep in mind that we’re now operating in a world where every environment tree has its own
top.sls file. For this example, we assume that the top.sls file hasn’t diverged between the two
environments, so the same contents would appear in both copies of top.sls.
Of course, manually reproducing the elements of the common configuration inside each
environment is prone to error. A better option is to define the common configuration as a Jinja
macro so that it can automatically be repeated:

We’re assuming in this scenario that all minions are pinned to specific environments, so we can
now potentially remove the environment indicators from minion IDs. However, it’s a good idea
to retain them for security.
The issue is that minions control their own environment settings. If a minion in the development
environment were compromised, for example, it could declare itself to be a production server and
potentially gain access to the keys and configurations used in the production environment. (This
is perhaps one reason why the Salt documentation seems a bit skittish about recommending
environment pinning.)
Making environment-specific configurations contingent on both the environment settings and the
minion IDs protects against this line of attack. If a minion changes its ID, the master no longer
recognizes it as an approved client and ignores it until an administrator approves the change with
the salt-key command.

If you prefer not to use IDs in this way, an alternative is to use pillar data as a cross-check.
Whatever you do, you can’t just drop the suffix and turn '*-dev' into '*', because the shared portion
of the configuration already uses '*' as a key. Duplicate patterns within an environment are a
YAML violation.
When debugging environments, you’ll find a couple of execution functions especially helpful.
config.get shows the value that a particular minion (or set of minions) is using for a configuration
option:

Here, we can see that the minion with ID new-client-dev has been pinned to the development
environment, just as its ID would suggest. To see what the top.sls configuration looks like from
that minion’s perspective, use state.show_top:

The output shows only the states that are active and selected for the target minion. In other
words, they are the states that would run if you invoked state.highstate on that minion.

Note that all the displayed states come from the development environment. Because the minion is
pinned, that will always be the case.
Documentation roadmap
Salt’s documentation (docs.saltstack.com) will likely earn your admiration, but perhaps only
after a period of frustration. The main sticking point is that topics are nested several layers deep,
but the headings at the top two layers do not necessarily hint at what you’ll find at layer three.
The Architecture section, for example, contains no information about Salt’s architecture (it’s
really about multiserver deployments).
Some of the most useful reference material lies within sections that are organized as scenarios or
tutorials. Front-to-back reading can sometimes evoke a dying sysadmin’s fever dream: themes
cyclically loom and recede without fully resolving. Once in a while, you’ll experience a moment
of lucidity in which to appreciate the severity of your condition.
Some pointers:

      The top-level Using Salt section is an overview by concept, and most of
      Configuration Management is labeled as a tutorial. Because of their formats, these
      sections look like supplemental materials. But that’s not true; they are pretty much
      the primary documentation for the material they cover. Don’t skip.
      The best reference information is beneath State System Reference, under
      Configuration Management. A lot of the stuff in here is not important for a first
      reading, but Highstate data structure definitions, Requisites and other global state
      arguments, and The top file are particularly worth reading. (The top file is also the
      authoritative documentation for environments.)

      The docs you’ll use most frequently—the ones covering state and execution functions
      —are concealed under Salt Module Reference and camouflaged among 19 other
      module types that are of interest mostly to module developers. Bookmark the sections
      for Full list of builtin state modules and Full list of builtin execution modules.
23.7 ANSIBLE AND SALT COMPARED
We like both Ansible and Salt. Each of them has some friction points, however, and we
recommend them for different environments. The sections below comment on a few of the
factors you might consider when choosing between them.
Deployment flexibility and scalability
Salt covers a broader range of deployment environments than does Ansible. It’s simple enough
that you can reasonably use it to manage a single server, but it also scales effortlessly and
essentially without limit. If you want to learn one system that covers the broadest possible range
of use cases, Salt is a good choice.
In part, that’s because Salt’s architecture makes relatively few demands of the master server.
Minions receive their instructions and don’t report back until they’re done, with all status
information being reported at once. Minions call the server to obtain configuration data, but aside
from serving pillar data, the server itself performs relatively little computation.
Once your site outgrows a single Salt master, you can convert your infrastructure to a tiered or
replicated server scheme. We don’t cover those options in this book, but they’re easy to set up
and work well.
Large deployments are a comparative weak spot for Ansible. It does include some features to
help you implement multitier server systems, but the transition to this model is not as transparent
as it is in Salt.

Ansible is an order of magnitude slower than Salt, and because of its architecture, it must handle
clients in batches. However, most servers can handle far more than the default 5 simultaneous
clients. You can also change Ansible’s execution strategy so that clients aren’t kept in strict
lockstep with each other. Even a tuned Ansible system won’t approach the speed of Salt, but it’s
better than one might naïvely anticipate.
Built-in modules and extensibility
Bake-offs of configuration management software sometimes attempt to compare the number of
operation types that various systems support out of the box. However, these comparisons are
hard to get right because of underlying structural differences. Functions that are spread across
several modules in Ansible might be addressed by one in Salt, for example. An atomic operation
in one system may correspond to several operations in another.
At present, Salt and Ansible are roughly comparable in this respect. In addition to extensive
standard libraries, both systems have a structure in place for absorbing community-written
modules into the core or an easily accessible add-on pack.
In any event, total module count doesn’t matter nearly as much as coverage of the systems and
software your site is actually using. All CM systems cover basic operations pretty well, but as
you move into the long tail, offerings vary dramatically.
It’s likely that you’ll eventually want to tackle some tasks for which your CM system doesn’t
have an off-the-shelf solution. Fortunately, Salt and Ansible are both easy to extend with your
own Python code. Embrace this extensibility early on and make it part of your repertoire.
Security
As outlined in Ansible access options, Ansible can be made almost arbitrarily secure. The only
limit to security is your own willingness to retype passwords and deal with security red tape.
Ansible’s vault system lets you keep configuration data in an encrypted format. That’s actually a
pretty big deal, because it means that neither the Ansible server nor the configuration base needs
to be particularly secure. (Salt’s modular architecture probably makes this an easy feature to add,
but it doesn’t come in the box.)
By contrast, Salt can only be as secure as the root account on the master server. Although the
master daemon itself is simple to set up, the server on which it runs should receive your site’s
most aggressive securement. Ideally, the master should be a machine or virtual server dedicated
to this task.
In practice, administrators hate intrusive security protocols as much as anyone else does. Most
real-world Ansible installations have relatively lax security. Just as Ansible can be made
arbitrarily secure, it can also be made arbitrarily insecure.

Even if you strive to keep Ansible fully secured, you may have trouble maintaining this approach
once your site grows beyond the point at which configuration management can be handled by an
administrator typing commands in a terminal window. Nothing that runs out of cron, for
example, can depend on the presence of an administrator to enter passwords. Working around
that constraint inevitably ends up lowering security to the level of the root account.
The bottom line on security is that Ansible gives you both more options and more opportunities
to shoot yourself in the foot. It’s more securable, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that it’s more
secure. Either system is fine for the average site. Keep your own needs and constraints firmly in
mind when evaluating these systems.
Miscellaneous
Table 23.6 and Table 23.7 summarize some of the additional strengths and weakness of both
Ansible and Salt.

Table 23.6: Ansible pros and cons

Table 23.7: Salt pros and cons
23.8 BEST PRACTICES
If you’ve worked on a software project, you might find many of the issues addressed by
configuration management systems to be familiar from the development world. Development
environments encompass many of the same vagaries: multiple platforms, multiple products
derived from the same code base, multiple types of builds and configurations, and deployment
through successive steps of development, testing, and production.
These are complex issues, and development environments are only tools. Developers use a
variety of additional controls—development guidelines, design reviews, coding standards,
internal documentation, and clear architectural boundaries, among others—to limit the slide
toward entropy.

Unfortunately, administrators often wander into configuration management territory without a
proper suit of developer’s armor. At first glance, configuration management seems deceptively
straightforward, like a slightly more general and sophisticated way to approach routine scripting
tasks. Configuration management vendors work hard to reinforce this impression. Their web sites
are siren songs of ease and grace; each one features a tutorial in which you deploy a web server
by running ten lines of configuration code.
In reality, the edge of the abyss may be closer than it seems, particularly when multiple
administrators contribute to the same configuration base over time. Real-world specifications for
even a single-purpose server run to hundreds of lines of code segmented into multiple different
functional roles. Without coordination, it’s easy to turn the CM system into a muddle of
conflicting or parallel code.
Best practices vary by configuration management system and by environment, but a few rules
apply to most situations:

      Keep the configuration base under version control. This isn’t a best practice so much
      as a basic requirement for CM sanity. Not only does Git provide change tracking and
      history, but it has already solved many of the mechanical problems involved in
      coordinating projects across administrative boundaries.
      Configuration bases are inherently hierarchical, at least in a logical sense. Some
      standards apply site-wide, some apply to every server in a particular department or
      region, and some are specific to particular hosts. In addition, you’ll most likely need
      the ability to make exceptions in certain cases. Depending on your site’s operations,
      you might also need to maintain multiple independent hierarchies.

      Plan for all of this structure in advance, and consider how you might manage
      scenarios in which different groups control different parts of the configuration base.
      At the very least, conventions for classifying hosts (e.g., EC2 instances, Internet-
facing hosts, database servers) should be coordinated site-wide and adhered to
consistently.

CM systems allow different parts of the configuration base to be kept in different
directories or repositories. However, this structure provides little actual benefit, and it
complicates day-to-day configuration work. We recommend one big, integrated
configuration base. Manage hierarchy and coordination at the Git layer.
Sensitive data (keys, passwords) should not be put under version control unless
encrypted, even in private code repositories. Git in particular is not designed to
maintain security. Your CM system may have some encryption features built in, but
if not, roll your own.

Because it effectively has root access to many other hosts, a configuration server is
one of the most concentrated sources of security risk in your organization. It’s
reasonable to dedicate a server to this role, and it should receive your most stringent
security hardening.
Configurations should run without reporting spurious changes. Scripts and shell
commands are usually the biggest sticking points. Check your CM system’s
documentation for advice on this topic, as it’s one of the most frequent issues that
users encounter.
Don’t test on production servers. But do test! It’s easy to spin up a test system in the
cloud or in Vagrant. Chef even provides an elaborate testing and development system
in the form of Kitchen. Make sure your test system matches your real systems by
using the same machine image and network configuration.
Read the code for add-on bundles that you obtain from public repositories. It’s not
that these sources are particularly suspicious; it’s just that systems and conventions
differ widely. In many cases, you’ll find that a few local tweaks are needed. If you
can bypass the CM system’s package manager and clone bundles directly from a Git
repo, then you can easily upgrade to later releases without losing your
customizations.

Subdivide configurations ruthlessly. Every file should have a clear and single
purpose. (Ansible users might want to select a text editor that deals well with 50
different files all named main.yml.)
Configuration-managed servers should be 100% managed. That is, there should be no
penumbra of administrative work that was performed by hand and that no one knows
how to replicate. This issue appears primarily when moving existing servers onto
configuration management. When converting an existing “snowflake” server to
configuration management, you may find it useful to clone the original system for use
as a basis for comparison. It can take multiple cycles of configuration management
and testing to home in on all the system’s particulars.
Do not allow yourself or your team to “temporarily disable” the CM system on a
node or to use a heavy-handed method of overriding the CM system (for example, by
setting the immutable attribute on a configuration file that is typically under CM
control). These changes are inevitably forgotten, and confusion or outages ensue.
It’s not hard to open a gateway from existing administrative databases into a
configuration management system, and there’s a lot of value in doing so. CM systems
are designed for this kind of interfacing. For example, you might identify system
administrators and their zones of activity in your site-wide LDAP database, and make
this information available within the configuration management environment through
gateway scripts. Ideally, every piece of information should have a single authoritative
source.

CM systems are excellent for managing the state of a machine. They are not intended
for stateful, coordinated activities such as software deployment operations, although
the documentation and even some examples might lead you to believe that they are.
In our experience, a dedicated continuous deployment system is more suitable.
In elastic cloud environments where computational capacity is added in response to
real-time demand, the time that it takes for a new node to bootstrap through
configuration management can be agonizingly slow. Optimize by including packages
and long-running configuration items within the baseline machine image rather than
downloading and installing them at boot time.

If you use configuration management to set configuration parameters for an
application, make sure that that step comes early in the bootstrapping process so that
the application comes on-line more quickly. We try to limit the CM run time to less
than 60 seconds for dynamically scaled nodes.

As an administrator working with a CM system, you will allot much of your time to
writing CM code, testing changes against a representative set of systems, committing
the updates to a repository, and applying changes to your site in a staged fashion. To
be most effective, you should perfect this process by investing time up front to learn
best practices and tricks for your system of choice.
23.9 RECOMMENDED READING
COWIE, JON. Customizing Chef: Getting the Most Out of Your Infrastructure Automation.
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2014.
FRANK, FELIX, AND MARTIN ALFKE. Puppet 4 Essentials (2nd Edition). Birmingham, UK: Packt
Publishing, 2015.

GEERLING, JEFF. Ansible for DevOps: Server and configuration management for humans. St.
Louis, MO: Midwestern Mac, LLC, 2015. This book is focused mostly on basic Ansible
wrangling, but it does include some helpful material about combining Ansible with specific
systems such as Vagrant, Docker, and Jenkins.
HOCHSTEIN, LORIN. Ansible: Up and Running (2nd Edition). Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media,
2017. Like Ansible for DevOps, this book covers both the Ansible basics and interactions with
common environments such as Vagrant and EC2. Some highlights are the inclusion of a larger-
scale example configuration, a chapter on writing your own Ansible modules, and tips on
debugging.
MORRIS, KIEF. Infrastructure as Code: Managing Servers in the Cloud. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly
Media, 2016. This book includes few specifics about configuration management per se, but it’s
helpful for understanding how configuration management integrates into the larger scheme of
DevOps and structured administration.
SEBENIK, CRAIG, AND THOMAS HATCH. Salt Essentials. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2015. This
is a short and rather skeletal book that sticks pretty closely to the basics of Salt. It’s not the style
of book we’d ordinarily recommend, but given the unevenness of the official documentation, it’s
a potentially useful reference for those who seek a “second opinion.”

TAYLOR, MISCHA, AND SETH VARGO. Learning Chef: A Guide to Configuration Management and
Automation. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2013.
UPHILL, THOMAS, AND JOHN ARUNDEL. Puppet Cookbook (3rd Edition). Birmingham, UK: Packt
Publishing, 2015.
