24 Virtualization

Server virtualization makes it possible to run multiple operating system instances concurrently on
the same physical hardware. Virtualization software parcels out CPU, memory, and I/O
resources, dynamically allocating their use among several “guest” operating systems and
resolving resource conflicts. From the user’s point of view, a virtual server walks and talks like a
full-fledged physical server.

     See Chapter 25 for more information about containers.

This decoupling of hardware from the operating system affords numerous luxuries. Virtualized
servers are more flexible than their “bare metal” kin. They’re portable and can be
programmatically managed. The underlying hardware is used more efficiently because it can
service multiple guests simultaneously. And if that isn’t enough, virtualization technology
underpins both cloud computing and containers.
Implementations of virtualization have changed over the years, but the core concepts are not new
to the industry. Big Blue used virtual machines on early mainframes while researching time-
sharing concepts in the 1960s. The same techniques were used throughout the mainframe heyday
of the 1970s until the client/server boom of the 1980s, when the difficulty of virtualizing the Intel
x86 architecture led to a short period of relative dormancy.
The ever-growing size of server farms rekindled interest in virtualization for modern systems.
VMware and other providers conquered the challenges of x86 and made it easy to automatically
provision operating systems. These facilities eventually led to the rise of on-demand, Internet-
connected virtual servers: the infrastructure we now know as cloud computing. More recently,
advances in OS-level virtualization have ushered in a new era of OS abstraction in the form of
containers.

In this chapter, we begin by clarifying the terms and concepts you need in order to understand
virtualization for UNIX and Linux. We then introduce the leading virtualization solutions used
on our example operating systems.
24.1 VIRTUAL VERNACULAR
The terminology used to describe virtualization is somewhat opaque, largely because of the way
the technology evolved. Competing vendors worked independently without the benefit of
standards, yielding a bewildering array of ambiguous phrases and acronyms. Conway’s Law
comes to mind: “Organizations which design systems are constrained to produce designs which
are copies of the communication structures of these organizations.”
To further confuse the issue, “virtualization” itself is an overloaded term that describes more than
the scenario described above, in which guest operating systems run within the context of
virtualized hardware. OS-level virtualization—more commonly referred to as containerization—
is a related but distinct set of facilities that has become just as ubiquitous as server virtualization.
For those without hands-on exposure to these technologies, it can often be difficult to grasp the
differences. We contrast the two approaches later in this section.
Hypervisors
A hypervisor (also known as a virtual machine monitor) is a software layer that mediates
between virtual machines (VMs) and the underlying hardware on which they run. Hypervisors
are responsible for sharing system resources among the guest operating systems, which are
isolated from one another and which access the hardware exclusively through the hypervisor.
Guest operating systems are independent, so they needn’t be the same. CentOS can run alongside
FreeBSD and Windows, for example. VMware ESX, XenServer, and FreeBSD bhyve are
examples of hypervisors. The Linux kernel-based virtual machine (KVM) converts the Linux
kernel into a hypervisor.

Full virtualization
The first hypervisors fully emulated the underlying hardware, defining virtual replacements for
all the basic computing resources: hard disks, network devices, interrupts, motherboard
hardware, BIOSs, and so on. This mode, called full virtualization, runs guests without
modification but incurs a performance penalty because the hypervisor must constantly translate
between the system’s actual hardware and the virtual hardware exposed to guests.

Simulating an entire PC is a complex task. Most hypervisors that offer full virtualization separate
the task of maintaining multiple environments (virtualization) from the task of simulating the
hardware within each environment (emulation).
The most common emulation package used in these systems is an open source project called
QEMU. You can find more information at qemu.org, but in most cases the emulator doesn’t
require much attention from administrators.

Paravirtualization
The Xen hypervisor introduced “paravirtualization,” in which modified guest operating systems
detect their virtualized state and actively cooperate with the hypervisor to access hardware. This
approach improves performance by an order of magnitude or more. However, guest operating
systems need substantial updates to run this way, and the exact modifications depend on the
specific hypervisor in use.

Hardware-assisted virtualization
In 2004 and 2005, Intel and AMD introduced CPU features (Intel VT and AMD-V) that facilitate
virtualization on the x86 platform. These extensions gave rise to “hardware-assisted
virtualization,” also known as “accelerated virtualization.” In this scheme, the CPU and memory
controller are virtualized by the hardware, albeit under the control of the hypervisor. Performance
is very good, and guest operating systems need not know that they’re running on a virtualized
CPU. These days, hardware-assisted virtualization is the assumed baseline.
Although the CPU is a primary point of contact between the hardware and guest operating
systems, it is only one component of the system. The hypervisor still needs some way to present
or emulate the rest of the system’s hardware. Either full virtualization or paravirtualization can be
used for this task. In some cases, a mix of approaches is used; it depends on the virtualization-
awareness of the guest.

Paravirtualized drivers
One great advantage of hardware-assisted virtualization is that it largely restricts the need for
paravirtualization support to the level of device drivers. All operating systems allow add-on
drivers, so setting up a guest with paravirtualized disk drives, display cards, and network
interfaces is as simple as installing the appropriate drivers. The drivers know the secret
handshake that lets them connect with the hypervisor’s paravirtualization support, and the guest
OS remains none the wiser.
A few pesky aspects of the PC architecture, such as the interrupt controller and the BIOS
resources, fall into the domain of neither the CPU nor the device drivers. In the past, the
predominant approach has been to implement these remaining components through full
virtualization. For example, Xen’s HVM (Hardware Virtual Machine) mode combines support
for CPU-level virtualization extensions with a copy of the QEMU PC emulator. And PVHVM
(ParaVirtualized HVM) mode adds to this scheme paravirtualized drivers on guest operating
systems, greatly reducing the amount of full virtualization needed to keep the system running.
However, the hypervisor still needs an active copy of QEMU for each virtual machine so that it
can cover the odds and ends not addressed by the paravirtualized drivers.

Modern virtualization
The most recent versions of Xen and other hypervisors have more or less eliminated the need to
emulate legacy hardware. Instead, they rely on CPU-level virtualization features, paravirtualized
guest-OS drivers, and a few additional sections of paravirtualized code within guest kernels. Xen
calls this mode PVH (ParaVirtualized Hardware), and it’s considered to be a close-to-ideal blend
that yields optimal performance but imposes the lowest possible requirements on guest kernels.

You might encounter any of the varieties of virtualization described above in the wild or when
reading documentation. However, it’s not worth memorizing any particular taxonomy or
worrying too much about virtualization modes. The boundaries among these modes are porous,
and the hypervisor generally works out the best options for a given guest. If you keep your
software updated, you automatically benefit from the latest enhancements. The only reason to
choose anything other than the default operating mode is to support older hardware or ancient
hypervisors.

Type 1 vs. type 2 hypervisors
Many reference materials draw a somewhat dubious distinction between “type 1” and “type 2”
hypervisors. A type 1 hypervisor runs directly on the hardware without a supporting OS, and for
that reason is sometimes called a bare-metal or native hypervisor. Type 2 hypervisors are user-
space applications that run on top of another general-purpose OS. Exhibit A depicts these two
models.

Exhibit A: Comparison of type 1 and type 2 hypervisors

VMware ESXi and XenServer are considered type 1, and FreeBSD’s bhyve is type 2. Likewise,
workstation-oriented virtualization packages such as Oracle’s VirtualBox and VMware
Workstation are also type 2.
It’s true that type 1 and type 2 systems are different, but the delineation is not always so binary.
KVM, for example, is a Linux kernel module that gives virtual machines direct access to CPU
virtualization features. Differentiating among types of hypervisor is more an academic exercise
than a point of practice.
Live migration
Virtual machines can move between hypervisors running on different physical hardware in real
time, in some cases without interruptions in service or loss of connectivity. This feature is called
live migration. The magic lies in a memory dance between the source and target hosts. The
hypervisor copies changes from the source to the destination, and as soon as the memory is
identical between the two, the migration completes. Live migration is helpful for high-
availability load balancing, disaster recovery, server maintenance, and general system flexibility.
Virtual machine images
Virtual servers are created from images, which are templates of configured operating systems
that a hypervisor can load and execute. The image file format varies by hypervisor. Most
hypervisor projects maintain a collection of images that you can download and use as a basis for
your own customizations. You can also take a snapshot of a virtual machine to create an image,
either as a backup of important data or to use as the basis for creating more virtual machines.
Because the virtual machine hardware presented by the hypervisor is standardized, images are
portable among systems even if their actual hardware differs. Images are specific to a particular
hypervisor, but conversion tools that port images among hypervisors are available.
Containerization
OS-level virtualization—or containerization—is a different approach to isolation that does not
use a hypervisor. Instead, it relies on kernel features that isolate processes from the rest of the
system. Each process “container” or “jail” has a private root filesystem and process namespace.
The contained processes share the kernel and other services of the host OS, but they cannot
access files or resources outside of their containers. Exhibit B illustrates this architecture.

     See Chapter 25 for more information about containers.

Exhibit B: Containerization

Because it does not require virtualization of the hardware, the resource overhead of OS-level
virtualization is low. Most implementations offer near-native performance. Linux’s LXC, Docker
containers, and FreeBSD jails are implementations of containers.
This type of virtualization largely precludes the use of multiple operating systems because the
host kernel is shared by all containers. However, FreeBSD’s Linux emulation layer permits
Linux containers to run on FreeBSD hosts.

It’s easy to confuse containers with virtual machines. Both define portable, isolated execution
environments, and both look and act like full operating systems with root filesystems and running
processes. Yet their implementations are entirely different.
A true virtual machine has an OS kernel, an init process, drivers to interact with hardware, and
the full trappings of a UNIX operating system. A container, on the other hand, is merely the
facade of an operating system. It uses the strategies described above to give individual processes
a suitable execution environment. Table 24.1 illustrates some of the practical differences.

Table 24.1: Comparing virtual machines with containers
It’s common to use containers in combination with virtual machines. Virtual machines are the
best way to subdivide physical servers into manageable chunks. You can then run applications in
containers atop the VMs to achieve optimal system density (this procedure is sometimes called
“bin packing”). The containers-on-VMs architecture is standard for containerized applications
that need to run on public cloud instances.
We focus on true virtualization for the rest of this chapter. See Chapter 25, Containers, for more
details on containerization.
24.2 VIRTUALIZATION WITH LINUX
Xen and KVM are the leading open source virtualization projects for Linux. Xen, now a project
of the Linux Foundation, powers some of the largest public clouds, including Amazon Web
Services and IBM’s SoftLayer. KVM is the kernel-based virtual machine integrated into the
mainline Linux kernel. Both Xen and KVM have demonstrated their stability through many
production installations at large sites.
Xen
Initially developed by Ian Pratt as a research project at the University of Cambridge, the Linux-
friendly Xen has grown to become a formidable virtualization platform that challenges even the
commercial giants in terms of performance, security, and especially, cost.
As a paravirtual hypervisor, Xen claims a mere 0.1%–3.5% overhead, far less than fully
virtualized solutions. Because Xen is open source, a variety of management tools are available
with varying levels of feature support. The Xen source code is available from xenproject.org, but
many Linux distributions include native support.
Xen is a bare-metal hypervisor that runs directly on the physical hardware. A running virtual
machine is called a domain. There is always at least one domain, referred to as domain zero or
dom0. Dom0 has full hardware access, manages the other domains, and runs all the hypervisor’s
own device drivers. Unprivileged domains are referred to as domU.
Dom0 typically runs a Linux distribution. It looks just like any other Linux system but includes
the daemons, tools, and libraries that complete the Xen architecture and enable communication
among domU, dom0, and the hypervisor.

The hypervisor is responsible for CPU scheduling and memory management for the system as a
whole. It controls all domains, including dom0. However, the hypervisor itself is in turn
controlled and managed from dom0. What a tangled web we weave.
Table 24.2 lists the most interesting puzzle pieces of a Linux dom0.

Table 24.2: Xen components in dom0

Each Xen guest-domain configuration file in /etc/xen specifies the virtual resources available to a
domU, including disk devices, CPU, memory, and network interfaces. Each domU has a separate
configuration file. The format is flexible and gives administrators granular control over the
constraints applied to each guest. If a symbolic link to a domU configuration file is added to the
auto subdirectory, that guest OS is automatically started at boot time.
Xen guest installation
It takes several steps to get a guest server up and running under Xen. We recommend the use of a
tool such as virt-manager (virt-manager.org) to simplify the process. virt-manager was
originally a Red Hat project, but it has now been deproprietarized and is available for most Linux
distributions. virt-install, its command-line OS provisioning tool, accepts installation media
from a variety of sources, including SMB or NFS mounts, physical CDs or DVDs, and HTTP
URLs.
Guest domains’ disks are normally stored in virtual block devices (VBDs) in dom0. The VBD
can be connected to a dedicated resource such as a physical disk drive or logical volume. Or, it
can be a loopback file, also known as a file-backed VBD, created with dd. Performance is better
with a dedicated disk or volume, but files are more flexible and can be managed with normal
Linux commands (such as mv and cp) in dom0. Backing files are sparse files that grow as
needed.
Unless the system is experiencing performance bottlenecks, a file-backed VBD is usually the
best choice. It’s a simple process to transfer a VBD onto a dedicated disk if you change your
mind.
The installation of a guest domain might look like this:

This is a typical Xen guest domain with the name “chef,” a disk VBD location of /vm/chef.img,
and installation media obtained through HTTP. The instance has 512MiB of RAM and uses no X
Windows graphics support during installation. virt-install downloads the files needed to start the
installation and then kicks off the installer process.
When the screen clears, install Linux through the standard text-based process, which includes
network configuration and package selection. After the installation completes, the guest domain
reboots and is ready for use. To disconnect from the guest console and return to dom0, just press
<Control-]>.

It’s worth noting that although this example uses text-based installation, graphics-based
installation through Virtual Network Computing (VNC) is also available.
virt-install saves the domain’s configuration in /etc/xen/chef. Here’s what it looks like:
You can see that the NIC defaults to bridged mode. In this case, the VBD is a “block tap” file
that affords better performance than does a standard loopback file. The writable disk image file is
presented to the guest as /dev/xvda.
The xl tool is convenient for day-to-day management of virtual machines. It lets you start and
stop VMs, connect to their consoles, and investigate their current state. Below, we show the
running guest domains, then connect to the console for the chef domU. IDs are assigned in
increasing order as guest domains are created, and they are reset when the host reboots.

To change the configuration of a guest domain (e.g., to attach another disk or to change the
network to NAT mode instead of bridged), edit the guest’s configuration file in /etc/xen and
reboot the guest.
KVM
KVM, the Kernel-based Virtual Machine, is a full virtualization platform that is the default for
most Linux distributions. Like Xen’s HVM mode, KVM takes advantage of the Intel VT and
AMD-V CPU extensions and relies (in a typical setup) on QEMU to implement a fully
virtualized hardware system. Although the system is native to Linux, it has also been ported to
FreeBSD as a loadable kernel module.
Since KVM defaults to full virtualization, many guest operating systems are supported, including
Windows. Paravirtualized Ethernet, disk, and graphics card drivers are available for Linux,
FreeBSD, and Windows. Their use is optional but recommended for performance.
Under KVM, the Linux kernel itself serves as the hypervisor. Memory management and
scheduling are handled through the host’s kernel, and guest machines are normal Linux
processes. Enormous benefits accompany this unique approach to virtualization. For example,
the complexity introduced by multicore processors is handled by the kernel, and no hypervisor
changes are required to support them. Linux commands such as top, ps, and kill show and
control virtual machines, just as they would for other processes. The integration with Linux is
seamless.
KVM guest installation
Although the technologies behind Xen and KVM are fundamentally different, the tools that
install and manage guest operating systems are eerily similar. As under Xen, you can use virt-
install to create new KVM guests. Use the virsh command to manage them.
The flags passed to virt-install vary slightly from those used for a Xen installation. To begin
with, the --hvm flag says that the guest should be hardware virtualized, as opposed to
paravirtualized. In addition, the --connect argument guarantees that the correct default
hypervisor is chosen, since virt-install supports more than one hypervisor. Finally, the use of --
accelerate is recommended, to take advantage of the acceleration capabilities in KVM. Ergo, a
full command for installing an Ubuntu server guest from DVD-ROM looks something like this:

Assuming that the Ubuntu installation DVD has been inserted, this command launches the
installation and stores the guest in the file ~/ubuntu-Yakkety.img, allowing it to grow to 12GB.
Since we specified neither --nographics nor --vnc, virt-install asks whether to enable graphics.
The virsh utility spawns its own shell from which you can run commands. To open the shell,
type virsh --connect qemu:///system. The following series of commands demonstrates some of
the core functionality of virsh. Type help in the shell to see a complete list, or see the man page
for the nitty-gritty details.
24.3 FREEBSD BHYVE
FreeBSD’s virtualization software is bhyve, a relatively new system first added in FreeBSD 10.0.
It can run BSD, Linux, and even Windows guests. However, it runs on a limited set of hardware
and is missing some of the core features found in other implementations.
With so many virtualization platforms that support FreeBSD on the market already, it’s unclear
why the bhyve effort started when it did. Unless you are developing a custom platform that
requires embedded FreeBSD virtualization, we recommend choosing another solution until this
project matures.
24.4 VMWARE
VMware is the biggest player in the virtualization industry and was the first vendor to develop
techniques to virtualize the fractious x86 platform. VMware is a commercial entity, but some of
its products are free. They’re all worthy of consideration when you are choosing a site-wide
virtualization technology.
The primary product of interest to UNIX and Linux administrators is ESXi, which is a bare-metal
hypervisor for the Intel x86 architecture. The name stands for “Elastic Sky X, integrated”—you
really can’t make this stuff up. ESXi is free (free like a box of puppies), but some useful
functionality is limited to paid licensees.

In addition to ESXi, VMware offers some powerful, advanced products that facilitate centralized
deployment and management of virtual machines. They also have the most mature live migration
technology we’ve seen. In-depth coverage of the full VWware product suite is beyond the scope
of this chapter, however.
24.5 VIRTUALBOX
VirtualBox is a consumer-grade, cross-platform, type 2 hypervisor. It performs “probably good
enough” virtualization of systems, typically for individuals. It’s popular among developers and
end users because it is free, easy to install, easy to use, and often simplifies the creation and
management of test environments.
Performance and hardware support are both weak points. VirtualBox is generally not suitable for
“production” virtualization use, although its web site does describe it as a “professional” solution
which is licensed for “enterprise” use. (This may in fact be the case with regard to Oracle
operating systems, which are the only prebuilt VMs available.)

The history of VirtualBox is long and sordid. It originally began as a commercial product of
Innotek GmbH but was released as open source before Innotek was acquired by Sun
Microsystems in 2008. After Oracle swallowed Sun in 2010, the product was rebranded as
Oracle VM VirtualBox. VirtualBox lives on today (available under the GPLv2 open source
license) and remains under active development at Oracle.
VirtualBox runs on Linux, FreeBSD, Windows, macOS, and Solaris. Oracle does not publish or
support the FreeBSD version of the host, but it’s available as a community port. Supported guest
OSs include Windows, Linux, and FreeBSD.
By default, you wrangle virtual machines through VirtualBox’s GUI. If you’re interested in
running VMs on a system that doesn’t run a GUI, explore VBoxHeadless, the morbid name for
VirtualBox’s CLI tool. You can download VirtualBox and read more about it at virtualbox.org.
24.6 PACKER
Packer (packer.io), from the esteemed open source company HashiCorp, is a tool for building
virtual machine images from a specification file. It can build images for a variety of virtualization
and cloud platforms. Integrating Packer into your workflow lets you be more or less
virtualization-platform-agnostic. You can easily build your customized image for whatever
platform you’re using on a given day.
To create an image, Packer launches an instance from a source image of your choosing. It then
customizes the instance by running scripts or invoking other provisioning steps that you specify.
Finally, it saves a copy of the virtual machine’s state as a new image.

This process is particularly helpful for supporting an “infrastructure as code” way of managing
servers. Instead of manually applying changes to images, you modify a template that describes
the image in abstract terms. You then check the specification into a repository as you would with
traditional source code. This technique supplies you with outstanding transparency, repeatability,
and reversibility. It also creates a clear audit trail.
Packer configurations are JSON files. Most administrators agree that JSON is a poor choice of
format since it’s notoriously picky about quotes and commas and doesn’t allow comments. With
luck, HashiCorp will soon convert Packer to their much improved custom configuration format,
but until then you’re stuck editing JSON.
In a template, “builders” define how to create an image and “provisioners” configure and install
software for the image. Builders exist for AWS, GCP, DigitalOcean, VMware, VirtualBox, and
Vagrant, among others. Provisioners can be shell scripts, Chef cookbooks, Ansible roles, or other
configuration management tools.
The following template, custom_ami.json, demonstrates AWS’s amazon-ebs builder and the shell
provisioner.
Just as the CLI tool needs certain parameters to launch an instance, the amazon-ebs builder needs
data such as API credentials, instance type, the source AMI on which to base the new image, and
a VPC subnet where the instance should be located. Packer uses SSH to execute the provisioning
step, so we make sure the instance has a public IP address.
In this case, the provisioner is a shell script called customize_ami.sh. Packer copies the script to
the remote system with scp and runs it. There’s nothing special about such a script; it can do
anything you’d normally do from a script. For example, it can add new users, download and
configure software, or execute security hardening steps.
To create the AMI, invoke packer build:

packer build notes each step of the creation process on the console. The amazon-ebs builder takes
the following steps:
   1. It automatically creates a key pair and a security group.
   2. It starts the instance and waits for it to become accessible on the network.
   3. It uses scp and ssh to perform the requested provisioning steps.
   4. It creates an AMI by calling the EC2 CreateImage API.

   5. It cleans up by terminating the instance.
If everything works correctly, Packer prints the AMI ID as soon as it is available for use. If a
problem occurs during the build, Packer prints a magenta-colored error message and exits after
cleaning up after itself.
The -debug argument to packer build pauses at each step to let you troubleshoot problems. You
can also use the null builder to fix any errors without launching an instance each time you try to
run a build.
24.7 VAGRANT
Also developed by HashiCorp, Vagrant is a wrapper that sits on top of virtualization platforms
such as VMware, VirtualBox, and Docker. However, it is not itself a virtualization platform.
Vagrant simplifies virtual environment provisioning and configuration. Its mission is to quickly
and easily create disposable, preconfigured development environments that closely mirror
production environments. This glue function lets developers write and test code with minimal
involvement from sysadmins or an operations team.

It’s possible (but not required) to use Vagrant in combination with Packer. For example, you
might standardize the base image that you use for your production platforms through Packer,
then distribute a Vagrant build of that image to developers. The developers can then spin up an
instance of the image on their laptop or cloud provider of choice, with any necessary
customizations. This method balances the need for centralized management of production images
with developers’ need for access to a similar environment that they can directly control.
24.8 RECOMMENDED READING
The web site virtualization.info is an excellent source of current news, trends, and gossip in the
virtualization and cloud computing sectors.
HASHIMOTO, MITCHELL. Vagrant: Up and Running: Create and Manage Virtualized Development
Environments. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2013.

KUSNETSKY, DAN. Virtualization: A Manager’s Guide: Big Picture of the Who, What, and Where
of Virtualization. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2011.
MACKEY, TIM, AND J. K. BENEDICT. XenServer Administration Handbook: Practical Recipes for
Successful Deployments. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2016.
SENTHIL, NATHAN. VirtualBox at Warp Speed: Virtualization with VirtualBox. Seattle, WA:
Amazon Digital Services, 2015.
TROY, RYAN, AND MATTHEW HELMKE. VMware Cookbook: A Real-World Guide to Effective
VMware Use, 2nd Edition. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2012.
