25 Containers

Few technologies have generated as much excitement and hype in recent years as the humble
container, whose explosion in popularity coincided with the release of the open source Docker
project in 2013. Containers are of particular interest to system administrators because they
standardize software packaging, an ambition that has long been tantalizingly out of reach.
To illustrate the utility of containers, consider a typical web application developed in any modern
language or framework. At a minimum, the following ingredients are needed to install and run
the app:

      The code for the application and its correct configuration
      Libraries and other dependencies, potentially numbered in the dozens, each pinned to
      a specific version that is known to be compatible
      An interpreter (e.g., Python or Ruby) or run time (JRE) to execute the code, also
      version pinned

      Localizations such as user accounts, environment settings, and services provided by
      the operating system

A typical site runs dozens or hundreds of such applications. Maintaining uniformity in each of
these areas across multiple application deployments is a constant challenge, even with the
assistance of the tools discussed in Chapter 23, Configuration Management, and Chapter 26,
Continuous Integration and Delivery. Incompatible dependencies required by separate
applications lead to systems that are underutilized because they cannot be shared. In addition, at
sites where software developers and system administrators are functionally separated, careful
coordination is needed because it’s not always straightforward to identify who’s responsible for
what parts of the operating environment.
A container image simplifies matters by packaging an application and its prerequisites into a
standard, portable file. Any host with a compatible container run-time engine can create a
container by using the image as a template. Tens or hundreds of containers can run
simultaneously without conflicts. With images typically being a few hundred megabytes in size
or less, it’s practical to copy them among systems. This easy application portability is perhaps the
primary reason for the popularity of containers.

This chapter focuses on Docker. The eponymous business behind Docker has played a central
role in bringing containers into mainstream use, and the Docker ecosystem is the one you’re most
likely to encounter as a system administrator. Docker, Inc., offers several products related to
containers, but we limit our discussion to the main container engine and the Swarm cluster
manager.
Several viable alternative container engines are available. rkt, from CoreOS, is the most
complete. It has a cleaner process model than Docker and a more secure default configuration.
rkt integrates well with the Kubernetes orchestration system. systemd-nspawn, from the
systemd project, is another option for lightweight containers. It has fewer features than Docker
or rkt, but in some cases that can be a good thing. rkt cooperates with systemd-nspawn to
configure container namespaces.
25.1 BACKGROUND AND CORE CONCEPTS
The container’s rapid rise to grace can be attributed more to timing than to the emergence of any
single technology. Containers are a fusion of numerous existing kernel features, filesystem tricks,
and networking hacks. A container engine is the management software that pulls it all together.
In essence, a container is an isolated group of processes that are restricted to a private root
filesystem and process namespace. The contained processes share the kernel and other services
of the host OS, but by default they cannot access files or system resources outside their container.
Applications that run within a container are not aware of their containerized state and do not
require modification.

After you read the following sections, it should be clear that containers contain no magic. In fact,
they rely on some features of UNIX and Linux that have been around for many years. See
Chapter 24, Virtualization, for a description of how containers differ from virtual machines.
Kernel support
The container engine uses several kernel features that are essential for isolating processes. In
particular:

      Namespaces isolate containerized processes from the perspective of several operating
      system facilities, including filesystem mounts, process management, and networking.
      The mount namespace, for example, shows processes a customized view of the
      filesystem hierarchy. Containers can run with varying levels of integration with the
      host operating system, depending on how these namespaces have been configured.
      Control groups (contextually abbreviated to cgroups) limit the use of system
      resources and prioritize certain processes over others. Cgroups prevent runaway
      containers from consuming all available CPU and memory.
      Capabilities allow processes to execute certain sensitive kernel operations and system
      calls. For example, a process might have a capability that permits it to change the
      ownership of a file or to set the system time.
      Secure computing mode (usually shortened to seccomp) restricts access to system
      calls. It allows more fine-grained control than do capabilities.

Development of these features was driven in part by the Linux Containers project, LXC, which
began at Google in 2006. LXC was the basis of Borg, Google’s internal virtualization platform.
LXC supplies the raw functions and tools needed to create and run Linux containers, but with
more than 30 command-line tools and configuration files, it’s quite complicated. The first few
releases of Docker were essentially user-friendly wrappers that made LXC easier to use.

Docker now relies on an improved, standards-based container run time dubbed containerd. It too
relies on Linux namespaces, cgroups, and capabilities to isolate containers. Learn more at
containerd.io.
Images
A container image is akin to a template for a container. Images rely on union filesystem mounts
for performance and portability. Unions overlay multiple filesystems to create a single, consistent
hierarchy. The LWN.net article “A brief history of union mounts” describes the relevant
background. The related articles are interesting reading, too. See lwn.net/Articles/396020.
Container images are union filesystems that are organized to resemble the root filesystem of a
typical Linux distribution. The directory layout and the locations of binaries, libraries, and
supporting files all conform to standard Linux filesystem hierarchy specifications. Specialized
Linux distributions have been developed for use as the basis of container images.
To create a container, Docker points to the read-only union filesystem of an image and adds a
read/write layer that the container can update. When containerized processes modify the
filesystem, their changes are transparently saved within the read/write layer. The base remains
unmodified. This is known as a copy-on-write strategy.
Many containers can share the same immutable base layers, thus improving storage efficiency
and reducing startup times. Exhibit A depicts the scheme.

Exhibit A: Docker images and the union filesystem
Networking
The default way to connect containers to the network is to use a network namespace and a bridge
within the host. In this configuration, containers have private IP addresses that aren’t reachable
from outside the host. The host acts as a poor man’s IP router and proxies traffic between the
outside world and the containers. This architecture gives administrators control over which
container ports are exposed to the outside world.
It’s also possible to forgo the private container addressing scheme and expose entire containers
directly to the network. This is called host mode networking, and it means that the container has
unfettered access to the host’s network stack. This might be desirable in some situations, but it
also presents a security risk because the container is not fully isolated.
See Docker networks for more details.
25.2 DOCKER: THE OPEN SOURCE CONTAINER ENGINE
Docker, Inc.’s primary product is a client/server application that builds and manages containers.
The Docker container engine, written in Go, is highly modular. Separate, individual projects
manage pluggable storage, networking, and other features.
Docker, Inc., is not without controversy. Its tools tend to evolve rapidly, and new versions have
sometimes been incompatible with existing deployments. Some sites worry that relying on
Docker’s ecosystem will result in vendor lock-in. And as with any new technology, containers
introduce complexity and require some study to understand.

To counter these sources of resistance, Docker, Inc., became one of the founding members of the
Open Container Initiative, a consortium whose mission is to guide the growth of container
technology in a healthily competitive direction that fosters standards and collaboration. You can
learn more at opencontainers.org. In 2017, Docker founded the Moby project and contributed the
primary Docker Git repository to it to facilitate easier community development of the Docker
execution engine. Refer to mobyproject.org for details.
Our discussion of Docker is based on version 1.13.1. Docker maintains an exceptionally rapid
pace of development, and the current features are a moving target. We focus on the nuts and bolts
here, but be sure to supplement our tutorial with the reference material at docs.docker.com. You
might also dip your toes into the Moby sandbox at play-with-moby.com and the Docker lab
environment at labs.play-with-docker.com.
Basic architecture
docker is an executable command that handles all management tasks for the Docker system.
dockerd is the persistent daemon process that implements container and image operations.
docker can run on the same system as dockerd and can communicate with it through UNIX
domain sockets, or it can contact dockerd from a remote host over TCP. The architecture is
depicted in Exhibit B.

Exhibit B: Docker architecture
dockerd owns all the scaffolding needed to run containers. It creates the virtual network
plumbing and maintains the data directory in which containers and images are stored
(/var/lib/docker by default). It’s responsible for creating containers by invoking the appropriate
system calls, setting up union filesystems, and executing processes. In short, it is the container
management software.
Administrators interface with dockerd from the command line by running subcommands of the
docker client. You can create a container with docker run, for example, or view information
about the server with docker info. Table 25.1 summarizes some frequently used subcommands.

Table 25.1: Frequently used docker subcommands
An image is the template for a container. It includes the files that processes running within the
container instance depend on, such as libraries, operating system binaries, and applications.
Linux distributions can function as convenient base images because they define a complete
operating environment. However, an image is not necessarily based on a Linux distribution. The
“scratch” image is an explicitly empty image intended as a basis for creation of other, more
practical images.
A container relies on the image template as a basis for execution. When dockerd runs a
container, it creates a writable filesystem layer that is separate from the source image. The
container can read any of the files and other metadata stored within the image, but any writes are
confined to the container’s own read/write layer.
An image registry is a centralized collection of images. dockerd communicates with registries
when you docker pull an image that isn’t already present or when you docker push one of your
own images. The default registry is Docker Hub, which stockpiles images for many popular
applications. Most standard Linux distributions also publish Docker images.
You can run your own registry, or you can add your custom images to private registries that are
hosted on Docker Hub. Any system with Docker can pull images from a registry as long as the
registry server is accessible over the network.
Installation
Docker runs on Linux, macOS, Windows, and FreeBSD, but Linux is the flagship platform.
FreeBSD support is considered experimental. Visit docker.com to choose the installation method
that best suits your environment.
Users in the docker group can control the Docker daemon through its socket, which effectively
gives those users root privileges. This is a significant security risk, so we suggest that you use
sudo to control access to docker rather than adding users to the docker group. In the examples
below, we run docker commands as the root user.
The installation process may not immediately start the daemon. If it isn’t running, start it through
the system’s normal init system. On CentOS, for example, run sudo systemctl start docker.
Client setup
If you’re connecting to a local dockerd and you’re in the docker group or have sudo privileges,
no client configuration is necessary. The docker client connects to dockerd through a local
socket by default. You can modify the default client behavior by setting environment variables.
To connect to a remote dockerd, set the DOCKER_HOST environment variable. The usual
HTTP port for the daemon is 2375, and the TLS version is 2376.
For example:

Always use TLS to communicate with remote daemons. If you use plain HTTP, you may as well
hand out root privileges freely to anyone on your network. You can find additional details on
Docker TLS configuration in Use TLS.
We also suggest enabling the content trust:

This feature validates the integrity and publisher of Docker images. Enabling the content trust
prevents the client from pulling images that are not trusted.
If you run docker through sudo, you can prevent sudo from purging your environment variables
with the -E flag. You can also whitelist specific environment variables by setting the value of the
env_keep variable in /etc/sudoers. For example,
The container experience
To create a container, you need an image to use as a template. The image has all the filesystem
bits needed to run programs. A new installation of Docker has no images. You can review the
available images by browsing hub.docker.com. To download images from the Docker Hub, use
docker pull.

The hex strings are the layers of the union filesystem. If the same layer is used by more than one
image, Docker needs only a single copy. We didn’t request a specific tag, or version, of the
Debian image, so Docker downloaded the “latest” tag by default.

Examine the locally available images with docker images:

This machine has the images for several Linux distributions, including the just-downloaded
Debian image. The same image can be tagged more than once. Notice that debian:jessie and
debian:latest share an image ID; they are two different names for the same image.
Armed with an image, it’s remarkably simple to run a basic container:

What just happened? Docker created a container from the Debian base image and ran the
command /bin/echo "Hello World" inside it. (This is GNU echo, not to be confused with the
echo command built into most shells. They do exactly the same thing.)
The container stops running when the command exits: in this case, immediately after echo
completes. If the “debian” image didn’t already exist locally, the daemon would attempt to
automatically download it before running the command. We didn’t specify a tag, so the “latest”
image was used by default.
We start an interactive shell with the -i and -t flags to docker run. The command below starts a
bash shell within the container and connects the “outer” shell’s I/O channels to it. We also assign
the container a hostname, which is helpful for identifying it in logs. (Otherwise, we’d see the
container’s random ID in log messages.)

The experience is oddly similar to accessing a virtual machine. There is a complete root
filesystem, but the process tree appears nearly empty. /bin/bash is PID 1 because it’s the
command that Docker started in the container.
The result of uname -r is the same both inside and outside the container. That will always be the
case; we show it as a reminder that the kernel is shared.

Processes in containers cannot see other processes running on the system because of PID
namespacing. However, processes on the host can see the containerized processes. The PID of a
process as seen from within a container differs from the PID that is visible from the host.
For real work, you need long-lived containers that run in the background and accept connections
over the network. The following command runs in the background (-d) a container named
“nginx” that’s generated from the official NGINX image. We tunnel port 80 from the host into
the same port within the container:
We didn’t have the “nginx” image locally, so Docker had to pull it from the registry. Once the
image was downloaded, Docker started the container and printed its ID, a unique 65-character
hexadecimal string.
docker ps shows a brief summary of running containers:

We didn’t tell docker what to run in the container, so it used the default command that was
specified when the image was created. The output shows this command to be nginx -g 'daemon
off' which runs nginx as a foreground process rather than as a background daemon. The
container has no init to manage processes, and if the nginx server were started as a daemon, the
container would run but immediately exit when the nginx process forked and exited to enter the
background.
Most server daemons offer a command-line flag that forces them to run in the foreground. If your
software doesn’t run in the foreground or if you need to run several processes in a container, you
can assign a process control system such as supervisord to act as a lightweight init for the
container.
With NGINX running in the container and port 80 mapped from the host, we can make HTTP
requests to the container with curl. NGINX serves a generic HTML landing page by default.

We can use docker logs to view the STDOUT from the container, which in this case is the
NGINX access log. The only traffic is our curl request:
We can also use docker logs -f to get a real-time stream of a container’s output, just like running
tail -f on a growing log file.
docker exec creates a new process in an existing container. For example, to debug or
troubleshoot, we could start an interactive shell in a container:

Container images are as slim as possible and are often missing common administrative utilities.
In this sequence, we first updated the package index and then installed ps, which is part of the
procps package.
The process list reveals the nginx master daemon, an nginx worker, and our bash shell. When
we exit the shell created with docker exec, the container continues to run. If PID 1 exited while
our shell was active, the container would terminate and our shell would also exit.
We can stop and start the container:

docker start starts the container with the same arguments that were passed when the container
was created with docker run.
When containers exit, they remain on the system in a dormant state. You can list all containers,
including those that are stopped, with docker ps -a. It’s not particularly harmful to keep
unneeded old containers lying around, but it’s considered poor hygiene and might cause name
collisions if you reuse container names.
When we finish with the container, we can stop and remove it:
docker run --rm runs a container and removes it automatically when it exits, but this works only
for containers that are not daemonized with -d.
Volumes
The filesystem layers for most containers consist of static application code, libraries, and other
supporting or OS files. The read/write filesystem layer allows containers to make local
modifications to these layers. However, heavy reliance on the overlay filesystem isn’t the best
storage solution for data-intensive applications such as databases. For those kinds of apps,
Docker has the notion of volumes.
A volume is an independent, writable directory within a container that’s maintained separately
from the union filesystem. If the container is removed, the data in the volume persists and can be
accessed from the host. Volumes can also be shared among multiple containers.
We add a volume to a container with docker’s -v argument:

If /data already exists within the container, any files found there are copied to the volume. We
can find the volume on the host by running docker inspect:

The inspect subcommand returns verbose output; we applied a filter so that only the mounted
volumes would be printed. If the container terminates or needs to be removed, we can find the
data volume at the Source directory on the host. The Name looks more like an ID, but it’s useful
if we need to identify the volume later.
For a higher-level overview of volumes on the system, we run docker volume ls.
Docker also supports “bind mounts,” which mount volumes on the host and in containers
simultaneously. For example, we can bind-mount /mnt/data from the host to /data in the
container with the following command:

When the container writes to /data, the changes are also visible in /mnt/data on the host.
For bind-mounted volumes, Docker does not copy existing files from the container’s mount
directory to the volume. As with a traditional filesystem mount, the volume’s contents supersede
the original contents of the container’s mount directory.
When running containers in the cloud, we suggest combining bind mounts with the block storage
options offered by cloud providers. For example, AWS’s Elastic Block Storage volumes make
great backing stores for Docker bind mounts. They have built-in snapshot facilities and can move
among EC2 instances. They can also be copied between nodes, which makes it straightforward
for other systems to retrieve a container’s data. You can leverage EBS’s native snapshotting
facilities to create a simple backup system.
Data volume containers
One helpful pattern that has emerged from real-world experience is the data-only container. Its
purpose is to hold a volume configuration on behalf of other containers so that those containers
can be easily restarted and replaced.
Create a data container by using either a normal volume or a bind-mounted volume from the
host. The data container never actually runs.

Now you can use the data container’s volume in the nginx container:

The “web” container has read and write access to the /data volume of the data-only “nginx-data”
container. “web” can be restarted, removed, or replaced, but so long as it is started with --
volumes-from, the files in /data will remain persistent.
In truth, combining data persistence with containers is a bit of an impedance mismatch.
Containers are meant to be created and removed at a moment’s notice in response to external
events. The ideal is to have a fleet of identical servers that run dockerd, with containers being
deployable to any of the servers. Once you add persistent data volumes, however, the container
becomes coupled to a particular server. As much as we’d like to be living in the ideal world,
many applications do need persistent data.
Docker networks
As discussed in Networking, there is more than one way to connect containers to the network.
During installation, Docker creates three default networking options. List them with docker
network ls:

     See this page for more information about iptables.

In the default bridge mode, containers reside on a private namespaced network within the host.
The bridge connects the host’s network to the container namespace. When you create a container
and map a port from the host with docker run -p, Docker creates iptables rules that route traffic
from the host’s public interface to the container’s interface on the bridge network.

With “host” networking, no separate network namespace is used. Instead, the container shares
the network stack with the host, including all its interfaces. Ports exposed by the container are
also exposed on the interfaces of the host. Some software behaves better when running with host
networking, but this configuration can also lead to port conflicts and other problems.
“None” networking indicates that Docker shouldn’t take any steps whatsoever to configure
networking. It is intended for advanced use cases that have custom networking requirements.
Pass the --net argument to docker run to select a container’s network.

Namespaces and the bridge network
A bridge is a Linux kernel feature that connects two network segments. During installation,
Docker quietly creates a bridge called docker0 on the host. Docker chooses an IP address space
for the far side of the bridge that it calculates as unlikely to collide with any networks reachable
by the host. Each container is given a namespaced virtual network interface that has an IP
address within the bridged network range.
The address selection algorithm is practical but not perfect. Your network may have routes that
aren’t visible from the host. If a collision occurs, the host will no longer be able to access the
remote network that has the overlapping address space, but it will be able to reach local
containers. If you find yourself in this situation or if you need to customize the bridge’s address
space for some other reason, use the --fixed-cidr argument to dockerd.
Network namespaces rely on virtual interfaces, strange constructs that are created in pairs, where
one side is in the host’s namespace and the other is in the container’s. Data flows in one end of
the pair and out the other end, thus connecting the container to the host. In most cases a container
has only one such pair. Exhibit C illustrates the concept.

Exhibit C: A docker bridge network

One half of each pair is visible from the host’s networking stack. For example, here are the
visible interfaces on a CentOS host with just one container running:

The output shows enp0s3, the primary interface on the host, and docker0, the virtual Ethernet
bridge, which uses the 172.17.42.0/16 range. The veth interface is the host side of the virtual
interface pair that connects the container to the bridged network.
The container’s side of the bridged pair is not visible from the host without low-level inspection
of the networking stack. This invisibility is just a side effect of the way network namespaces
work. However, we can find the interface by inspecting the container itself:

The container’s IP address is 172.17.42.13, and the default gateway is the docker0 bridge
interface. (This is the bridge network depicted in Exhibit C.)
In the default bridge configuration, all containers can communicate with one another because
they are all on the same virtual network. However, you can create additional network
namespaces to isolate containers from one another. That way, you can serve multiple, isolated
environments from the same set of container instances.

Network overlays
Docker has lots of additional networking flexibility available to help with advanced use cases.
For example, you can create user-defined private networks that automatically have container
linking. With network overlay software, containers running on separate hosts can route traffic to
each other through a private network address space. Virtual eXtensible LAN (VXLAN)
technology, described in RFC7348, is one system that can be combined with containers to
implement advanced networking capabilities. See the Docker networking documentation for
more details.
Storage drivers
UNIX and Linux systems offer multiple ways to implement a union filesystem. Docker is
technology-agnostic in this regard and filters all filesystem operations through a storage driver
that you select.
The storage driver is configured as part of the docker daemon launch options. Your choice of
storage engine has important consequences for performance and stability, especially in
production environments that support many containers. Table 25.2 shows the current menu of
drivers.

Table 25.2: Docker storage drivers

The VFS driver effectively disables the use of a union filesystem. Docker creates a complete
copy of an image for each container, resulting in higher disk usage and longer container start
times. However, this implementation is simple and robust. If your use case involves long-lived
containers, VFS is a reliable choice. We’ve never encountered a site that uses VFS in production,
however.
Btrfs and ZFS are also not true union filesystems. However, they implement overlays efficiently
and reliably because they natively support copy-on-write filesystem clones. Docker support for
Btrfs and ZFS is currently limited to a few specific Linux distributions (and FreeBSD, for ZFS),
but these are good options to keep an eye on for the future. The less filesystem magic specific to
the container system, the better.
Storage driver selection is a nuanced topic. Unless you or somebody on your team has
comprehensive knowledge of one of these filesystems, we recommend that you stick with the
default for your distribution. The Docker storage driver documentation has further information.
dockerd option editing
You’ll inevitably need to modify some of dockerd’s settings. Tuning options include the storage
engine, DNS options, and the base directory in which images and metadata are stored. Run
dockerd -h to see a complete list of arguments.
You can examine a running daemon’s configuration with docker info:

This is a good place to check that any customizations you made have taken effect.
Docker conforms to the operating system’s native init system for managing daemon processes,
including settings for startup options. For example, on a distribution that uses systemd, the
following command edits the Docker service unit to set a nondefault storage driver, a set of DNS
servers, and a custom address space for the bridge network:

The redundant ExecStart= is not a mistake. It’s a systemd-ism that clears the default setting,
ensuring that the new definition is used exactly as shown. Once the edits are complete, we restart
the daemon with systemctl and review the changes:
On systems running upstart, configure daemon options in /etc/default/docker. For older
systems with SysV-style init, use /etc/sysconfig/docker.
By default, dockerd listens for connections from docker on the UNIX domain socket at
/var/run/docker.sock. To set the daemon to listen on a TLS socket instead, use the daemon
option -H tcp://0.0.0.0:2376. See this page for more details about how to set up TLS.
Image building
You can containerize your own applications by building images that include your application
code. The build process begins with a base image. You add your application by committing any
changes as new layers and saving the image to the local image database. You can then create
containers from the image. You can also push your image to a registry to make it accessible to
other systems running Docker.
Each layer of an image is identified by a cryptographic hash of its contents. The hash serves as a
validation system that lets Docker confirm that no corruption or malicious intervention has
modified the contents of the image.

Choosing a base image
Before creating a custom image, choose a suitable base. The rule of thumb for base images is that
the smaller footprint, the better. The base should have what you need to run your software and
nothing more.

Many of the official images are based on a distribution called Alpine Linux, which weighs in at a
lean 5MB but may have library incompatibilities with some applications. The Ubuntu image is
larger at 188MB, but still small in comparison to a typical server installation. You might be able
to find a base image that has your application run-time components already configured. Default
base images exist for the most common languages, run-times, and application platforms.
Thoroughly vet your base image before you make a final decision. Examine the base’s
Dockerfile (see the next section) and any nonobvious dependencies to avoid surprises. Base
images may have unexpected requirements or include vulnerable versions of software. In some
circumstances, you may need to copy the Dockerfile of a base image and rebuild it to suit your
needs.
When dockerd downloads an image, it downloads only the layers that it doesn’t already have. If
all your applications use the same base, there is less data for the daemon to download and
containers start faster when first run.

Building from a Dockerfile
A Dockerfile is a recipe for building an image. It contains a series of instructions and shell
commands. The docker build command reads the Dockerfile, runs its instructions in sequence,
and commits the result as an image. Software projects that have a Dockerfile usually keep it in
the root directory of the Git repository to facilitate building new images that contain that
software.
The first instruction in a Dockerfile specifies an image to use as the base. Each subsequent
instruction commits a change to a new layer, which is used in turn as the base for the next
instruction. Each layer includes only the changes from the previous layer. The union filesystem
merges the layers to create a container’s root filesystem.
Here is a Dockerfile that builds the official NGINX image for Debian. This is slightly simplified
from github.com/nginxinc/docker-nginx.

NGINX uses the debian:jessie image as a base. After declaring a maintainer, the file sets an
environment variable (NGINX_VERSION) that’s then available to every subsequent instruction in the
Dockerfile and also to any process that runs inside the container once the image has been built
and instantiated. The first RUN instruction does the heavy lifting by installing NGINX from a
package repository.
By default, NGINX sends log data to /var/log/nginx/access.log, but the convention for
containers is to log messages to STDOUT. In the final RUN command, the maintainers use a
symbolic link to redirect the access log to the STDOUT device file. Similarly, errors are
redirected to the container’s STDERR.

The EXPOSE command tells dockerd which ports the container listens on. The exposed ports can
be overridden at container run time with the -p option to docker run.
The final instruction in the NGINX Dockerfile is the command that dockerd should execute
when it starts the container. In this case, the container runs the nginx binary as a foreground
process.
See Table 25.3 for a rundown of common Dockerfile instructions. The reference manual at
docs.docker.com is the authoritative documentation.

Table 25.3: Abbreviated list of Dockerfile instructions
Composing a derived Dockerfile
We can use a very simple Dockerfile to build a derived NGINX image that adds a custom
index.html, replacing the default from the official image:

Other than having a custom index.html, our new image will be identical to the base image.
Here’s how we build the customized image:
We use docker build with -t nginx:ulsah to create an image with the name nginx and the tag
ulsah to distinguish it from the official NGINX image. The trailing dot tells docker build where
to search for the Dockerfile (in this case, the current directory).
Now we can run the image and see our customized index.html:

We can check that our image is listed among the local images by running the command docker
images:

To remove images, run docker rmi. You can’t remove an image until you’ve stopped and
removed any containers that are using it:

Both docker stop and docker rm echo the name of the container they affect, resulting in “nginx-
ulsah” being printed twice.
Registries
A registry is an index of Docker images that dockerd can access through HTTP. When an image
is requested that doesn’t exist on the local disk, dockerd pulls it from the registry. Images are
uploaded to a registry with docker push. Although image operations are initated by the docker
command, only dockerd actually interacts with registries.
Docker Hub is a hosted registry service run by Docker, Inc. It hosts images for many
distributions and open source projects, including all our example Linux systems. The integrity of
these official images is verified through a content trust system, thus ensuring that the image you
download is provided by the vendor whose name is on the label. You can also publish your own
images to Docker Hub for others to use.
Anyone can download public images from Docker Hub, but with a subscription you can also
create private repositories. Once you have a paid account at hub.docker.com, log in from the
command line with docker login to access the private registry so that you can push and pull your
own custom images. You can also trigger an image build whenever a commit is detected on a
GitHub repository.
Docker Hub is not the only subscription-based registry. Others include quay.io, Artifactory,
Google Container Registry, and the Amazon EC2 Container Registry.

Docker Hub is the generous benefactor of the greater image ecosystem, and it also benefits from
being the default registry when nothing more specific is requested. For example, the command

first looks for a local copy of the image. If the image isn’t available locally, the next stop is
Docker Hub. You can tell docker to use a different registry by including a hostname or URL in
the image specification:

Similarly, when building an image to push to a custom registry, you must tag it with the
registry’s URL, and you must authenticate before you push:

Docker saves the login details to a file in your home directory called .dockercfg so that you need
not log in again the next time you interact with the private registry.
For performance or security reasons, you might prefer to run your own image registry. The
registry project is open source (github.com/docker/distribution), and a simple registry is easy to
run as a container:

The registry:2 tag differentiates the latest-generation registry from the previous version, which
implements an API that is incompatible with current versions of Docker.
After running this command, the registry service is now running on port 5000. You can pull an
image from it by qualifying the name of the image you’re seeking:

The registry implements two authentication methods: token and htpasswd. token delegates
authentication to an external provider, which is likely to require custom development effort.
htpasswd is simpler and allows HTTP basic authentication for registry access. Alternatively, you
can set up a proxy (e.g., NGINX) to handle authentication. Always run the registry with TLS.
The default private registry configuration is not appropriate for a large-scale deployment.
Considerations for production use include storage space, authentication and authorization
requirements, image cleanup, and other maintenance tasks.

As your containerized environment expands, your registry will be inundated with new images.
For users working in the cloud, an object store such as Amazon S3 or Google Cloud Storage is
one possible way to store all this data. The registry natively supports both services.
Better yet, you can outsource your registry functions to the registries built into your cloud
platform of choice and have one less thing to worry about. Both Google and Amazon run
managed container registry services. You pay for storage and for the network traffic to upload
and download images.
25.3 CONTAINERS IN PRACTICE
Once you’re comfortable with the general way that containers work, you’ll find that certain
administrative chores need to be approached differently in a containerized world. For example,
how do you manage log files for containerized applications? What are some security
considerations? How do you troubleshoot errors?
The list below offers a few rules of thumb to help you adjust to life inside a container:

      When your application needs to run a scheduled job, don’t run cron in a container.
      Use the cron daemon from the host (or a systemd timer) to schedule a short-lived
      container that runs the job and exits. Containers are meant to be disposable.

      Need to log in and check out what a process is doing? Don’t run sshd in your
      container. Log in to the host with ssh, then use docker exec to open an interactive
      shell.
      If possible, set up your software to accept its configuration information from
      environment variables. You can pass environment variables to containers with the -e
      KEY=value argument to docker run. Or set up many variables at once from a
      separate file with --env-file filename.
      Ignore the commonly dispensed advice “one process per container.” That’s nonsense.
      Split processes into separate containers only when it makes sense to do so. For
      example, it’s usually a good idea to run an application and its database server in
      separate containers because they are separated by clear architectural boundaries. But
      it’s perfectly OK to have more than one process in a container when that’s
      appropriate. Use common sense.
      Focus on the automatic creation of containers for your environment. Write scripts to
      build images and upload them to registries. Make sure that software deployment
      procedures involve replacing containers, not updating them in place.

      On that note, avoid maintaining containers. If you’re accessing a container manually
      to fix something, figure out what the problem is, resolve it in the image, then replace
      the container. Immediately update your automation tooling if necessary.
      Stuck? Ask questions on the Docker User mailing list, on the Docker Community
      Slack, or in the #docker IRC channel on freenode.

Everything an application needs to function should be available within its container: the
filesystem, network access, and kernel facilities. The only processes that run in a container are
the ones that you start. It is atypical of containers to run normal OS services such as cron,
rsyslogd, and sshd, although it is certainly possible to do so. Those duties are best left to the host
OS. If you find yourself needing these services within a container, reconsider your problem and
see if you can solve it in a more container-friendly way.
Logging
UNIX and Linux applications traditionally use syslog (now the rsyslogd daemon) to process log
messages. Syslog handles log filtering, sorting, and routing to remote systems. Some applications
don’t use syslog and instead write directly to log files.
Containers do not run syslog. Instead, Docker collects the logs for you through logging drivers.
Container processes need only write logs to STDOUT and errors to STDERR. Docker collects
those messages and sends them to a configurable destination.
If your software supports logging only to files, apply the same technique as the NGINX example
on this page: create symbolic links from log files to /dev/stdout and /dev/stderr when you build
the image.
Docker forwards the log entries it receives to a selectable logging driver. Table 25.4 lists some of
the more common and useful logging drivers.

Table 25.4: Docker logging drivers

When using json-file or journald, you can access log data from the command line through docker
logs container-id.
You set the default logging driver for dockerd with the --log-driver option. You can also assign
a logging driver at container run time with docker run --logging-driver. Some drivers accept
additional options. For example, the --log-opt max-size option configures log file rotation for the
json-file driver. Use this option to avoid filling up the disk with log files. Refer to the Docker
logging documentation for complete details.
Security advice
Container security relies on processes within containers being unable to access files, processes,
and other resources outside their sandbox. Vulnerabilities that allow attackers to escape
containers—known as breakout attacks—are serious but rare. The code that underlies container
isolation has been in the Linux kernel since at least 2008; it’s mature and stable. As with bare-
metal or virtualized systems, insecure configurations are a far more likely source of compromises
than are vulnerabilities in the isolation layer.
Docker maintains an interesting list of known software vulnerabilities that are and are not
mitigated by containerization. See docs.docker.com/engine/security/non-events.

Restrict access to the daemon
Above all, protect the docker daemon. Because dockerd necessarily runs with elevated
privileges, it’s trivial for any user with access to the daemon to gain full root access to the host.

The following sequence of commands demonstrates the risk:

This transcript shows that any user in the docker group can mount the host’s root filesystem to a
container and gain full control of its contents. This is just one of many possible ways to elevate
privileges through Docker.

If you use the default UNIX domain socket to communicate with the daemon, add only trusted
users to the docker group, which has access to the socket. Better yet, control access through
sudo.

Use TLS

     See this page for information about TLS.

We said it before, and we’ll say it again: if the docker daemon must be remotely accessible
(dockerd -H), require the use of TLS to encrypt network communications and to mutually
authenticate the client and server.
Setting up TLS involves having a certificate authority issue certificates to the docker daemon and
clients. Once the key pairs and certificate authority are in place, actually enabling TLS for
docker and dockerd is a simple matter of supplying the right command-line arguments. Table
25.5 lists the essential settings.

Table 25.5: TLS arguments common to docker and dockerd

Successful use of TLS relies on a mature certificate management processes. Certificate issuance,
revocation, and expiration are a few of the issues that need attention. Heavy is the burden of a
security-conscious administrator.

Run processes as unprivileged users
Processes in containers should run as nonroot users, just as they should on a full-fledged
operating system. This practice limits an attacker’s ability to launch breakout attacks. When you
are writing a Dockerfile, use the USER instruction to run future commands in the image under the
named user account.

Use a read-only root filesystem
To further restrict containers, you can specify docker run --read-only, thereby limiting the
container to a read-only root filesystem. This works well for stateless services that never need to
write. You can also mount a read/write volume that your process can modify, but leave the root
filesystem read-only.

Limit capabilities

     See this page for more information about Linux capabilities.

The Linux kernel defines 40 separate capabilities that can be assigned to processes. By default,
Docker containers are granted a large subset of these. You can enable an even greater subset by
starting a container with the --privileged flag. However, this option disables many of the
isolation benefits of using Docker. You can tune the specific capabilities that are available to
containerized processes with the --cap-add and --cap-drop arguments:

You can also drop all privileges and add back just the ones you need:
Secure images
The Docker content trust feature validates the authenticity and integrity of images in a registry.
The publisher of the image signs it with a secret key, and the registry validates it with the
corresponding public key. This process ensures that the image was produced by the expected
creator. You can use content trust to sign your own images or to validate the images in a remote
registry. The feature is available on Docker Hub and on some third party registries, such as
Artifactory.
Unfortunately, most of the content on Docker Hub is unsigned and should be considered
untrustworthy. Indeed, most images on the Hub are never patched, updated, or audited in any
way.
This lack of a proper chain of trust associated with many Docker images is representative of the
miserable state of security on the Internet in general. It’s quite common for software packages to
depend on third party libraries with little or no concern being given to the trustworthiness of the
content that’s pulled in. Some software repositories have no cryptographic signatures
whatsoever. It’s also common to find articles that actively encourage disabling validation.
Responsible system administrators are highly suspicious of unknown and untrusted software
repositories.
Debugging and troubleshooting
Containers bring with them a particularly heinous complement of obscure debugging techniques.
When an application is containerized, its symptoms become more difficult to characterize and
their root causes more puzzling. Many applications can run without modification inside a
container, but in some scenarios they may behave differently. You might also encounter bugs
within Docker itself. This section helps navigate these treacherous waters.
Errors usually manifest themselves in log files, so that’s the first place to look for information.
Use the advice in Logging to configure logging for containers, and always review the logs when
you encounter issues.
If you experience problems with a running container, try

to open an interactive shell. From there you can attempt to reproduce the problem, examine the
filesystem for evidence, and search for configuration errors.
If you see errors related to the docker daemon or if you have trouble starting it, search the issues
list at github.com/moby/moby. You may find others that have the same problem, and one of them
may have identified a potential fix or workaround.
Docker doesn’t automatically clean up images or containers. When neglected, these remnants can
consume an inordinate amount of disk space. If your container workload is predictable, configure
a cron job to clean up by running docker system prune and docker image prune.

A related annoyance are “dangling” volumes, volumes that were once attached to a container but
for which the container has since been removed. Volumes are independent of containers, so any
files within them will continue to consume disk space until the volumes are destroyed. You can
use the following incantation to clean out orphaned volumes:

Base images you depend on may have a VOLUME instruction in their Dockerfile. If you don’t
notice this case, you might end up with a full disk after running a few containers from that image.
You can show the volumes associated with a container by running docker inspect:
25.4 CONTAINER CLUSTERING AND MANAGEMENT
One of the great promises of containerization is the prospect of co-locating many applications on
the same host while avoiding interdependencies and conflicts, thereby making more efficient use
of servers. This is an appealing vision, but the Docker engine is responsible only for individual
containers, not for answering the broader question of how to run many containers on distributed
hosts in a highly available configuration.
Configuration management tools such as Chef, Puppet, Ansible, and Salt all support Docker.
They can ensure that hosts run a certain set of containers with declared configurations. They also
support image building, registry interfaces, network and volume management, and other
container-related chores. These tools centralize and standardize container configuration, but they
do not solve the problem of conducting the deployment of many containers across a network of
servers. (Note that although configuration management systems are useful for a variety of
container-related tasks, you will rarely need to use configuration management inside of
containers.)

For network-wide container deployments, you need container orchestration software, also known
as container scheduling or container management software. An entire symphony of open source
and commercial tooling is available to handle large numbers of containers. Such tools are crucial
for running containers at scale in a production context.
To understand how these systems work, think of the servers on the network as a farm of compute
capacity. Each node in the farm offers CPU, memory, disk, and network resources to the
scheduler. When the scheduler receives a request to run a container (or set of containers), it
places the container on a node that has sufficient spare resources to meet the container’s needs.
Because the scheduler knows where containers have been placed, it can also assist in routing
network requests to the correct nodes within the cluster. Administrators interact with the
container management system rather than dealing with any individual container engine. Exhibit
D illustrates this architecture.

Exhibit D: Basic container scheduler architecture
Container management systems supply several helpful features:

      Scheduling algorithms select the best node in light of a job’s requested resources and
      the utilization of the cluster. For example, a job with high bandwidth requirements
      might be slotted onto a node with a 10 Gb/s network interface.
      Formal APIs allow programs to submit jobs to the cluster, opening the door to
      integration with external tools. It’s easy to use container management systems in
      conjunction with CI/CD systems to simplify software deployments.

      Container placement can accommodate the needs of high-availability configurations.
      For example, an application may need to run on host nodes in several distinct
      geographical regions.
      Health monitoring is built in. The system can terminate and reschedule unhealthy
      jobs and can route jobs away from unhealthy nodes.
      It’s easy to add or remove capacity. If your compute farm doesn’t have enough
      resources available to satisfy demand, you can simply add another node. This facility
      is especially well suited to cloud environments.
      The container management system can interface with a load balancer to route
      network traffic from external clients. This facility obviates the complex
      administrative process of manually configuring network access to containerized
      applications.

One of the most challenging tasks in a distributed container system is mapping service names to
containers. Remember that containers are typically ephemeral in nature and may have dynamic
ports assigned. How do you map a friendly, persistent service name to multiple containers,
especially when the nodes and ports change frequently? This problem is known as service
discovery, and container management systems have various solutions.
It helps to be familiar with the underlying container execution engine before diving into
orchestration tooling. All the container management systems we’re aware of rely on Docker as
the default container execution engine, although some systems also support other engines.
A synopsis of container management software
Despite their relative youth, the container management tools we discuss below are mature
beyond their years and can be considered production grade. In fact, many are already used in
production at high-profile, large-scale technology companies. Most are open source and have
sizable user communities. Based on recent trends, we anticipate substantial development in this
area in the coming years.
In the upcoming sections, we highlight the functionality and features of the most widely used
systems. We also mention their integration points and common use cases.
Kubernetes
Kubernetes—sometimes shortened to “k8s” because there are eight letters between the leading
“k” and the trailing “s”—has emerged as a leader in the container management space. It
originated within Google and was launched by some of the same developers that worked on
Borg, Google’s internal cluster manager. Kubernetes was released as an open source project in
2014 and now has more than a thousand active contributors. It has the most features and the
fastest development cycle of any system we’re aware of.
Kubernetes consists of a few separate services that integrate to form a cluster. The basic building
blocks include

      The API server, for operator requests
      A scheduler, for placing tasks
      A controller manager, for tracking the state of the cluster
      The Kubelet, an agent that runs on all cluster nodes
      cAdvisor, for monitoring container metrics
      A proxy, for routing incoming requests to the appropriate container

The first three items on this list run on a set of masters (which can optionally serve dual duty as
nodes) for high availability. The Kubelet and cAdvisor processes run on each node, handling
requests from the controller manager and reporting statistics about the health of their tasks.
In Kubernetes, containers are deployed as a “pod” which contains one or more containers. All
containers in a pod are guaranteed to be co-located on the same node. Pods are assigned a
cluster-wide unique IP address, and they are labeled for identification and placement purposes.

Pods are not meant to be long-lived. If a node dies, the controller schedules a replacement pod on
a different node with a new IP address. Therefore, you cannot use the address of a pod as a
durable name.
Services are collections of related pods with an address that is guaranteed not to change. If a pod
within a service dies or fails a health check, the service removes that pod from its rotation. You
can also use the built-in DNS server to assign resolvable names to services.
Kubernetes has integrated support for service discovery, secret management, deployment, and
pod autoscaling. It has pluggable networking options to enable container network overlays. It can
support stateful applications by migrating volumes among nodes as needed. Its CLI tool,
kubectl, is one of the most intuitive that we’ve ever worked with. In short, it has more advanced
features than we can possibly cover in this short section.
Although Kubernetes has the most active and engaged community and the most advanced
features, those assets are accompanied by a steep learning curve. Recent versions have improved
the experience for first-time users, but a full-fledged, customized Kubernetes deployment is not
for the timid. Production k8s deployments impose a substantial administrative and operational
burden.
The Google Container Engine service is implemented with Kubernetes, and it offers one of the
best experiences for teams that want to run containerized workloads without the operational
overhead of cluster management.
Mesos and Marathon
Mesos is an entirely different breed. It was conceived at the University of California at Berkeley
around 2009 as a generic cluster manager. It quickly made its way to Twitter, where it now runs
on thousands of nodes. Today, Mesos is a top-level project from the Apache Foundation and
boasts a large number of enterprise users.
The major conceptual entities in Mesos are masters, agents, and frameworks. A master is a proxy
between agents and frameworks. Masters relay offers of system resources from agents to
frameworks. If a framework has a task to run, it chooses an offer and instructs the master to run
the task. The master sends along the task details to the agent.
Marathon is a Mesos framework that deploys and manages containers. It includes a handsome
user interface for managing applications and a simple, RESTful API. To run an application, you
write a request definition in JSON format and submit it to Marathon through the API or the UI.
Because it’s an external framework, the deployment of Marathon is flexible. Marathon can run
on the same node as the master for convenience, or it can run externally.
Support for multiple, coexisting frameworks is Mesos’s biggest differentiator. Apache Spark, the
big-data processing tool, and Apache Cassandra, a NoSQL database, both offer Mesos
frameworks, thus allowing you to use Mesos agents as nodes in a Spark or Cassandra cluster.
Chronos is a framework for scheduled jobs, rather like a version of cron that runs on a cluster
instead of an individual machine. The ability to run so many frameworks on the same set of
nodes is a nice feature and helps create a unified and centralized experience for administrators.

Unlike Kubernetes, Mesos does not come with batteries included. For example, load balancing
and traffic routing are pluggable options that depend on your preferred solution. Marathon
includes a tool, the Marathon-lb, that implements this service, or you can choose your own.
We’ve had success using HashiCorp’s Consul and HAProxy. Designing and implementing an
exact solution is left as an exercise for the administrator.
Like Kubernetes, Mesos requires some contemplation to understand and use. Mesos and most of
its frameworks rely on Apache Zookeeper for cluster coordination. Zookeeper is somewhat
difficult to administer and is known for complex failure cases. In addition, a high-availability
Mesos cluster requires a minimum of three nodes, which may be an onerous burden at some
sites.
Docker Swarm
Not to be left behind, Docker offers Swarm, a container cluster manager built directly into
Docker. The current incarnation of Swarm emerged in 2016 as an answer to the growing
popularity of Mesos, Kubernetes, and other cluster managers that used Docker containers under
the hood. Container orchestration is now a major focus for Docker, Inc.
Swarm is easier to get started with than is Mesos or Kubernetes. Any node that runs Docker can
join the swarm as a worker node, and any worker node can also be a manager. There is no need
to run separate nodes as masters. (Strictly speaking, this is true for Kubernetes and Mesos as
well, but we’ve found it to be common practice to separate masters from agents in high-
availability configurations.)
Starting a swarm is as simple as running docker swarm init. There are no additional processes to
manage and configure, and there is no state to track. It works out of the box.
You can use familiar docker commands to run services (as in Kubernetes, collections of
containers) on the swarm. You declare the state you want to achieve (“three containers running
my web application”) and Swarm schedules the tasks on the cluster. It automatically handles
failure states and zero-downtime updates.

Swarm has a built-in load balancer that adjusts automatically as containers are added or removed.
The Swarm load balancer is not as full-featured as tools such as NGINX or HAProxy, but on the
other hand, it doesn’t require any administrative attention.
Swarm supplies a secure Docker experience by default. All connections between nodes in a
swarm are TLS-encrypted, and no configuration is required on the part of the administrator. This
is a major differentiator for Swarm when compared to its competitors.
AWS EC2 Container Service
AWS offers ECS, a container management service designed for EC2 instances (AWS’s native
virtual servers). In a manner reminiscent of many Amazon services, AWS launched ECS with
minimal functionality but has steadily enhanced it over time. ECS has matured into a fine choice
for sites that are already invested in AWS and want to stick to E-Z mode.
ECS is a “mostly managed” service. The cluster manager components are operated by AWS.
Users run EC2 instances that have Docker and the ECS agent installed. The agent connects to the
central ECS API and registers its resource availability. To run a task on your ECS cluster, you
submit a task definition in JSON format through the API. ECS then schedules the task on one of
your nodes.
Because the service is mostly managed, the barrier to entry is low. You can get started with ECS
in just a few minutes. The service scales well to at least hundreds of nodes and thousands of
concurrent tasks.
ECS integrates with other AWS services. For example, load balancing among multiple tasks,
along with the requisite service discovery, are handled by the Application Load Balancer service.
You can add resource capacity to your ECS cluster by taking advantage of EC2 autoscaling. ECS
also integrates with AWS’s Identity and Access Manager service to grant permissions for your
container tasks to interact with other services.

One of the most polished parts of ECS is the included Docker image registry. You can upload
Docker images to the EC2 Container Registry, where they’re stored and made available to any
Docker client, whether it’s running on ECS or not. If you’re running containers on AWS, use the
container registry in the same region as your instances. You’ll achieve far better reliability and
performance than with any other registry.
The ECS user interface, although functional, shares the limitations of other AWS interfaces. The
AWS CLI tool has complete support for the ECS API. For management of applications on ECS,
we recommend turning to third party, open source tools such as Empire
(github.com/remind101/empire) or Convox (convox.com) for a more streamlined experience.
25.5 RECOMMENDED READING
DOCKER, INC. Official Docker Documentation. docs.docker.com. Docker has good documentation.
It’s comprehensive and usually up to date.
MATTHIAS, KARL, AND SEAN KANE. Docker Up & Running. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media,
2015. This book focuses on running Docker containers in production environments.

MOUAT, ADRIAN. Using Docker: Developing and Deploying software with Containers.
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2016. This book covers topics from basic to advanced and
includes plenty of examples.
TURNBULL, JAMES. The Docker Book. www.dockerbook.com.
The Container Solutions blog at container-solutions.com/blog includes technical HOWTOs, best
practices, and interviews with experts in the container space.
