26 Continuous Integration and Delivery

Until the past decade or so, updating software was a hair-pulling, time-consuming exercise in
frustration. Release processes typically involved ad hoc, home-grown scripts that were invoked
in enigmatic order and saddled with outdated and incomplete documentation. Testing—if it
existed at all—was performed by a quality assurance team that was far removed from the
development cycle and often became a major obstacle to shipping code. Administrators,
developers, and project managers would plan days-long marathons for the final stages of
releasing updates to live users. Service outages were often scheduled weeks in advance.
Given this unsavory context, it should come as no surprise that some very smart people were
working diligently to improve the situation. After all, where some see only problems, others see
opportunity.
At top of mind is Martin Fowler, an oracle of the software industry and chief scientist of the
influential development shop ThoughtWorks. In an insightful article (goo.gl/Y2lisI), Fowler
describes continuous integration as “a software development practice where members of a team
integrate their work frequently,” thus removing one of the major pain points of software work:
the tiresome task of reconciling code fragments that have diverged dramatically over a long
period of independent development. The practice of continuous integration is now ubiquitous
among software development teams.
Hot on the heels of this innovation came continuous delivery, which is similar in concept but
which targets a separate goal: reliably deploying updated software to live systems. Continuous
delivery embraces the release of small, incremental changes to IT infrastructure. If something
breaks (that is, if a “regression” is introduced), it becomes straightforward to isolate and resolve
the issue because the changes between versions are small. At the extreme end, some sites aim to
deploy new code to users multiple times per day. Bugs and security issues can be resolved in
hours rather than weeks.
In combination, continuous integration and continuous delivery (henceforth denoted CI/CD)
encompass the tools and processes needed to facilitate frequent, incremental software and
configuration updates.

     See this page for more comments on DevOps.

CI/CD is a pillar of the DevOps philosophy. It’s the glue that holds together developers and
operations folks. It is as much a business asset as a technical innovation. Once introduced, CI/CD
becomes the bedrock of an IT organization because it imposes logic and organization on release
processes that were previously chaotic.
Sysadmins are central to the design, implementation, and ongoing maintenance of CI/CD
systems. Administrators install, configure, and operate the tools that make CI/CD function. They
are responsible for ensuring that software build processes are fast and reliable.
Testing is an important element of CI/CD, and although administrators may not write the tests
(though they sometimes do!), they are often responsible for setting up the infrastructure and the
systems on which the tests are performed. Perhaps most importantly, it is ultimately system
administrators who are responsible for deployments, the “delivery” component of CI/CD.

An effective CI/CD system is implemented not with a solitary tool but rather with a collection of
software that works in unison to form a cohesive environment. Myriad open source and
commercial tools are available to coordinate the various elements of CI/CD. These coordination
tools rely on other software packages to do the actual work (e.g., compiling code or setting up
servers in a particular configuration). Indeed, there are so many options that the initial approach
to CI/CD can be overwhelming. If nothing else, the recent proliferation of tools in this space is
evidence of CI/CD’s growing importance to the industry.
In this chapter we attempt to navigate the maze of CI/CD concepts, terminology, and tools. We
cover the basics of a CI/CD pipeline, the various types of testing and their relevance to CI/CD,
the practice of running multiple environments in parallel, and some of the most popular open
source tools. At the end of the chapter, we dissect an example CI/CD pipeline that uses some of
the most popular tools. When you’re finished with this chapter, you should understand some of
the principles and techniques that go into creating a powerful, flexible CI/CD system.
26.1 CI/CD ESSENTIALS
Many terms related to CI/CD sound similar and have overlapping meanings. So let’s first take a
closer look at the differences between continuous integration, delivery, and deployment:

      Continuous integration is the process of collaborating on a shared code base, merging
      disparate code changes into a version control system, and automatically creating and
      testing builds.
      Continuous delivery is the process of automatically deploying builds to
      nonproduction environments after the continuous integration process completes.

      Continuous deployment closes the loop by deploying to live systems that serve real
      users without any operator intervention.

Continuous deployment without any human supervision can be intimidating, but that’s precisely
the point: the idea is to reduce the fear factor by deploying as often as possible, eliminating more
and more issues until the team has enough confidence in the testing and tooling to enable
automatic releases.
Continuous deployment need not be the ultimate goal of all sites. There may be compliance or
risk reasons to pause at any point in the pipeline. If that’s the case, you can still benefit from
making each stage of the process as simple as possible for the human who pushes the final
button. Every organization should choose its own boundaries.
Principles and practices
Business agility is one of the key benefits of CI/CD. Continuous deployment facilitates the
release of well-tested features to production in minutes or hours instead of weeks or months.
Because every change is built, tested, and deployed immediately, the delta between versions is
much smaller. And that decreases the risk of deployment and helps narrow the range of possible
root causes if something goes wrong. Rather than staging a small number of big-bang
deployments per year, you might find yourself releasing new code multiple times per week or
even per day.
CI/CD stresses the release of more features, more often. This goal is achievable only when
developers write and commit code in smaller chunks. To realize continuous integration,
developers need to push code changes at least once per day after running tests locally.
For administrators, CI/CD processes greatly reduce the amount of time spent preparing for and
implementing releases. They also reduce the time spent debugging problems when deployments
inevitably fail. Few things are more satisfying than watching a new feature release itself to
production without any human intervention.
The next sections cover some basic rules of thumb to keep in mind as you develop your CI/CD
processes.

Use revision control
All code should be tracked in a source control system. We recommend Git, but there are lots of
options. Most software development teams use source control as a matter of course.
For sites that embrace the infrastructure-as-code concept (as we demonstrate in the section
CI/CD in practice), you can track infrastructure-related code alongside your applications. You
can even store documentation and configuration settings in source control.
Make sure version control is the single source of truth. Nothing can be managed manually or off
the record.

Build once, deploy often
A CI/CD pipeline begins with a build. The output of the build (the “artifact”) is used from that
point forward for testing and deployment. The only way to confirm that a specific build is ready
to go to production is to run all tests against that build. Deploy the same artifact to at least one or
two environments that match production as closely as possible.

Automate end-to-end
Building, testing, and deploying code without manual intervention is the key to reliable and
reproducible updates. Even if you’re not planning to deploy code continuously to production, the
final production deployment step should run fully unattended after being triggered by a human.
Build every integration commit
An integration merges changes made by multiple developers or teams of developers. The product
is a composite code base that incorporates everyone’s updates.
An integration does not randomly snatch work in progress out of developers’ hands and stick it in
the mainline code base; that’s a recipe for disaster. Individual developers are responsible for
managing their own development stream. When they’re ready, they initiate an integration.
Integrations occur as frequently as possible.
Integrations are performed through the source control system. The exact workflow varies.
Individual developers might be responsible for merging their work back to the trunk, or a
designated release overseer might integrate several developers or teams at once. The merge
process can be largely automated, but there’s always the potential for two sets of changes to
conflict. That situation requires human intervention.
The idea behind continuous integration is that commits to the revision control system’s
integration branch automatically result in a build. The “integration branch” part is important
because source control serves several purposes. In addition to being a vehicle for collaboration
and integration, it’s also useful as a backup system, as a checkpoint for work in progress, and as a
system that lets developers work on several updates while keeping the changes related to those
updates logically separate. Therefore, only commits to the integration branch result in a build.

Frequent integrations make it easy to trace a broken build back to the exact lines of code that
caused the problem. The revision control system can then determine the identity of the
responsible developer. But note: a broken build should carry little or no stigma. The goal is just
to get the build running again. Encourage a blame-free culture within your teams.

Share responsibility
When something goes wrong, the pipeline needs to be fixed. No new code can be pushed until
the previous problem has been resolved. It’s the equivalent of halting the assembly line in a
factory. It is the responsibility of the entire team to fix the build before resuming development
work.
CI/CD shouldn’t be a mysterious system that runs in the background and occasionally sends
email when something is broken. Every team member should have access to the CI/CD interface
to view dashboards and logs. Some sites create humorous widgets such as RGB lighting fixtures
that act as a visual indicator of the pipeline’s current status.

Build fast, fix fast
CI/CD is designed to yield feedback as quickly as possible, ideally within minutes after pushing
code to source control. This rapid response guarantees that developers pay attention to the result.
If the build fails, the developers will likely be able to fix the problem quickly because the
changes they just committed are fresh in their minds. Slow build processes are
counterproductive. Strive to eliminate redundant and time-consuming steps. Ensure that your
build system has enough agents, and that the agents have sufficient system resources to build
quickly.

Audit and verify
Part of the CI/CD system includes a detailed history of every software release, including its
progression from development to production. This auditability can be useful to ensure that only
authorized builds are deployed. The settings and event timelines related to each environment can
be irrefutably verified.
Environments
Applications do not run in isolation. They depend on external resources such as databases,
caches, network filesystems, DNS records, remote HTTP APIs, other applications, and external
network services. An execution environment includes all these resources and anything else that
the application needs so it can run. Building and maintaining such environments is a target of
substantial administrative attention.
Most sites run at least three environments, listed here in ascending order of importance:

      Development (“dev” for short), for integrating updates from multiple developers,
      testing infrastructure changes, and checking for obvious failures. Development is
      used mostly by the technical staff and not by business types or end users. In the
      context of CI/CD, the development environment may be created and reset multiple
      times per day.
      Staging (or “stage”), for manual and automated testing and for further vetting of
      changes and software updates. Some organizations call this the “test” environment.
      Testers, product owners, and other business stakeholders use the staging environment
      to review new features and bug fixes. Staging can also be used for penetration testing
      and other security checks.
      Production (“prod”), for implementing service for real users. The production
      environment usually includes extensive measures to ensure high performance and
      strong security. An outage in production is an all-hands-on-deck emergency that must
      be resolved immediately.

A typical CI/CD system promotes software through each of these environments in succession,
filtering out errors and software defects along the way. You can deploy to production with
confidence because you know that changes have already been tested in two other environments.

Environment parity is a subject of some complexity for administrators. The purpose of the
nonproduction or “lower” environments is to prepare and scrutinize changes of all types before
they are made in production. Substantive differences among environments can result in
unforeseen incompatibilities that might ultimately cause degraded performance, downtime, or
even the destruction of data.
For example, imagine that the development and staging environments have undergone an
operating system upgrade, but production still runs the older OS version. It’s time for a software
deployment. The new software is thoroughly tested in dev and stage, and it seems to work fine.
However, an unexpected incompatibility becomes evident during the production rollout because
the older version of a certain library is missing functionality used by the new code.
This scenario is quite common, and it’s one reason why administrators must be vigilant about
keeping environments in sync. The closer that lower environments match production, the higher
your chances of maintaining high availability and delivering software successfully.
Running multiple environments at full capacity can be expensive and time-consuming. Because
production serves far more users than the lower environments, it’s usually necessary to run a
larger number of more expensive systems in that environment. Production data sets tend to be
larger, and the provisioned disk space and server size are beefed up to compensate.

Even this type of difference among environments can cause unanticipated problems. A load
balancer misconfiguration that didn’t matter in dev or stage may reveal a defect, or a database
query that runs quickly in dev and stage might turn out to be far slower when applied to
production-scale data.
Matching production capacity in lower environments is a tricky problem. Strive to have at least
one lower environment that has redundancy in all the same places that production does (e.g.,
multiple web servers, fully replicated databases, and matching failover strategies for any
clustered systems). It’s fine for the staging servers to be smaller in size, although any tests you
run to check performance will not reflect production numbers.
For best results, data sets in lower environments should be similar in size and content to those of
production. One strategy is to create nightly snapshots of all relevant production data and copy it
to the lower environment. For compliance and good security hygiene, sensitive user data must be
anonymized before it’s used this way. For truly massive data sets that are not practical to copy,
import a smaller but still meaningful sample.
Despite your best efforts, lower environments will never be exactly like the production
environment. Some configuration settings (such as credentials, URLs, addresses, and hostnames)
will differ. Use configuration management to track these configuration items among
environments. When the CI/CD system runs a deployment, consult your source of truth to find
the relevant configuration for that environment and make sure that all environments are deployed
in the same way.
Feature flags
A feature flag enables or disables an application feature depending on the value of a
configuration setting. Developers can build support for feature flags into their software. You can
use feature flags to enable certain features in specific environments. For example, you can enable
a feature for the staging environment while keeping it disabled in production until it’s fully tested
and ready for the user base.
For instance, consider an e-commerce application that has a shopping cart. The business wants to
run a promotion that requires some changes to the code. The development team can build the
feature and release it to all three environments in advance, but enable it only on dev and stage.
When the business is ready to advertise and activate the promotion, enabling the feature becomes
a simple, low-risk configuration change rather than a software release. If the feature has a bug,
it’s easy to disable it without updating the software.
26.2 PIPELINES
A CI/CD pipeline is a series of steps, called “stages,” that run in sequence. Each stage is
essentially a script that performs tasks specific to your software project.
At the most basic level, a CI/CD pipeline

      Reliably builds and packages software

      Runs a series of automated tests to search for bugs and configuration errors
      Deploys code to one or more environments, culminating in production

Exhibit A illustrates the stages in a simple (yet mature) CI/CD pipeline.

Exhibit A: A basic CI/CD pipeline

The following sections break down the three stages in further detail.
The build process
A build is a snapshot of the current status of a software project. It’s typically the first stage of any
CI/CD pipeline, possibly after a code analysis stage that monitors code quality and searches for
security risks. The build step transforms the code into an installable piece of software. Builds can
be triggered by a commit to the integration branch of the code repository or they can run on a
regular schedule or on demand.
Every pipeline run starts with a build, but not every build reaches production. Once a build
passes testing, it becomes a “release candidate.” If the release candidate is actually deployed to
production, it becomes a “release.” If you do continuous deployment, every release candidate is
also a release. Exhibit B illustrates these categories.

Exhibit B: Builds, release candidates, and releases

The precise steps of the build process depend on the language and software. For a program in C,
C++, or Go, the build process is a compilation, often initiated by make, that results in an
executable binary. For languages that do not require compilation, such as Python or Ruby, the
build stage might involve packaging the project with all relevant dependencies and assets,
including libraries, images, templates, and markup files. Some builds might involve only
configuration changes.
The output of the build stage is a “build artifact.” The nature of that artifact depends on the
software and the configuration of the rest of the pipeline. Table 26.1 lists some of the common
types of artifacts. Whatever the format, the artifact is the basis for deployments throughout the
rest of the pipeline.

Table 26.1: Common types of build artifacts
Build artifacts are saved to an artifact repository. The type of repository depends on the type of
artifact. At its simplest, a repository can be a directory on a remote server that’s accessible
through SFTP or NFS. It can also be a yum or APT repository, a Docker image repository, or, in
the cloud, an object store such as an AWS S3 bucket. The repository must be available to all the
systems that need to download and install the artifact during a deployment.
Testing
Each stage in a CI/CD pipeline runs tests to catch buggy code and bad builds so that the code that
makes it through to production is free of defects (or at least, as free as possible). Testing is the
linchpin of this process. It engenders trust that a release is ready to deploy.
If a build fails any test, the remaining stages of the pipeline are pointless. The team must
determine why the build failed and address the underlying issue. Because builds are created for
every code push, it’s easy to isolate the problem to the latest commit. The fewer lines of code
changed between builds, the easier the problem’s isolation.
Failures do not always stem from software bugs. They can occur because of network conditions
or infrastructure errors that require administrative attention. If the application depends on outside
resources, such as third party APIs, there can be upstream failures in the external resource. Some
tests can run in isolation, but other tests require the same infrastructure and data that will be
present in production.
Consider adding each of the following types of tests to your CI/CD pipeline:

      Static code analysis examines code for syntax errors, duplication, violations of
      coding guidelines, security problems, or excessive code complexity. These checks are
      fast and do not involve executing the actual code.

      Unit tests are written by the same developers who write the application code. They
      reflect the developer’s view of how the code is supposed to function. The intent is to
      test the input and output of every method and function (unit) in the code. “Code
      coverage” is a (sometimes misleading) metric that describes what portion of the code
      is being unit-tested.
      Integration tests take unit tests one step further by running the application in its
      intended execution environment. Integration tests run the application with its
      underlying frameworks and with external dependencies such as outside APIs,
      databases, queues, and caches.
      Acceptance tests simulate typical use. In contrast to unit tests, acceptance tests reflect
      a user’s point of view. For web-based software, this stage might include remote-
      controlling browser page loads through tools such as Selenium. For mobile software,
      the build artifact might go to a device farm that runs the app on many different
      mobile devices. Different browsers and versions make acceptance tests challenging to
      create, but in the end, these tests have meaningful results.
      Performance tests search for performance problems introduced by the latest code. To
      identify bottlenecks, these so-called stress tests should invoke the application within a
      perfect clone of your production environment, with real traffic patterns. Tools such as
      JMeter or Gatling can simulate thousands of concurrent users interacting with an
      application in a programmed pattern. To gain the most from performance testing,
      ensure that monitoring and graphing instrumentation are in place. Those tools clarify
      both the application’s typical performance and its behavior under a new build.
      Infrastructure tests go hand-in-hand with programmatically provisioned cloud
      infrastructure. If you create temporary cloud infrastructure as part of your CI/CD
      pipeline, you can write test cases to verify the proper configuration and operation of
      the infrastructure itself. Does the system run through configuration management
      successfully? Are only the expected daemons running? Serverspec (serverspec.org) is
      one interesting tool in this space.

Depending on the characteristics of your project, some tests are more important than others. For
example, software that implements a REST API has no need for browser-based acceptance tests.
Instead, you’ll likely focus on integration tests. On the other hand, for shopping cart software,
browser tests for all the important user paths (catalog, product pages, cart, checkout) are
mandatory. Consider the needs of your project and implement testing accordingly.

Sometimes the code that’s difficult to test is also the most likely to have defects. Your code may
have 85% code coverage through unit tests (which is quite high by industry standards), but if the
most complex code isn’t tested, bugs might be missed. Code coverage alone is not an adequate
measure of code quality.
Testing workflows don’t have to be linear. Actually, because one of the goals is to get feedback
as quickly as possible, it’s a good idea to run as much of the testing as possible in parallel. But
keep in mind that some tests might depend on the results of other tests; others might potentially
interfere with each other. (Ideally, tests should have no cross-dependencies.)
Avoid the temptation to ignore or overlook broken tests. It’s easy to get in the habit of
understanding the reason for a failure, considering it to be harmless or inapplicable, and
suppressing the test. However, this thinking is dangerous and can lead to a less reliable testing
system. Keep in mind the golden rule of CI/CD: fixing a broken pipeline is the top priority.
To reinforce this tenet, make it difficult to ignore failed tests. It should be a technical
requirement, enforced through the CI/CD software, that production deployments cannot occur if
there are any broken tests.
Deployment
Deployment is the act of installing software and preparing it for use within a server environment.
The specifics of how this is done depend on the technology stack. A deployment system must
understand how to retrieve the build artifact (e.g., from a package repository or container image
registry), how to install it on the server, and what setup steps, if any, are necessary. A
deployment concludes when a new version of software is running and the old version has been
disabled.
A deployment might be as simple as updating some HTML files on disk. No restart or further
configuration required! But for most cases, a deployment involves at least installing a package
and restarting an application. Complex, large-scale production deployments might involve
installing code on multiple systems while serving live traffic, without pausing for a service
outage.
System administrators play an important role in the deployment process. They are usually
responsible for creating deployment scripts, monitoring important application health indicators
during deployments, and ensuring that the infrastructure and configuration needs of other team
members are met.
The following list describes just a few of the possible ways to deploy software:

      Run a basic shell script that invokes ssh to log in to each system, downloads and
      installs the build artifact, and then restarts the application. These types of scripts are
      usually home grown and do not scale to more than a handful of systems.

      Use a configuration management tool to orchestrate the installation process across a
      managed set of systems. This strategy is more organized and scalable than the use of
      shell scripts. Most configuration management systems are not designed specifically to
      facilitate deployments, although they can be used for this purpose.
      If the build artifact is a container image and the application runs on a container
      management platform such as Kubernetes, Docker Swarm, or AWS ECS, the
      deployment might be nothing more than a quick API call to the container manager.
      The container service manages the rest of the deployment process on its own. See
      Containers and CI/CD.
      A few open source projects standardize and streamline deployment. Capistrano
      (capistranorb.com) is a Ruby-based deployment tool that extends Ruby’s Rake
      system to run commands on remote systems. Fabric (fabfile.org) is a similar tool
      written in Python. These tools, by developers for developers, are essentially elaborate
      shell scripts.
      Software deployment is a well-explored problem for users of public clouds. Most
      cloud ecosystems include both integrated and third party deployment services that
      can be used from a CI/CD pipeline. Some examples include Google Deployment
      Manager, AWS CodeDeploy, and Heroku.

Tailor the deployment technique to your site’s technology stack and service needs. If you have a
simple environment with a few servers and a small handful of applications, a configuration
management tool might be appropriate. At sites with a large number of servers spread among
data centers, a specialized deployment tool is called for.
An “immutable” deployment codifies the principle that servers should never be modified (or
“mutated”) once they’ve been initialized. To deploy a new release, the CI/CD tooling creates
entirely new servers with the updated build artifact included in the image. In this model, servers
are considered disposable and temporary. This strategy is predicated on a programmable
infrastructure such as a public or private cloud, where instances can be allocated through an API
call. Some of the largest users of the public cloud embrace immutable deployments.

In CI/CD in practice, we walk through a sample immutable deployment that uses HashiCorp’s
Terraform tool to create and update infrastructure.
Zero-downtime deployment techniques
At some sites, services must continue to run even while they are being upgraded or redeployed,
either because an outage poses unacceptable risk (health care, government services) or because it
might have substantial financial costs (high-volume e-commerce or financial services). Updating
live software without service interruptions is the Xanadu of software deployments, and it’s the
source of much anxiety and yak-shaving.
One common way to achieve a zero-downtime release is a “blue/green” deployment. The concept
is straightforward: stage the new software on a standby system (or set of systems), run tests to
confirm its functionality, then switch traffic from the live system to the standby once the tests are
complete.

     See this page for more information about load balancers.

This strategy works particularly well when traffic is proxied through a load balancer. The live
systems handle all the user connections while the standby systems are being prepared. When the
time is right, the standby systems can be added to the load balancer and the previously live
systems removed. The deployment is complete when all the old systems are out of the rotation
and all the transactions they were handling have concluded.

A “rolling” deployment updates existing systems in a stepwise fashion, modifying software on
one system at a time. Each system is removed from the load balancer, updated, then added back
to the rotation to accept user traffic. This type of deployment can cause problems if the
application cannot tolerate two different versions running simultaneously.
Both the blue/green and rolling deployment strategies can accommodate a “canary,” akin to the
hapless canary in a coal mine. You first allocate a small amount of traffic to a single system (or
small percentage of systems) that runs the new release. If the new release has problems, you back
it out and correct the problem, having impacted only a handful of users. Of course, the canary
systems need precise telemetry and monitoring so that you can determine whether problems have
been introduced.
26.3 JENKINS: THE OPEN SOURCE AUTOMATION SERVER
Jenkins is an automation server written in Java. It’s by far the most popular software used to
implement CI/CD. With broad adoption and an extensive ecosystem of plug-ins, Jenkins is well
suited to a variety of use cases.
It’s easy to dabble with Jenkins by running it in a Docker container:

Once the container starts, you can access the Jenkins user interface in a web browser on port
8080. You’ll find the initial administrator password buried in the container output. In practice,
you would need to change that password immediately!

A single-container configuration is fine for learning the ropes, but you’ll likely need a more
robust solution in production environments. The Jenkins download page (jenkins.io/download)
has installation instructions that we needn’t rehash here. Refer to those docs for installation on
Linux and FreeBSD. CloudBees, the maker of Jenkins, also offers a high-availability version
called Jenkins Enterprise.
Jenkins has plug-ins for every conceivable task. Use plug-ins to outsource builds to different
types of agents, send notifications, coordinate releases, and execute scheduled jobs. Plug-ins
integrate with open source tools and with all the major cloud platforms and external SaaS
providers. Plug-ins give Jenkins superpowers.
Most Jenkins configuration is done through the web UI, and being merciful to your attention
span, we don’t attempt to cover the UI’s nooks and crannies. Instead, we introduce the
fundamentals of Jenkins along with some of its most important features.
Basic Jenkins concepts
At its core, Jenkins is a coordination server that links a series of tools into a chain—or, to use
CI/CD terminology, a pipeline. Jenkins is an organizer and facilitator; all actual work depends on
outside services such as source code repositories, compilers, build tools, testing harnesses, and
deployment systems.
A Jenkins job, or project, is a collection of linked stages. Creating a project is the first order of
business for a new installation. You can link the project’s steps together so that they run in
sequence or in parallel. You can even set up conditional steps that do different things depending
on the results of previous steps.
Every project should be connected to a source code repository. Jenkins has native support for
pretty much every version control system: Git, Subversion, Mercurial, even ancient systems such
as CVS. There are also integration plug-ins for higher-level version control services such as
GitHub, GitLab, and BitBucket. You’ll need to give Jenkins the appropriate credentials to allow
it to download code from your repository.
The “build context” is the current working directory on the Jenkins system that’s executing a
build. Source code is copied into the build context along with any supporting files that are needed
for the build.

Once you’ve wired up Jenkins to a version control repository, you can create a build trigger. This
is the signal for Jenkins to copy the current source code and start the build process. Jenkins can
poll the source repository for new commits and initiate a build whenever it finds one. It can also
start builds on a schedule or be triggered by a web hook, a feature supported by GitHub.
After setting up the trigger, create the build steps, that is, the specific tasks that will create a
build. Steps can be code-base-specific, or they can be generic shell scripts. For example, Java
projects are usually built with a tool called Maven. A Jenkins plug-in supports Maven directly, so
you can simply add a Maven build step. For a project written in C, the first build step might just
be a shell script that runs make.
The remaining build steps depend on your goals for the project. The most common builds include
steps that initiate the testing tasks discussed in Testing. You may need a step to create a custom
build artifact such as a tarball, OS package, or container image. You can also include steps that
trigger administrator notifications, take deployment-related actions, or coordinate with outside
tooling.
For a CI/CD project, the build steps can address all the stages of a pipeline: build the code, run
tests, upload the artifact to a repository, and kick off a deployment. Each stage of the pipeline is a
just a build step within the Jenkins project. The Jenkins interface presents an overview of the
status of each step, so it’s easy to see at a glance what’s happening in the pipeline.
Sites that have many applications should have separate Jenkins projects for each. Each project
will have a distinct code repository and build steps. The Jenkins system needs all the tools and
dependencies to run a build for any of its projects. For example, if you have configured both a
Java project and a C project, your Jenkins system must have both Maven and make installed.
Projects can depend on other projects. Use this to your advantage by structuring projects as
generic, inheritable templates. For example, if you have a variety of applications that are built
differently but deployed in the same way (e.g., as containers running on a server cluster), you can
create a generic “deploy” project that manages the common deployment stage. Individual
application projects can execute the deploy project, thereby eliminating a now-redundant build
step.
Distributed builds
At sites that support dozens of applications, each with its own dependencies and build steps, it’s
easy to inadvertently create dependency conflicts and bottlenecks because too many pipelines are
running at once. To compensate, Jenkins lets you graduate to a distributed build architecture.
This mode of operation uses a “build master,” a central system that keeps track of all the projects
and their current state, and “build agents,” which run the actual build steps for a project. If you
use Jenkins a lot, you’ll move to this configuration pretty quickly.
Build agents run on hosts that are separate from the build master. The Jenkins master logs in to
the slaves (usually through SSH) to start the agent process and to add labels that document the
slaves’ capabilities. For example, you might distinguish your Java-capable agents from your C-
capable agents by applying appropriate labels.
For best results, run agents in containers, remote VMs, or ephemeral cloud instances that scale
out and back on demand. If you have a container cluster, you can use Jenkins plug-ins to run
agents in the cluster through a container management system.
Pipeline as code
Thus far, we’ve described the process of setting up Jenkins projects by stringing together
individual build steps in the web UI. This is the quickest way to get started with Jenkins, but
from an infrastructure perspective it’s also a bit opaque. The “code”—in this context, the
contents of each build step—is managed by Jenkins. You can’t check graphical build steps into a
code repository, and if you lose the Jenkins server, there’s no easy way to replace it; you’ll need
to restore your projects from a recent backup.
Jenkins version 2 introduced a major new feature, called the Pipeline, that affords first-class
support for CI/CD pipelines. A Jenkins pipeline codifies the steps of a project in a declarative,
domain-specific language that’s based on the Groovy programming language. You can commit
the Jenkins pipeline code, called a Jenkinsfile, alongside the code that’s associated with the
pipeline.
The following Jenkinsfile demonstrates a basic build/test/deploy cycle:

The agent any notation instructs Jenkins to prepare a workspace for this pipeline on any available
build agent. A workspace is the same as a build context: a location on the agent’s local disk that
contains all the files needed by the build, including the source code and dependencies. Every
build has a private workspace.
The Build, Test, and Deploy stages parallel the conceptual stages of a CI/CD pipeline. In our
example, each stage has a single step that invokes a shell (sh) to execute a command.
The Deploy stage runs a custom script, deploy.sh, that handles the entire deployment, including
copying the build artifact (generated by the Build stage) to a set of servers and restarting server
processes. In practice, deployment would usually be divided into multiple stages to afford better
visibility and control over the full process.
26.4 CI/CD IN PRACTICE
We now turn to a contrived example to illustrate the concepts presented so far. We’ve concocted
a simple application, UlsahGo, that’s a lot more basic than anything you might need to manage in
the real world. It’s entirely self-contained and has no dependencies on other applications.
Our example includes the following elements:

       The UlsahGo web application, with just one small feature

       Unit tests for the application
       A virtual machine image for DigitalOcean, which contains the application
       A single-server development environment, created on demand
       A load-balanced, multiserver staging environment, created on demand
       A CI/CD pipeline that ties all these parts together

We use several popular tools and services in this example:

       GitHub as the code repository
       DigitalOcean virtual machines and load balancers
       HashiCorp’s Packer, for provisioning the DigitalOcean image
       HashiCorp’s Terraform, to create deployment environments

       Jenkins, to manage the CI/CD pipeline

Your applications might use a different technology stack, but the general concepts are similar,
regardless of the tooling.
Exhibit C depicts the first several stages of the example pipeline. The diagram shows the pipeline
polling GitHub for new commits to the UlsahGo project. When a commit is found, Jenkins runs
the unit test suite. If the tests pass, Jenkins builds the binary. If the binary builds successfully, the
pipeline continues to create the deployment artifact, a DigitalOcean machine image that includes
the binary. If any of the stages fail, the pipeline reports an error.

Exhibit C: Demonstration pipeline (part one)
We describe the deployment stages in detail later. But first we should review these initial stages.
UlsahGo, a trivial web application
Our example application is a web service with a single feature. It returns, as JSON, the authors
associated with a specified edition of this book. For example, the following query shows the
authors for this edition:

We do some sanity checking to make sure users aren’t getting too carried away, for example, by
requesting implausible editions:

Our application also has a health-check endpoint. Health checks are an easy way for monitoring
systems to ask the application, “Hey, are you working OK?”

Developers typically work closely with administrators to create the build and test stages of a
CI/CD pipeline. In this case, since the application is written in Go, we can use the standard Go
tools (go build and go test) in our pipeline.
Unit testing UlsahGo
Unit tests are the first test suite to run because they operate at the source code level. Unit tests
involve testing the application’s functionality at the finest possible granularity: its functions and
methods. Most languages have testing frameworks that offer native support for unit tests.
Let’s examine one unit test for UlsahGo. Consider the following function:

The function takes an integer as input and determines the corresponding ordinal expression. For
example, when passed a 1, the function returns “1st.” UlsahGo uses this function to format the
text in the error message for invalid editions.
Unit tests try to prove that given some input, the function returns the expected output. Here’s a
unit test that exercises this function:

This simplified unit test runs the function on two values, 1 and 10, and confirms that the actual
response matches the expectation. (The ordinal() function implements three special cases and a
general case. A full set of unit tests would exercise each of these possible paths through the
code.)
We can run the tests through Go’s built-in testing framework:
If some part of the application changes in the future—for example, if updates are made to the
ordinal() function—the tests report any divergence from the expected output. Developers are
responsible for updating unit tests as they adjust the code. Experienced developers by design
write code that is easy to test. They aim to have complete coverage of each method and function.
Taking first steps with the Jenkins Pipeline
With the code ready to ship and the unit tests in place, the first step in our CI/CD journey is to
configure the project in Jenkins. The GUI interface walks us through the process. Here are our
selections:

      Our new project is a Pipeline project, defined by code as opposed to a traditional
      “freestyle” project with build steps mostly defined through user interface elements.
      We want to track our pipeline alongside our source code repository in a Jenkinsfile,
      so we choose “Pipeline script from SCM” for the Pipeline definition.
      We trigger the build by polling GitHub for commits. We add credentials so that
      Jenkins can access the UlsahGo repository and configure Jenkins to poll GitHub for
      changes every five minutes.

The initial setup takes just a few moments. In real life, we would use a GitHub web hook to
notify Jenkins that a new commit was available, thus avoiding polling and sparing GitHub from
our unnecessary calls to their API.
With this setup, Jenkins executes the pipeline described by the Jenkinsfile in the repository
whenever a new commit is pushed to GitHub.

Consider how your repositories are organized. In this project we chose to combine CI/CD and
application code in the same repository, with all CI/CD-related files being kept in the pipeline
subdirectory. The UlsahGo repository is laid out as follows:

An integrated structure works well for a small project like this one. Jenkins, Packer, Terraform,
and other tools can look in the pipeline subdirectory for their configuration files. Modifying the
deployment pipeline is a simple matter of updating the repository. For more complex
environments where multiple projects share a common infrastructure, it makes sense to have a
dedicated infrastructure repository.
With the project in place, we can commit our first Jenkinsfile. The first step in any pipeline is to
check out the source code. Here’s a complete Jenkinsfile pipeline script that does just that:

The checkout scm line instructs Jenkins to check out the code from “software configuration
management,” a generic industry term for source control.
With Jenkins polling GitHub and the checkout stage complete, we can move on to setting up the
test and build stages. Our Go project has no external dependencies. The only requirement for
building and testing our code is the go binary. We have already installed go on our Jenkins
system (with apt-get -y install golang-go) so we need only add the test and build stages to the
Jenkinsfile:

After we commit the changes, Jenkins discovers the new commit and executes the pipeline.
Jenkins emits friendly log output indicating that it has done so:

The Jenkins GUI uses a weather metaphor to indicate the health of recent builds. A sun icon
represents a project that is building successfully, and a stormy cloud icon represents failures. You
can debug build failures by inspecting the console output, which is found under the build details.
It shows the STDOUT printed by any part of the build.
Here’s a snippet from the go test and go build steps of our pipeline:

You can normally pinpoint the cause of a failed build by reviewing the log. Look for error
messages that identify the failed step. You can also add your own log messages to supply clues
about the state of the system, such as the values of variables or the contents of a script at a given
point in the execution. Writing output for the purpose of debugging is a time-honored
programming tradition.
The output of our build is a single binary file, ulsahgo, which contains our entire application.
(This, incidentally, is one of the primary benefits of Go programs and one of the reasons Go is
popular with sysadmins: it’s easy to create static binaries that run on multiple architectures and
have no external dependencies. Installing a Go application is often as simple as copying it to the
system.)
Building a DigitalOcean image
With ulsahgo ready to ship, we next build a virtual machine image for the DigitalOcean cloud.
We start with a vanilla Ubuntu 16.04 image, install the latest updates, and then install ulsahgo.
The resulting image becomes the deployment artifact for the remaining stages of the pipeline.
If you’re unfamiliar with the tool packer, which creates virtual machine images, refer to the
section Packer before continuing.
packer reads its image configuration from a template that has two primary sections: builders,
which interact with remote APIs to create machines and images, and optional provisioners, which
run custom configuration steps.
The template for our UlsahGo image has only one builder:

The builder tells packer which platform to build the image on and how to authenticate to the
API, among other provider-specific details.
Three provisioning steps follow:

    See this page for more information about systemd unit files.
The first two provisioning steps add files to the image. The first file is the application itself,
ulsahgo, which is uploaded to /tmp for later use. The second is a systemd drop-in unit file that
manages the service.
The last provisioner executes a custom shell script on the remote system. The script,
provisioner.sh, updates the system and then sets up the application:

In addition to shell scripts, packer lets you use all the popular configuration management tools
as provisioning steps. Call out to Puppet, Chef, Ansible, or Salt to provision your images in a
more structured and scalable manner.
Finally, we can add an image-building stage to our Jenkinsfile:

The first step invokes packer and saves the output to packer.txt in the build’s working directory.
The tail end of that output includes an ID for the new image:

The second step greps the ID from packer.txt and saves it to a new file in the build context.
Because the image is the deployment artifact, we will need to refer to its ID from later stages of
the pipeline.
Provisioning a single system for testing
At this point we have a process for continuously running unit tests, building the application, and
creating a virtual machine image as a build artifact. The remaining build stages focus on
deploying the artifact and testing it in the wild. Exhibit D picks up where Exhibit C leaves off.

Exhibit D: Demonstration pipeline (part two)

We’ve chosen to use terraform, another gem from HashiCorp, to create and manage the
UlsahGo infrastructure. terraform reads its configuration from “plans,” JSON-like configuration
files that describe a desired infrastructure configuration. It then creates the cloud resources
described in the plan by making an appropriate series of API calls. terraform supports dozens of
cloud providers and a wide variety of services.
The following terraform configuration, ulsahgo.tf, requisitions a single DigitalOcean droplet
running the image we created in the previous stage of the pipeline:
Most of this is self-explanatory: use DigitalOcean as the provider, and authenticate with the
provided token. Create the droplet in the sfo2 region from the specified image ID.
In the Packer template on this page, we directly embedded parameters such as the API token in
the builder configuration. One (big!) problem with that approach is that the API key is saved in
the source code repository even though it’s supposedly secret. The key gives access to the cloud
provider’s API and hence would be dangerous in the wrong hands. Keeping secrets in revision
control is a security antipattern for reasons we describe in more detail here.

In this example, we instead read the parameters as variables. The three variables are

      The DigitalOcean API token
      The fingerprint of an SSH key that will be permitted to access the droplet
      The ID of the image to use for the new system, which we captured during the
      previous stage of the pipeline.

Jenkins can store secrets such as the API token in its “credential store,” an encrypted area that’s
intended for exactly this kind of sensitive data. The pipeline can read values from the credential
store and save them as environment variables. The values then become accessible throughout the
pipeline without being saved in the version control system.
Here’s how we set this up in the Jenkinsfile:

Recall that we saved the ID of the DigitalOcean machine image to a file within the build area,
do_image.txt. We need that ID in our new pipeline stage, which creates the actual DigitalOcean
droplet. The code for the new stage just runs a script from the project repository:

It’s easier and more maintainable to separate the code of complex scripts from the rest of the
pipeline, as we’ve done here. tf_testing.sh contains the following lines:
This script copies the saved image ID to a temporary directory, pipeline/testing, then runs
terraform from that directory. terraform looks for files in the current directory that have .tf
extensions, so we don’t have to explicitly name the plan file. (It’s the same ulsahgo.tf file that
we looked at on this page.)
A few explanations:

      The DO_TOKEN and SSH_FINGERPRINT environment variables are available to
      any shell commands in the pipeline. The environment clause shown above can appear
      either at the level of the overall pipeline or within a particular stage, depending on the
      scope you want.
      $(<do_image.txt) reads the contents of the saved DigitalOcean image ID from the text file
      saved in the previous stage.
      The final line of the tf_testing.sh script inspects the terraform-created droplet,
      obtains its IP address, and saves the address to a text file for use in the next stage.
      The terraform.tfstate file is terraform’s snapshot of the system state. It’s how
      terraform keeps track of resources.

Like packer, terraform sends useful output to the Jenkins console output page. Here are the
relevant bits from the terraform apply command:
When this stage completes, the droplet is up and running with UlsahGo.
Testing the droplet
We have some confidence that the code is functional because it passed the unit testing step.
However, we also need to make sure that it runs successfully as part of a DigitalOcean droplet.
Testing at this level is considered a form of integration test. We want the integration tests to run
each time a new image is created, so we add a new stage to the Jenkinsfile:

Sometimes a blunt, heavy object is the right tool for the job. This pair of curl commands queries
ulsahgo on the remote droplet’s port 8000, where ulsahgo runs by default. We check that a
query for the fifth edition returns an HTTP code 200 (success) and that a query for the sixth
edition returns an HTTP 404 (failure). We know to expect these specific status codes only
because of our familiarity with the application.

At the conclusion of the tests, we destroy the droplet because it’s no longer needed. The droplet
is created, tested, and destroyed each time the pipeline runs.
Deploying UlsahGo to a pair of droplets and a load balancer
The final pipeline task is to deploy to our (mock) production environment, which consists of two
DigitalOcean droplets and a load balancer. Once again, Terraform is up to the task.
We can reuse some of the configuration from the single-droplet terraform plan file. We still
need the same variables and the droplet resource. This time, we add a second droplet resource:

We also add a load balancer resource:

The load balancer listens on port 80 and forwards requests to each of the droplets on port 8000,
where ulsahgo is listening. We tell the load balancer to use the /healthy endpoint to confirm that
each copy of the service is running. The load balancer adds a droplet to the rotation if it receives
a 200 status code when it queries this endpoint.
Now we can add the production configuration as a new stage in the pipeline:
The load balancer stage is more or less identical to the single instance stage. Even the external
script is pretty much the same, so we omit its contents here. We could easily refactor these scripts
so that a single version could handle both environments, but for now, we’ve kept the scripts
separate.
We can add a testing stage as well, this time running against the load balancer’s IP address:

The curl commands are similar to the previous set, but they target port 80, where the load
balancer listens.
Concluding the demonstration pipeline
This demonstration CI/CD implementation captures several of the key elements of a real-world
pipeline:

      The first two stages (unit testing and building) demonstrate continuous integration.
      Each time a developer commits code, Jenkins runs unit tests and tries to build the
      project.
      The third stage (creating a DigitalOcean image as a build artifact) is the beginning of
      continuous delivery. We can use the same image when deploying to each
      environment.
      Deployment to a single droplet is considered a “development” or “testing”
      environment.
      The final stage deploys ulsahgo to a high-availability, production-like environment,
      thereby closing the loop on a continuous deployment pipeline.

      If any stage in the pipeline fails, the subsequent stages are skipped. In that case,
      console output is available to help debug the problem.

This pipeline relies on open source tools throughout. All the deployment code is captured in just
a few text files that are kept in the same repository as the application’s source code.
Astute readers will think of a host of improvements that could be made to these steps. To name
just a few:

      A blue/green deployment to ensure no downtime in the production stage
      Status notifications to email or chat rooms for each stage
      Hooks to help monitoring systems note that a new deployment has occurred

      A better method of propagating data, such as the image ID, between stages

Continuous improvement is integral to CI/CD (and to system administration in general). Over
time, a chain of incremental improvements results in a highly efficient and automated software
delivery system.
26.5 CONTAINERS AND CI/CD
Most software relies on outside dependencies such as third party libraries, a particular filesystem
layout, the availability of certain environment variables, and other localizations. Conflicts among
required dependencies often make it hard to run multiple applications on a single virtual
machine.
To further complicate matters, building an application requires resources different from those
running it. For example, the build process might require a compiler and a test suite, but these
extras are not needed at run time.

     See Chapter 25 for more information about containers.

Containers offer an elegant solution to these problems. From an operations viewpoint, the
environment needs only the capability to run containers. You can activate any given container on
any container-compatible system without further configuration effort because all dependencies
and localizations for an app are housed within its container. Multiple containers can run on the
same system simultaneously without conflict.
You can use containers to simplify your CI/CD environment in several ways:

      By running the CI/CD system itself within a container
      By building applications inside containers

      By using container images as build artifacts for deployment

The first point is rather obvious: you can run your CI/CD software (including both the master and
any agents) in containers, thereby avoiding the overhead of having to dedicate systems to the
CI/CD infrastructure.
The other two scenarios require a bit more explication. We look at them in more detail in the next
sections.
Containers as a build environment
The exact environment needed to build an application is project-specific and sometimes quite
complex. Rather than installing all the necessary tools, build software, and dependencies directly
on your CI/CD agent systems, you can build your software within containers and leave the
CI/CD agents in a clean and generic state. The build process then becomes portable and
independent of the specific CI/CD agent.
Consider a typical application that depends on a PostgreSQL database and a Redis key/value
store. To build and test the application in a traditional setting, you’d need separate servers for
each component: the application itself, the Redis daemon, and PostgreSQL. In a pinch, you might
run all these components on one system, but you probably wouldn’t use that same server to build
and test another service that had different dependencies.
Instead, you can use short-lived containers for each component. One container can build and run
the application. It can connect to separate containers (on the same host or a different host) for
PostgreSQL and Redis. Once the build process is complete, the containers can be stopped and
discarded. You can use the same CI/CD agent to build, with no risk of conflicts, applications that
have other dependencies.
The container image used to build software should be distinct from the container image that runs
it. The build image is normally larger than the run-time image because it includes extra
components such as compilers and testing tools.

Most current CI/CD tools include native support for containers. Jenkins has a Docker plug-in that
integrates nicely with the pipeline. Also check out Drone (try.drone.io), a CI/CD platform
designed around containers.
Container images as build artifacts
The product of a build can be a container image deployable through a container orchestration
system. Containers are lightweight and highly portable. Moving container images among systems
by way of an image registry is easy and fast. Any CI/CD tool can adopt the strategy of producing
containers.
The basic workflow becomes:
   1. Build your application inside a build-specific container.
   2. Create a container image that includes the application and its dependencies.

   3. Push the image to a registry.
   4. Deploy that image to a container-ready execution environment.
It’s generally best to use a container management platform such as Docker Swarm,
Mesos/Marathon, Kubernetes, or AWS EC2 Container Service to deploy images into production.
Your pipeline’s deployment stage can call the appropriate APIs and let the platform handle the
specifics. Exhibit E illustrates the procedure.

Exhibit E: Container-based deployment process

We’ve found containers to be an excellent match for mature CI/CD pipelines. Their extremely
fast cycle time makes it easy both to deploy new code and to revert to a previous version in the
event of a problem. Both virtual machines and configuration management systems are an order of
magnitude slower.
26.6 RECOMMENDED READING
BECK, KENT, ET AL. Manifesto for Agile Software Development. agilemanifesto.org
DUVALL, PAUL M., STEVE MATYAS, AND ANDREW GLOVER. Continuous Integration: Improving
Software Quality and Reducing Risk. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-Wesley, 2007.

FARCIC, VIKTOR. The DevOps 2.0 Toolkit: Automating the Continuous Deployment Pipeline with
Containerized Microservices. Seattle, WA: Amazon Digital Services LLC, 2016.
FOWLER, MARTIN. Continuous Integration. goo.gl/Y2lisI (martinfowler.com)
HUMBLE, JEZ, AND DAVID FARLEY. Continuous Delivery: Reliable Software Releases through
Build, Test, and Deployment Automation. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-Wesley, 2010.
MORRIS, KIEF. Infrastructure as Code: Managing Servers in the Cloud. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly
Media, 2016.

jenkinsci-docs@googlegroups.com. Jenkins User Handbook. jenkins.io/doc/book
