27 Security

Computer security is in a sorry state. In contrast to the progress seen in virtually every other area
of computing, security flaws have become increasingly dire and the consequences of inadequate
security more severe. Computer security issues directly influence and threaten societies around
the world.
If you’re tempted to skip over this chapter, permit us to pique your curiosity by reminding you of
a few computer security events that have occurred since the last edition of this book:

      The sophisticated Stuxnet worm, discovered in 2010, attacked Iran’s nuclear program
      by damaging centrifuges at a uranium enrichment plant.
      In 2013, Edward Snowden exposed the massive NSA surveillance machine, revealing
      that some major Internet companies were complicit in allowing the government to
      spy on U.S. citizens.
      Around 2013, a new type of attack known as ransomware came to prominence.
      Attackers compromise a target system and encrypt its data, holding it hostage.
      Victims must pay a ransom for recovery. They often do.

      In 2015, the U.S. Office of Personnel Management was breached, compromising the
      sensitive and private details of more than 21 million U.S. citizens, many of whom had
      security clearances.
      In 2016, Russian state-sponsored hackers allegedly mounted a campaign to influence
      the outcome of the U.S. presidential election.
      In 2017, a ransomware attack of unprecedented scale took over Windows systems in
      more than 150 countries. The attack used an exploit developed by the NSA.

The stakes have never been higher. We think it will get worse before it gets better.

Part of the challenge is that security problems are not purely technical. You cannot solve them by
buying a particular product or service from a third party. Achieving an acceptable level of
security requires patience, vigilance, knowledge, and persistence—not just from you and other
sysadmins, but from your entire user and management communities.
As a system administrator you bear a heavy burden. You must push an agenda that secures your
organization’s systems and networks, ensures that they are vigilantly monitored, and properly
educates your users and your staff. Familiarize yourself with current security technology and
work with experts to identify and resolve vulnerabilities at your site. Security considerations
should be part of every decision.
Strike a balance between security and usability. Remember that

The more security measures you introduce, the more constrained you and your users will be.
Implement the security measures suggested in this chapter only after carefully considering the
implications for your users.
Is UNIX secure? Of course not. UNIX and Linux are not secure, nor is any other operating
system that communicates on a network. If you must have absolute, total, unbreachable security,
then you need a measurable air gap between your computer and any other device. Sometimes
even an air gap isn’t enough. In a 2014 paper, Genkin, Shamir, and Tromer described a technique
to extract RSA encryption keys from laptops by analyzing the high-pitched frequencies they emit
when decrypting a file.
Some people argue that you also need to enclose your computer in a special room that blocks
electromagnetic radiation (look up “Faraday cage”). How fun is that?
This chapter examines the complex field of computer security: the sources of attacks, the basic
ways to secure systems, the tools of the trade, and sources of additional information.
27.1 ELEMENTS OF SECURITY
The field of information security is quite broad, but it is often best described by the “CIA triad.”
This acronym stands for

      Confidentiality
      Integrity
      Availability

Confidentiality concerns the privacy of data. Access to information should be limited to those
who are authorized to have it. Authentication, access control, and encryption are a few of the
subcomponents of confidentiality. If a hacker breaks into a system and steals a database of
customer contact information, a compromise of confidentiality has occurred.
Integrity relates to the authenticity of information. Data integrity technology ensures that
information is valid and has not been altered in unauthorized ways. It also addresses the
trustworthiness of information sources. When a secure web site presents a signed TLS certificate,
it is proving to the user not only that the information it is sending is encrypted but also that a
trusted certificate authority (such as VeriSign or Equifax) has verified the identity of the source.
Technologies such as PGP also offer some assurance of data integrity.

Availability expresses the idea that information must be accessible to authorized users when they
need it. Otherwise, the data has no value. Outages not caused by intruders (e.g., those caused by
administrative errors or power outages) also fall into the category of availability problems.
Unfortunately, availability is often ignored until something goes wrong.
Consider the CIA principles as you design, implement, and maintain systems and networks. As
the old security adage goes, “security is a process.”
27.2 HOW SECURITY IS COMPROMISED
In this section we take a general look at how real-world security problems tend to occur. Most
security lapses fit into one of the following categories.
Social engineering
Human users (and administrators) of a computer system are the weakest links in the chain of
security. Even in today’s world of heightened security awareness, unsuspecting users with good
intentions are easily convinced to give away sensitive information. No amount of technology can
protect against the user element—you must ensure that your user community has a high
awareness of security threats so that they can be part of the defense.
This problem manifests itself in many forms. Attackers cold-call their victims and pose as
legitimately confused users in an attempt to get help accessing the system. Someone
unintentionally posts sensitive information on a public forum while troubleshooting problems.
Physical compromises occur when seemingly legitimate maintenance personnel show up to
rewire the network closet.
The term “phishing” describes attempts to collect information from users or to coax them to into
doing something foolish, such as installing malware. Phishing begins with deceptive emails,
instant messages, text messages, or social media contacts. Targeted attacks (so called “spear
phishing”) can be especially hard to defend against because the communication often includes
victim-specific information that lends an appearance of authenticity.
Social engineering is a powerful hacking technique and is one of the most difficult threats to
neutralize. Your site security policy should include training for new employees. Regular,
organization-wide communications are an effective way to inform staff about social media
threats, physical security, email phishing, multifactor authentication, and good password
selection.

To gauge your organization’s resistance to social engineering, you might find it informative to
attempt some social engineering attacks of your own. Be sure you have explicit permission to do
this from your own managers, however. These exploits look very suspicious if they are
performed without a clear mandate! They’re also a form of internal spying, so they have the
potential to generate resentment if they’re not handled forthrightly.
Many organizations find it useful to communicate to users that administrators will never request
their passwords. Tell users to report any such password requests to the IT department
immediately.
Software vulnerabilities
Over the years, countless security-sapping bugs have been discovered in computer software. By
exploiting subtle programming errors or context dependencies, hackers have been able to
manipulate systems into a variety of compromising positions.
Buffer overflows are an example of a programming error with complex security implications.
Developers often allocate a predetermined amount of temporary memory space, called a buffer,
to store a particular piece of information. If the code isn’t careful about checking the size of the
data against the size of the container that’s supposed to hold it, the memory adjacent to the
allocated space is at risk of being overwritten. Crafty hackers can input carefully composed data
that crashes the program or, in the worst case, executes arbitrary code.
Buffer overflows are a subcategory of a larger class of software security bugs known as input
validation vulnerabilities. Nearly all programs accept some type of input from users (e.g.,
command-line arguments, parameters for an HTTP request). If the code processes such data
without rigorously checking it for appropriate format and content, bad things can happen.
In some ways, open source operating systems have a leg up on security. The source code for
Linux and FreeBSD is available to everyone, and thousands of people can (and do) scrutinize
each line of code for possible security threats. This arrangement is widely believed to result in
better security than that of closed operating systems, where a limited number of people have the
opportunity to examine the code for weaknesses.

     See Chapter 25 for more information about containers.

What can you as an administrator do to prevent this type of attack? It depends on the application,
but one obvious approach is to reduce the privileges that your applications run with to minimize
the impact of security bugs. A process running as an unprivileged user can do less damage than
one that runs as root. For the paranoid, this approach can include a mandatory access control
system such as SELinux. Containers with limited capabilities can also play a role here.
Over time, the open source community has developed a standard process for addressing software
vulnerabilities. Initial reports should go directly to the software developers so that patches to
address the issue can be developed and released before hackers formulate methods to exploit it.
Later, details of the security issue are released publicly so that administrators become aware of it
and so that the issue and the patches can receive public scrutiny. For this reason, keeping up with
patches and security bulletins is an important part of most administrators’ job. Fortunately,
modern operating systems strive to make software updates straightforward and easy to automate.
Distributed denial-of-service attacks (DDoS)
A DDoS attack aims to interrupt a service or adversely impact its performance, making the
service unavailable to users. It’s usually achieved by flooding a site with network traffic, thereby
consuming all the site’s available bandwidth or system resources. DDoS attacks can be
financially motivated (in which case the attacker holds the site for ransom), or they can be either
political or retaliatory.
To conduct an attack, attackers plant malicious code on unprotected devices outside the victim’s
network. This code lets the attackers remotely command these intermediary systems, forming a
“botnet.” In the most common DDoS scenario, the minions of the botnet are instructed to pelt the
victim with network traffic.
In recent years, botnets have been assembled from Internet-connected devices such as IP
cameras, printers, and even baby monitors. These devices have essentially no security, and the
owners usually remain unaware that their devices have been compromised. Sophisticated
command-and-control tools for managing botnets are available on the dark web for anyone to
purchase. Some of them even include free customer service!
In the fall of 2016, the Mirai botnet targeted security researcher and blogger Brian Krebs,
slamming his site with 620 Gb/s of traffic from tens of thousands of source IP addresses.
Naturally, his hosting provider asked him to kindly move somewhere else. The Mirai botnet code
has since been open sourced.

Most of the responsibility for preventing and mitigating DDoS attacks falls to the network
management layer. Software and hardware are available to detect attacks and shut them down
while keeping legitimate services on-line. Public cloud providers and some co-location facilities
are equipped with this technology. However, the mitigations aren’t perfect and the threats are
constantly shifting.
Insider abuse
Employees, contractors, and consultants are trusted agents of an organization and are granted
special privileges. Sometimes these privileges are abused. Insiders can steal or reveal data,
disrupt systems for financial gain, or create havoc for political reasons.
This type of attack is often the hardest of all to detect. Most security measures guard against
external threats, so they aren’t effective against users who have been granted access. Insiders are
typically not under suspicion in the first place; only the most rigorous organizations
systematically monitor their own employees.
System administrators must never knowingly install back doors in the environment for their own
use. Such facilities are too easily misinterpreted or exploited by others.
Network, system, or application configuration errors
Software can be configured securely or not-so-securely. Software is developed to be useful
instead of annoying, hence not-so-securely is too often the default. Hackers frequently gain
access by exploiting features that would be considered helpful and convenient in less treacherous
circumstances: accounts without passwords, firewalls with overly relaxed rules, and unprotected
databases, to name a few.
A typical example of a host configuration vulnerability is the standard practice of allowing Linux
systems to boot without requiring a boot loader password. GRUB can be configured at
installation to require a password, but administrators almost never activate this option. This
omission leaves the system open to physical attack.
However, it’s also a perfect example of the need to balance security against usability. Requiring a
password means that if the system were unintentionally rebooted (e.g., after a power outage), an
administrator would have to be physically present to get the machine running again.
One of the most important steps in securing a system is simply making sure that you haven’t
inadvertently put out a welcome mat for hackers. Problems in this category are the easiest to find
and fix, although there are potentially a lot of them, and it’s not always obvious what to check
for. The port and vulnerability scanning tools covered later in this chapter can help a motivated
administrator identify problems before they’re exploited.
27.3 BASIC SECURITY MEASURES
Most systems do not come secured out of the box. Customizations made during and after
installation change the security profile for new systems. Administrators should take steps to
harden new systems, integrate them into the local environment, and plan for their long-term
security maintenance.
When the auditors come knocking, it’s useful to be able to prove that you have followed some
kind of standard procedure, especially if that procedure conforms to external recommendations
and best practices for your industry. Refer to Sources of security information for
recommendations on selecting a system-hardening standard.

At the highest level, you can improve your site’s security by keeping in mind a few rules of
thumb:

      Apply the principle of least privilege by allocating only the minimum privileges
      needed by each entity, person, or role. This principle applies to firewall rules, user
      permissions, file permissions, and any other situation where access controls are used.
      Layer security measures to achieve defense in depth. For example, don’t rely solely
      on your external firewall for network protection. Otherwise, you are simply building
      a structure like a Tootsie Pop: a hard, crunchy outside and a soft, chewy center.
      Minimize the attack surface. The fewer interfaces, exposed systems, unnecessary
      services, and unused or underused systems, the lower the potential for vulnerabilities
      and security weaknesses.

Automation is a close ally in the security war. Use configuration management and scripting to
create repeatably secure systems and applications. The more security steps you automate, the less
room is available for human error.
Software updates
Keeping systems updated with the latest patches is an administrator’s highest-value security
chore. Most systems are preconfigured to point at the vendor’s package repository, which makes
applying patches as simple as running a few commands. Larger sites can use a local repository
that mirrors that of the vendor, thus saving external bandwidth and speeding updates.
A reasonable approach to patching should include the following elements:

      A regular schedule for installing routine patches that is followed diligently. Consider
      the impact of patches on users when designing this schedule. Monthly updates are
      usually sufficient, but be prepared to apply critical patches on short notice.
      A change plan that documents the impact of each set of patches, outlines post-
      installation testing steps, and describes how to back out the changes in the event of
      problems. Communicate this change plan to all relevant parties.
      An understanding of which patches pertain to the environment. Administrators should
      subscribe to vendor-specific security mailing lists and blogs, as well as to generalized
      security discussion forums such as Bugtraq.

      An accurate inventory of applications and operating systems used in your
      environment. This census helps ensure complete coverage. Use reporting software to
      keep track of your installed base.

Software patches sometimes introduce novel security problems and weaknesses of their own.
However, most exploits target older vulnerabilities that are widely known. Statistically speaking,
you are much better off with systems that are regularly updated. Make sure it’s done
methodically and consistently.
Unnecessary services
Stock systems come with lots of services running by default. Disable (and possibly remove)
those that are unnecessary, especially if they are network daemons. One way to see which
services are using the network is to use the netstat command. Here’s partial output from a
FreeBSD system:

     Linux is transitioning to the ss command for this purpose, but netstat still works there, too.

     A variety of commands can help pinpoint the service that’s using a port. For example, you
can use lsof:

     See Chapter 2 for more about starting processes at boot time.

Once you have the PIDs, you can then use ps to identify specific processes. If a service is
unneeded, stop it and make sure that it won’t be restarted at boot time. You can also use the tools
fuser or netstat -p if lsof is not available.

Limit your systems’ overall footprint. The fewer packages, the less vulnerable software. The
industry as a whole is beginning to address this issue by reducing the number of packages
included in a default installation. Some specialized distributions such as CoreOS take this to the
extreme and force nearly everything to run in a container.
Remote event logging

    See Chapter 10 for more information about logging.

The syslog service forwards log information to files, lists of users, or other hosts on your
network. Consider setting up a secure host to act as a central logging machine that parses
forwarded events and responds appropriately. A single centralized log aggregator can capture
logs from a variety of devices and alert administrators whenever meaningful events occur.
Remote logging also prevents hackers from covering their tracks by rewriting or erasing log files
on systems that have been compromised.
Most systems come configured to use syslog by default, but you will need to customize the
configuration to set up remote logging.
Backups
Regular, tested system backups are an essential part of any site security plan. They fall into the
“availability” bucket of the CIA triad. Make sure that all filesystems are regularly replicated and
that you store some backups off-site. If a significant security incident occurs, you’ll then have an
uncontaminated checkpoint from which to restore.
However, backups can also be a security hazard. Protect your backups by limiting (and
monitoring) access and by encrypting backup files.
Viruses and worms
UNIX and Linux have been mostly immune from viruses. Only a handful exist (most of which
are academic in nature), and none have wreaked the kind of costly havoc that has become
commonplace in the Windows world. Nonetheless, this fact hasn’t stopped certain antivirus
vendors from predicting the demise of the platform from malware—unless you purchase their
antivirus product at a special low price, of course.
The exact reason for the lack of malicious software is unclear. Some claim that UNIX simply has
less market share than its desktop competitors and is therefore not an interesting target for virus
authors. Others insist that UNIX’s access-controlled environment limits the damage from self-
propagating worms and viruses.
The latter argument has some validity. Because UNIX restricts write access to system
executables at the filesystem level, unprivileged user accounts cannot infect the rest of the
environment. Unless virus code is being run by root, the scope of infection is significantly
limited. The moral, then, is not to use the root account for day-to-day activities. See this page for
more comments on this issue.

     See Chapter 18 for more information about email content scanning.

Perhaps counterintuitively, one valid reason to run antivirus software on UNIX servers is to
protect your site’s Windows systems from Windows-specific viruses. A mail server can scan
incoming email attachments for viruses, and a file server can scan shared files for infection.
ClamAV by Tomasz Kojm is a popular, free antivirus product for UNIX and Linux. This widely
used GPL tool is a complete antivirus tool kit that includes signatures for thousands of viruses.
You can download the latest version from clamav.net.
Of course, one school of thought argues that antivirus software is itself counterproductive. Its
detection and prevention rates are mediocre, and the cost of licensing and management are
burdensome. All too frequently, antivirus software breaks other aspects of a system, resulting in a
variety of tech support problems. Some compromises have even resulted from attacks on the
antivirus infrastructure itself.
Recent versions of Microsoft Windows include a basic antivirus tool called Windows Defender.
It’s not the quickest to detect new forms of malware, but it’s effective and relatively unlikely to
interfere with other aspects of the system.
Root kits
The craftiest hackers try to cover their tracks and avoid detection. Often, they hope to continue
using your system to distribute software illegally, probe other networks, or launch attacks against
other systems. They often use “root kits” to help them remain undetected. Sony is notorious for
having included root-kit-like capabilities in the copy protection software included on millions of
music CDs.
Root kits are programs and patches that hide important system information such as process, disk,
or network activity. They come in many flavors and vary in sophistication from simple
application replacements (such as hacked versions of ls and ps) to kernel modules that are nearly
impossible to detect.
Host-based intrusion detection software such as OSSEC is an effective way to monitor systems
for the presence of root kits. File integrity monitoring tools, such as AIDE for Linux, can alert
you to files that have changed unexpectedly. Root-kit-finding scripts (such as chkrootkit,
chkrootkit.org) can identify known kits.
Although programs are available to help administrators remove root kits from a compromised
system, the time it takes to perform a thorough cleaning would probably be better spent saving
data and wiping the system. The most advanced root kits are aware of common removal
programs and make attempts to subvert them.
Packet filtering
If you’re connecting a system to a network that has Internet access, you must install a packet-
filtering router or firewall between the system and the outside world. The packet filter should
pass only traffic for services that you specifically want to offer from that system. Limiting the
public exposure of your systems is a first-line defense. Many systems do not need to be directly
accessible to the public Internet.
In addition to firewalling systems at the Internet gateway, you can double up with host-based
packet filters such as ipfw for FreeBSD and iptables (or ufw) on Linux. Determine which
services run on the host, and open ports only for those services. In some cases, you can also limit
which source addresses are allowed to connect to each port. Many systems need only one or two
ports to be accessible.
If your systems are in the cloud, you can use security groups rather than physical firewalls. When
designing security group rules, be as granular as possible. Consider adding outbound rules as
well, to limit an attacker’s ability to make outbound connections from your hosts. See the
platform-specific sections in Cloud networking for additional discussion of this topic.
Passwords and multifactor authentication
We’re simple people with simple rules. Here’s one: every account must have a password, and it
needs to be something that can’t easily be guessed. Password complexity rules may be a hassle,
but they exist for a reason. Guessable passwords are one of the leading sources of compromise.
One of our favorite trends from recent years is the proliferation of support for multifactor
authentication (MFA) systems. These schemes validate your identity both through something you
know (a password or passphrase) and something you have, such as a physical device, commonly
a phone. Almost any interface can be protected with MFA, from UNIX shell accounts to bank
accounts. Enabling MFA is an easy and powerful security win.
For a variety of reasons, MFA is now an absolute minimum requirement for any Internet-facing
portal that gives access to administrative privileges. That includes VPNs, SSH access, and
administrative interfaces to web applications. An argument can be made that single-factor
(password-only) authentication is not acceptable for any user authentication, but you must secure
at least all administrative interfaces with MFA. Fortunately, excellent cloud-based MFA services
are available, such as Google Authenticator and Duo (duo.com).
Vigilance
To ensure the security of your system, regularly monitor its health, network connections, process
table, and overall status (usually, daily). Do regular self-assessments with the power tools
discussed later in this chapter. Security compromises tend to start with a small foothold and
expand, so the earlier you identify an anomaly, the better off you’ll be. This is much easier said
than done.
You might find it beneficial to work with an external firm to perform a comprehensive
vulnerability analysis. These projects can draw your attention to issues that you hadn’t previously
considered. At a minimum, they establish a baseline understanding of the areas in which you’re
most exposed. Such engagements often reveal that hackers have already been nesting in the
client’s network.
Application penetration testing
Applications that are exposed to the Internet need their own security precautions in addition to
general system and network hygiene. Because of the widespread proliferation of vulnerability
data and exploit tools, it’s a good idea to have all applications penetration tested to verify that
they’ve been designed with security in mind and have appropriate controls in place.
Security is only as strong as the weakest link in the chain. If you have a secure network and
system infrastructure, but an application running on that infrastructure allows access to sensitive
data without a password (for example), you have won the battle but lost the war.
Penetration testing is a poorly defined discipline. Many companies that tout their penetration
testing services focus mostly on smoke and mirrors. The Hollywood scenes of adolescent kids in
windowless basements filled with 1980s-era terminals aren’t entirely inaccurate. Buyer beware.
Fortunately, the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) publishes information about
common application vulnerabilities and methods for probing applications for these issues. Our
recommendation is that you have a professional third party (who specializes in application
penetration testing) perform a penetration test at launch and periodically throughout the life of an
application. Make sure they adhere to the OWASP methodology.
27.4 PASSWORDS AND USER ACCOUNTS

     See this page for more information about password cracking.

In addition to securing all Internet-facing privileged access through multifactor authentication,
it’s important to select and manage passwords securely. In the world of sudo, administrators’
personal passwords are just as important as root passwords. More so, in fact: the more frequently
a password is used, the more opportunities there are for it to be compromised through methods
other than brute-force decryption.
From a narrowly technical perspective, the most secure password of a given length consists of a
random sequence of letters, punctuation, and digits. Years of propaganda and picky web site
password forms have convinced most people that this is the sort of password they ought to be
using. But of course, they never do, unless they use a password vault to remember passwords on
their behalf. Random passwords are simply impractical to commit to memory at the lengths
needed to withstand brute-force attacks (12 characters or longer).

Because password security increases exponentially with length, your best bet is to use a very
long password (a “passphrase”) that is unlikely to appear elsewhere but is easy to remember. You
can throw in a misspelling or modified character for extra credit, but the general idea is to let the
length do the heavy lifting for you.
For example, “six guests drank Evi’s poisoned wine” is an excellent passphrase. (Or at least, it
was until it appeared in this book.) That’s true despite the fact that it consists mostly of common,
lowercase, dictionary words, and despite the fact that the words are logically related and
grammatically ordered.
The other core concept that all administrators and users must keep in mind is that a given
passphrase should never be used for more than one purpose. It is all too common that a large
breach occurs and usernames with passwords are exposed. If those usernames and passwords
were used elsewhere, all those accounts are compromised now, too. Never use the same
password across administrative boundaries (e.g., your personal banking site vs. social media).
Password changes
Change root and administrator passwords

      At least every six months
      Every time someone who had access to them leaves your site
      Whenever you wonder whether security might have been compromised

In the past, the conventional wisdom has been that passwords should be changed frequently to
guard against the possibility of undetected compromises. However, password updates have their
own risks, and they disrupt life for administrators. Competent hackers install backup access
mechanisms as soon as they penetrate a site, so password changes are less helpful than they
might initially seem.
It’s still advisable to make regularly scheduled changes, but don’t go overboard. If you really
want to increase security, you’re better off obsessing about password quality.
Password vaults and password escrow
It’s often said that passwords “should never be written down,” but it’s perhaps more accurate to
say that they should never be left accessible to the wrong people. As security maven Bruce
Schneier has noted, a scrap of paper in an administrator’s wallet is relatively secure in
comparison to most forms of Internet-connected storage.
A password vault is a piece of software (or a combination of software and hardware) that stores
passwords for your organization in a more secure fashion than “Would you like Windows to
remember this password for you?”
Several developments have made a password vault almost a necessity:

      The proliferation of passwords needed not just to log in to computers, but also to
      access web pages, configure routers and firewalls, and administer remote services
      The increasing need for strong passwords as computers get so fast that weak
      passwords are easily broken

      Regulations that require access to certain data to be traceable to a single person—no
      shared logins such as root

Password management systems became more popular in the wake of U.S. legislation that
imposed additional requirements on sectors such as government, finance, and health care. In
some cases, this legislation requires multifactor authentication.
Password vaults are also a great boon for sysadmin support companies who must securely and
traceably manage passwords not only for their own machines but also for their customers’
machines.
Password vaults encrypt the passwords they store. Typically, every user has a separate vault
password. (Just when you thought your password travails were over, now you have even more
passwords to manage and worry about!)
Many password vault implementations are available. Free ones for individuals (e.g., KeePass)
store passwords locally, give all-or-nothing access to the password database, and do no logging.
Appliances suitable for huge enterprises (e.g., CyberArk) can cost tens of thousands of dollars.
Many of the commercial offerings charge either by the user or by the number of passwords they
remember.
The vault system we particularly like is 1Password from AgileBits (1password.com). 1Password
comes from the mass-market world, so it includes polished, cross-platform UIs and integration
with common web browsers. 1Password has a “teams” layer that extends this foundation of
personal password management into the domain of organizational secrets.
Another system worth evaluating is Secret Server from Thycotic (thycotic.com). This system is
browser-based and was designed from the ground up to serve the needs of organizations. It
includes extensive management and auditing features along with role-based access control (see
this page) and fine-grained permission options.
One useful feature to look for in a password management system is a “break the glass” option, so
named in honor of the hotel fire alarm stations that tell you to break the glass and pull the big red
lever in the event of an emergency. In this case, “breaking the glass” means obtaining a password
that you wouldn’t normally have access to, with loud alarms being forwarded to other
administrators. It’s a nice compromise between parsimonious password sharing (a normal best
practice) and the realities of emergency fire fighting.

     See this page for more information about the passwd file.

Poor password management is a common security weakness. By default, the contents of the
/etc/passwd and /etc/shadow files (or on FreeBSD, the /etc/master.passwd file) determine who
can log in, so these files are the system’s first line of defense against intruders. They must be
scrupulously maintained and free of errors, security hazards, and historical baggage.
UNIX allows users to choose their own passwords, and although this is a great convenience, it
leads to many security problems. The comments in the section Passwords and user accounts
apply equally to user passwords.
It is important to regularly verify (preferably daily) that every login has a password. Entries in
the /etc/shadow file that describe pseudo-users such as “daemon” who own files but never log in
should have a star or an exclamation point in their encrypted password fields. These do not match
any password and thus prevent use of the account.

At sites that use a centralized authentication scheme such as LDAP or Active Directory, the same
logic applies. Enforce password complexity requirements and lock out accounts after a few failed
login attempts.
Password aging
Most systems that have shadow passwords also let you compel users to change their passwords
periodically, a facility known as password aging. This feature may seem appealing at first glance,
but it has several problems. Users often resent having to change their passwords, and since they
don’t want to forget the new password, they choose something simple that is easy to type and
remember. Many users switch between two passwords each time they are forced to change, or
increment a digit in the password, defeating the purpose of password aging. PAM modules (see
this page) can help enforce strong passwords to avoid this pitfall.
      On Linux systems, the chage program controls password aging. Using chage,
      administrators can enforce minimum and maximum times between password changes,
password expiration dates, the number of days to warn users before their passwords expire, the
number of days of inactivity that are permissible before accounts are automatically locked, and
more. The following command sets the minimum number of days between password changes to
2, sets the maximum number to 90, sets the expiration date to July 31, 2017, and warns the user
for 14 days that the expiration date is approaching:

     Under FreeBSD, the pw command manages password aging parameters. This example sets
     the password validity period to 90 days and sets the expiration date to September 25, 2017.
Group logins and shared logins
Any login that is used by more than one person is bad news. Group logins (e.g., “guest” or
“demo”) are sure terrain for hackers to homestead and are prohibited in many contexts by federal
regulations such as HIPAA. Don’t allow them at your site. However, technical controls can’t
prevent users from sharing passwords, so education is the best enforcement tactic.
User shells
In theory, you can set the shell for a user account to be just about any program, including a
custom script. In practice, the use of shells other than standards such as bash and tcsh is a
dangerous practice. If you find yourself tempted to create such a login, you might consider a
passphrase-less SSH key pair instead.
Rootly entries
The only distinguishing feature of the root login is its UID of zero. Since there can be more than
one entry in the /etc/passwd file that uses this UID, there can be more than one way to log in as
root.
A common way for a hacker to install a back door after having obtained a root shell is to edit
new root logins into /etc/passwd. Programs such as who and w refer to the name stored in utmp
rather than the UID that owns the login shell, so they cannot expose hackers that appear to be
innocent users but are really logged in as UID 0.
Don’t allow root to log in remotely, even through the standard root account. Under OpenSSH,
you can set the PermitRootLogin configuration option to No in the /etc/ssh/sshd_config file to enforce
this restriction.
Because of sudo (see this page), it’s rare that you’ll ever need to log in as root, even on the
system console.
27.5 SECURITY POWER TOOLS
Some of the time-consuming chores mentioned in the previous sections can be automated with
freely available tools. Here are a few of the tools you’ll want to look at.
Nmap: network port scanner
Nmap’s main function is to check a set of target hosts to see which TCP and UDP ports have
servers listening on them. (As described here, a port is a numbered communication channel. An
IP address identifies an entire machine, and an IP address + port number identifies a specific
server or network conversation on that machine.) Since most network services are associated
with “well known” port numbers, this information tells you quite a lot about the software a
machine is running.
Running Nmap is a great way to find out what a system looks like to someone on the outside who
is trying to break in. For example, here’s a report from a production Ubuntu system:

By default, nmap includes the -sT argument to try to connect to each privileged or well-known
TCP port on the target host in the normal way. Use the -p option to explicitly specify a range of
ports to scan.
Once a connection has been established, nmap immediately disconnects, which is impolite but
not harmful to a properly written network server.
From the example above, we can see that the host ubuntu is running two services that are likely
to be unused and that have historically been associated with security problems: portmap (rpcbind)
and an email server (smtp). An attacker would most likely probe those ports for more information
as a next step in the information-gathering process.
The STATE column in nmap’s output shows open for ports that have servers listening, closed for
ports with no server, unfiltered for ports in an unknown state, and filtered for ports that cannot be
probed because of an intervening packet filter. nmap does not classify ports as unfiltered unless it is
running an ACK scan. Here are results from a more secure server, secure.booklab.atrust.com:
In this case, it’s clear that the host is set up to allow SMTP (email) and an HTTP server. A
firewall blocks access to other ports.
In addition to straightforward TCP and UDP probes, nmap also has a repertoire of sneaky ways
to probe ports without initiating an actual connection. In most cases, nmap probes with packets
that look like they come from the middle of a TCP conversation (rather than the beginning) and
waits for diagnostic packets to be sent back. These stealth probes may be effective at getting past
a firewall or at avoiding detection by a network security monitor on the lookout for port scanners.
If your site uses a firewall (see Firewalls), it’s a good idea to probe it with these alternative
scanning modes to see what they turn up.
nmap has the magical and useful ability to guess what operating system a remote system is
running by looking at the particulars of its implementation of TCP/IP. It can sometimes even
identify the software that’s running on an open port. The -O and -sV options, respectively, turn
on this behavior. For example:

This feature can be useful for taking an inventory of a local network. Unfortunately, it is also
useful to hackers, who can base their attacks on known weaknesses of the target OSes and
servers.
Keep in mind that most administrators don’t appreciate your efforts to scan their network and
point out its vulnerabilities, however well-intentioned your motive. Do not run nmap on
someone else’s network without permission from one of that network’s administrators.
Nessus: next-generation network scanner
Nessus, originally released by Renaud Deraison in 1998, is a powerful and useful software
vulnerability scanner. At this point, it uses more than 31,000 plug-ins to check for both local and
remote security flaws. Although it is now a closed source, proprietary product, it is still freely
available, and new plug-ins are released regularly. It is the most widely accepted and complete
vulnerability scanner available.
Nessus prides itself on being the security scanner that takes nothing for granted. Instead of
assuming that all web servers run on port 80, for instance, it scans for web servers running on
any port and checks them for vulnerabilities. Instead of relying on the version numbers reported
by the service it has connected to, Nessus can attempt to exploit known vulnerabilities to see if
the service is susceptible.
Although a substantial amount of setup time is required to get Nessus running (it requires several
packages that aren’t installed on a typical system), it’s well worth the effort. The Nessus system
includes a client and a server. The server acts as a database and the client handles the GUI
presentation. Nessus servers and clients exist for both Windows and UNIX platforms.
One of the great advantages of Nessus is the system’s modular design, which makes it easy for
third parties to add new security checks. Thanks to an active user community, Nessus is likely to
be a useful tool for years to come.
Metasploit: penetration testing software
Penetration testing is the act of breaking into a computer network with the owner’s permission
for the purpose of discovering security weaknesses. Metasploit is an open source software
package written in Ruby that automates this process.
Metasploit is controlled by the U.S.-based security company Rapid7, but its GitHub project has
hundreds of contributors. Metasploit includes a database of hundreds of ready-made exploits for
known software vulnerabilities. For those that have the desire and the skill, it’s possible to write
custom exploit plug-ins to add to the database.
Metasploit uses the following basic workflow:
   1. Scan remote systems to discover information about them.

   2. Select and execute exploits according to the information found.
   3. If a target is penetrated, use included tools to pivot from the compromised system to
      other hosts on the remote network.
   4. Run reports to document the results.
   5. Clean up and revert all changes to the remote system.

Metasploit has several interfaces: a command line, a web interface, and a full GUI client. Choose
the format that you like the best; they have equivalent functionality. Learn more at
metasploit.com.
Lynis: on-box security auditing
If you were faced with finding holes in the walls of an old wooden barn, you might first walk
around the outside of the barn and look for the large, gaping holes. Network-based vulnerability
scanning tools like Nessus give you this view of a system’s security profile. Walking inside the
barn on a sunny day highlights the pinpoint-sized holes in walls. To get this same level of
inspection of a system, you need a tool like Lynis that runs on the system itself.
Although unfortunately named, this security power tool performs both one-time and scheduled
audits of a system’s configuration, patching, and hardening state. This open source tool runs on
Linux and FreeBSD systems and performs hundreds of automated compliance checks. Download
it from cisofy.com/lynis.
John the Ripper: finder of insecure passwords
One way to thwart poor password choices is to try to break the passwords yourself and to force
users to change passwords that you have broken. John the Ripper is a sophisticated tool by Solar
Designer that implements various password-cracking algorithms in a single tool. It replaces the
tool crack, which was covered in previous editions of this book.
Even though most systems use a shadow password file to hide encrypted passwords from public
view, it’s still wise to verify that your users’ passwords are crack resistant, especially the
passwords of system administrators who have sudo privileges.
Knowing a user’s password can be useful because people tend to use the same password over and
over again. A single password might grant access to another system, decrypt files stored in a
user’s home directory, and allow access to financial accounts on the web. (Needless to say, it’s
not security-smart to reuse a password this way. But nobody wants to remember hundreds of
passwords.)
Considering its internal complexity, John the Ripper is an extremely simple program to use.
Direct john to the file to be cracked, most often /etc/shadow, and watch the magic happen:

In this example, 25 unique passwords were read from the shadow file. As passwords are cracked,
john prints them to the screen and saves them to a file called john.pot. The output contains the
password in the left column with the login in parentheses in the right column. To reprint
passwords after john has completed, run the same command with the -show argument.
As of this writing, the most recent stable version of John the Ripper is 1.8.0. It’s available from
openwall.com/john. Since John the Ripper’s output contains the passwords it has broken,
carefully protect this output and delete it as soon as you are done checking to see which users’
passwords are insecure.

As with most security monitoring techniques, it’s important to obtain explicit management
approval before cracking passwords with John the Ripper.
Bro: the programmable network intrusion detection system
Bro is an open source network intrusion detection system (NIDS) that monitors network traffic
and looks for suspicious activity. It was originally written by Vern Paxson and is available from
bro.org.
Bro inspects all traffic flowing into and out of a network. It can operate in passive mode, in
which it generates alerts for suspicious activity, or in active mode, in which it injects traffic to
disrupt malicious activity. Both modes likely require modification of your site’s network
configuration.
Unlike other NIDSs, Bro monitors traffic flows rather than just matching patterns inside
individual packets. This method of operation means that Bro can detect suspicious activity by
observing who talks to whom, even without matching any particular string or pattern. For
example, Bro can

      Detect systems used as “stepping stones” by correlating inbound and outbound traffic
      Detect a server that has a back door installed by watching for unexpected outbound
      connections immediately after an inbound one

      Detect protocols running on nonstandard ports
      Report correctly guessed passwords

Some of these features require substantial system resources, but Bro includes clustering support
to help you manage a group of sensor machines.
The configuration language for Bro is complex and requires significant coding experience to use.
Unfortunately, there is no simple default configuration for a novice to install. Most sites require a
moderate level of customization.
Bro is supported to some extent by the Networking Research Group of the International
Computer Science Institute (ICSI), but it’s mostly maintained by the community of Bro users. If
you are looking for a turnkey commercial NIDS, you will probably be disappointed by Bro.
However, Bro can do things that no commercial NIDS can do, and it can either supplement or
replace a commercial solution in your network.
Snort: the popular network intrusion detection system
Snort (snort.org) is an open source network intrusion prevention and detection system originally
written by Marty Roesch and now maintained by Cisco, a commercial entity. It has become the
de facto standard for home-grown NIDS deployments and is also the basis of many commercial
and “managed services” NIDS implementations.
Snort itself is distributed for free as an open source package. However, Cisco charges a
subscription fee for access to the most recent set of detection rules.
A number of third party platforms incorporate or extend Snort, and some of those projects are
open source. One excellent example is Aanval (aanval.com), which aggregates data from
multiple Snort sensors in a web console.
Snort captures raw packets off the network wire and compares them with a set of rules, aka
signatures. When Snort detects an event that’s been defined as interesting, it can alert a system
administrator or contact a network device to block the undesired traffic, among other actions.

Although Bro is a much more powerful system, Snort is a lot simpler and easier to configure,
attributes that make it a good choice as a “starter” NIDS platform.
OSSEC: host-based intrusion detection
OSSEC is free software and is available as source code under the GNU General Public License.
OSSEC serves up the following:

      Root kit detection
      Filesystem integrity checks
      Log file analysis
      Time-based alerting
      Active responses

OSSEC runs on the systems of interest and monitors their activity. It can send alerts or take
action according to a set of rules that you configure. For example, OSSEC can monitor systems
for the addition of unauthorized files and send email notifications like this one:

In this way, OSSEC acts as your 24/7 eyes and ears on the system. We recommend running
OSSEC on every production system.

OSSEC basic concepts
OSSEC has two primary components: the manager (server) and the agents (clients). You need
one manager on your network, and you should install that component first. The manager stores
the file-integrity-checking databases, logs, events, rules, decoders, major configuration options,
and system auditing entries for the entire network. A manager can connect to any OSSEC agent,
regardless of its operating system. The manager can also monitor certain devices that do not have
a dedicated OSSEC agent.
Agents run on the systems you want to monitor and report back to the manager. By design, they
have a small footprint and operate with a minimal set of privileges. Most of the agent’s
configuration is obtained from the manager. Communication between the server and the agent is
encrypted and authenticated. You need to create an authentication key for each agent on the
manager.
OSSEC classifies alerts by severity at levels 0 to 15; 15 is the highest severity.

OSSEC installation
OSSEC packages for most distributions are available at ossec.github.io.
Install the server on the system you want to be your OSSEC manager and then install the agent
on that and all other systems you want to monitor. The install script asks some additional
questions, such as to what email address alerts should be sent and which monitoring modules
should be enabled.
Once the installation has finished, start OSSEC with

Next, register each agent with the manager. On the server, run

You’ll see a menu that looks something like this:

Select option A to add an agent, and then type in the name and IP address of the agent. Next,
select option E to extract the agent’s key. Here’s what that looks like:

Finally, log in to the agent system and run manage_agents there:
On the client, you will see that the menu has somewhat different options.

Select option I and then cut and paste the key you extracted above. After you have added an
agent, you must restart the OSSEC server. Repeat the process of key generation, extraction, and
installation for each agent you want to connect.

OSSEC configuration
Once OSSEC is installed and running, you’ll want to tweak it so that it gives you just enough
information, but not too much. The majority of the configuration is stored on the server in the
/var/ossec/etc/ossec.conf file. This XML-style file is well commented and fairly intuitive, but it
contains dozens of options.
A common item you might want to configure is the list of files to ignore when checking file
integrity. For example, if you have a custom application that writes its log file to
/var/log/customapp.log, you can add the following line to the <syscheck> section of the file:

After you’ve made this change and restarted the OSSEC server, OSSEC will stop alerting you
every time the log file changes. The many OSSEC configuration options are documented at
ossec.net/main/manual/configuration-options.
It takes time and effort to get any HIDS system running and tuned. But after a few weeks, you’ll
have filtered out the noise, and the system will start to generate valuable information about
changing conditions in your environment.
Fail2Ban: brute-force attack response system
Fail2Ban is a Python script that monitors log files such as /var/log/auth.log and
/var/log/apache2/error.log. It looks for suspicious occurrences such as multiple failed login
attempts or queries to unusually long URLs. Fail2Ban then takes action to address the threat. For
example, it might temporarily block network traffic from a particular IP address or send email to
an incident response team. Learn more at fail2ban.org.
27.6 CRYPTOGRAPHY PRIMER
Most software is designed with security in mind, and that implies a strong dose of cryptography.
Security standards and regulations are opinionated about the selection of cryptographic
algorithms and the type of data that must be protected with cryptography. Nearly all network
protocols in modern use rely on cryptography for security. In short, cryptography is a pillar of
computer security and sysadmins encounter it every day. It’s well worth your time to understand
the basics.
Cryptography applies mathematics to the problem of securing communications. A cryptographic
algorithm, called a cipher, is the set of mathematical steps taken to secure a message. Such
algorithms are designed by committees of experts who represent academic, government, and
research interests from around the world. Acceptance of a new algorithm is a lengthy and tedious
process. By the time it makes its way to the masses, it has been thoroughly vetted.

Encryption is the process of using a cipher to convert plain text messages to unreadable
ciphertext. Decryption is the reverse of that process. Cryptographic messages (ciphertext) exhibit
several advantageous properties:

      Confidentiality: messages are impossible to read for everyone except the intended
      recipients.
      Integrity: it is impossible to modify the contents without detection.
      Non-repudiation: the authenticity of the message can be validated.

In other words, cryptography lets you communicate secretly over unsecured channels with the
added benefit of being able to prove the correctness of the message and the identity of sender.
Very valuable indeed.
Some ciphers offer only a subset of these features. Often, multiple ciphers are used together to
complete the full set, thus forming a hybrid cryptosystem.

Mathematics shows that strong cryptographic algorithms are reliably secure. However, software
that implements the algorithms might have weaknesses, and the security of systems that guard
cryptographic secrets might also be vulnerable, rendering the algorithms impotent. Protecting
your secrets and choosing well-designed, easily updated cryptography software is therefore
paramount.
Cryptographers have traditional names for three subjects who participate in a simple message
exchange: Alice and Bob, who wish to communicate privately, and Mallory, a bad actor who
wants to compromise their secrets, disrupt their communication, or impersonate one of the other
principals. We’ve adopted this convention.
The upcoming subsections introduce several cryptographic primitives, the associated ciphers, and
some common use cases for each.
Symmetric key cryptography
Symmetric key cryptography is sometimes called “conventional” or “classic” cryptography
because the ideas behind it have been around for a long time. It’s simple: Alice and Bob share a
secret key that they use to encrypt and decrypt messages. They must find a way to exchange the
shared secret privately. Once they both know the key, they can reuse it as long as they wish.
Mallory can only inspect (or interfere with) messages if she also has the key.
Symmetric keys are relatively efficient in terms of CPU usage and the size of the encrypted
payloads. As a result, symmetric cryptography is often used in applications where efficient
encryption and decryption are necessary. However, the need to distribute the shared key in
advance is a serious impediment to many use cases.
AES, the Advanced Encryption Standard from the United States National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST), is perhaps the most widely used symmetric key algorithm. Twofish and
its predecessor, Blowfish, designed by cryptographer and security expert Bruce Schneier, are also
options. These algorithms play a role in the security of every network protocol you can shake
your fist at, including SSH, TLS, IPsec VPNs, PGP, and many others.
Public key cryptography
A limitation of symmetric keys is the need to securely exchange the secret key in advance. The
only way to do so with complete security is to meet in person without interference, a major
inconvenience. For centuries, this requirement limited the practical utility of cryptography. The
invention of public key cryptography, which addresses this problem, was therefore an
extraordinary breakthrough when it occurred in the 1970s.
The scheme works as follows. Alice generates a pair of keys. The private key remains a secret,
but the public key can be widely known. Bob similarly generates a key pair and publishes his
public key. When Alice wants to send Bob a message, she encrypts it with Bob’s public key.
Bob, who holds the private key, is the only one who can decrypt the message.

Exhibit A: Sending a ciphertext message with public key cryptography

Alice can also sign the message with her private key. Bob can use Alice’s signature and her
public key to validate its authenticity. This process (simplified here for clarity) is known as a
digital signature. It proves that Alice, not Mallory, sent the message.
The Diffie-Hellman-Merkle key exchange method was the first publicly available public key
cryptosystem. Shortly thereafter, the RSA public key cryptosystem was circulated by the now-
famous team of Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman. These techniques are the
foundation of modern network security.
Public key ciphers, also called asymmetric ciphers, rely on the mathematical concept of trapdoor
functions, in which a value is easy to compute, and yet it is difficult and expensive to derive the
steps that produced that value. The performance characteristics of asymmetric ciphers generally
render them impractical for encrypting large quantities of data. They are often paired with
symmetric ciphers to realize the benefits of both: public keys establish a session and share a
symmetric key, and the symmetric key encrypts the ongoing conversation.
Public key infrastructure
Organizing a trustworthy and reliable way to record and distribute public keys is a messy
business. If Alice wants to send Bob a private message, she must trust that the public key she has
for Bob is in fact his and not Mallory’s. Validating the authenticity of public keys at Internet
scale is a formidable challenge.
One solution, adopted by PGP, is a so-called web of trust. It boils down to a network of entities
who trust each other to varying degrees. By following indirect chains of trust outside your
personal network, you can establish that a public key is trustworthy with a reasonable degree of
confidence. Unfortunately, the general public’s interest in attending key-signing parties and
cultivating a network of cryptofriends has been, shall we say, less than enthusiastic, as evidenced
by PGP’s continuing obscurity.
The Public Key Infrastructure, used to implement TLS on the web, addresses this problem by
trusting a third party known as a Certificate Authority (CA) to vouch for public keys. Alice and
Bob may not know each other, but they both trust the CA and know the CA’s public key. The CA
signs certificates for Alice and Bob’s public keys with its own private key. Alice and Bob can
then check the CA’s endorsements to be sure the keys are legitimate.
The certificates of major CAs such as GeoTrust and VeriSign are bundled with operating system
distributions. When a client begins an encrypted session, it will see that the peer’s certificate has
been signed by an authority already listed in the client’s local trust store. Hence the client can
trust the CA’s signature and can trust that the peer’s public key is valid. The scheme is depicted
in Exhibit B.

Exhibit B: Public key infrastructure process for the web

Certificate authorities charge a fee for signing services, the price of which is set according to the
reputation of the CA, market conditions, and various features of the certificate. Some variations,
such as so-called wild card certificates for entire subdomains or “extended validation certificates”
with a more rigorous background check for the requesting entity, are more expensive.
The CA is implicitly trusted in this system. Initially, there were only a few trusted CAs, but many
more have been added over time. Modern desktop and mobile operating systems trust hundreds
of certificate authorities by default. The CAs themselves are therefore high-value targets for
attackers, who would like to use the CA’s private key to sign certificates of their own devising.

When an authority is hacked, the entire system of trust is broken. Several CAs are known to have
been compromised by attackers, and in other widely discussed incidents, CAs are known to have
conspired with governments. We encourage readers to choose issuing CAs carefully when
purchasing signing services.
In 2016, Let’s Encrypt was launched as a free service (sponsored by organizations such as the
Electronic Frontier Foundation, the Mozilla Foundation, Cisco Systems, Stanford Law School,
and the Linux Foundation) that issues certificates through an automated system. By the end of
2016, this service had issued over 24 million certificates. Given the well-publicized operational
issues at some of the commercial CAs, we recommend Let’s Encrypt as a “probably just as
secure” free alternative.
It’s also easy to act as your own certificate authority. You can create a CA with OpenSSL, import
the CA’s certificate to the trust store throughout your site, and then issue certificates against that
authority. This is a common practice for securing services on an intranet where the organization
has full control over the trusted certificate store. See this page for more details.
Organizations should be careful when deciding to implement their own trusted authority on
company-issued machines. Unless you have the same rigorous and audited security in place that
the professional CAs do, you might just be creating a gaping vulnerability in your environment.
As a corollary, if you work for an organization that installs its own certificate in your computers’
trusted store, suspect that your own security may be compromised and act accordingly.
Transport Layer Security
Transport Layer Security (TLS) uses public key cryptography and PKI to secure messages
between nodes on a network. It is the successor to SSL, the Secure Sockets Layer, and you’ll
commonly see the acronyms SSL and TLS used interchangeably even though the old SSL is
obsolete and deprecated. TLS paired with HTTP is known as HTTPS.
TLS runs as a separate layer that wraps TCP connections. It supplies only the security for the
connection and does not involve itself in the HTTP transaction. Because of this hygienic
architecture, TLS can secure not only HTTP but also other protocols such as SMTP.
Once a client and server have established a TLS connection, the contents of the exchange,
including the URL and all headers, are protected by encryption. Only the host and port can be
determined by an attacker since those details are visible through the encapsulating TCP
connection. In the OSI model, TLS lies somewhere between layers 4 and 7.
Although the typical use case is one-way TLS encryption, in which the client validates the server,
it is possible and increasingly common to use two-way TLS, sometimes known as mutual
authentication. In this scheme, the client must present to the server a certificate that proves its
own identity. This is, for example, how Netflix clients (set-top boxes and anything else that
streams video from Netflix) are authenticated to the Netflix API.

The latest revision of TLS is 1.2. Disable all versions of SSL, along with TLS version 1.0,
because of known weaknesses. TLS 1.3 is under active development and introduces major
changes that will have significant implications for some industries.
A representative from the financial services industry attempted to influence a technical decision
on the TLS development mailing list, but he was about two years too late. The concern was
summarily rejected in an entertaining email thread. See the thread at goo.gl/uAEwPN.
Cryptographic hash functions
A hash function accepts input data of any length and generates a small, fixed-length value that is
somehow derived from that data. The output value is variously referred to as a hash value, hash,
summary, digest, checksum, or fingerprint. Hash functions are deterministic, so if you run a
particular hash function on a particular input, you will always generate the same hash value.
Because hashes have a fixed length, only a finite number of possible output values exist. For
example, an 8-bit hash has only 28 (that is, 256) possible outputs. Therefore, some inputs
necessarily generate the same hash value, an event known as a collision. Longer hash values
reduce the frequency of collisions but can never eliminate them entirely.
Hundreds of different hash functions are used in software, but the subset known as cryptographic
hash functions are of particular interest to sysadmins and mathematicians. In this context,
“cryptographic” means “real good.” These hash functions are designed to have pretty much every
desirable property you could want from a hash function, including the following:

      Entanglement: every bit of the hash value depends on every bit of the input data. On
      average, changing one bit of input should cause 50% of the hash bits to change.
      Pseudo-randomness: hash values should be indistinguishable from random data. Of
      course, hash values are not random; they are generated deterministically and
      reproducibly from input data. But they should still look like random data: they should
      have no detectable internal structure, should have no apparent relationship to the
      input data, and should pass all known statistical tests of randomness.

      Nonreversibility: given a hash value, it should be computationally infeasible to
      discover another input that generates the same hash value.

With a sufficiently high-quality hashing algorithm and a sufficiently long hash value length, we
can make the leap of faith of assuming that two inputs that generate the same hash value are in
fact the same input. Of course, that can’t ever be theoretically certain, because all hashes have
collisions. However, it can be made likely to any desired level of statistical proof by increasing
the length of the hash value.
Cryptographic hashes verify the integrity of things. They can certify that a given configuration
file or command binary has not been tampered with, or that a message signed by an email
correspondent has not been modified in transit. For example, to verify that a FreeBSD system
and a Linux system are using identical sshd_config files, we can use the following commands:
We’ve elided part of the hash values for simplicity. As is typical for most use cases, the output
values are shown here in hexadecimal notation. But keep in mind that the actual hash values are
just bags of binary data and that this data can be represented in multiple ways.
Many cryptographic hash algorithms exist, but the only ones recommended for general use at this
point are the SHA-2 and SHA-3 (Secure Hash Algorithm) families, which were selected through
an extensive review process by NIST. The older SHA-1 has been compromised and should no
longer be used.

Each of these algorithms exists in a range of variants with different hash value lengths. For
example, SHA3-512 is the SHA-3 algorithm configured to generate a 512-bit hash value. A SHA
algorithm without a version number, e.g., SHA-256, always refers to a member of the SHA-2
family.
Another common cryptographic hash algorithm, MD5, remains widely supported by
cryptographic software. However, it’s known to be vulnerable to engineered collisions, in which
multiple inputs yield the same hash value. Although MD5 is no longer considered safe for use in
cryptography, it’s still a well-behaved hash function and is theoretically OK to use for low-
security applications. But why bother? Just use SHA.
Open source software projects often publish hashes of the files they release to the community.
The OpenSSH project, for example, distributes PGP signatures (which rely on cryptographic
hash functions) of its tarballs for verification. To verify the authenticity and integrity of a
download, you calculate the hash value of the file you actually downloaded and compare it to the
published hash value, thus ensuring that you’ve received a complete and unmolested copy with
no bit errors.
Hash functions are also used as a component of message authentication codes, aka MACs. The
hash value inside a MAC is signed with a private key. The process of validating the MAC checks
both the authenticity of the MAC itself (by decrypting it with the corresponding public key) and
the integrity of the content (by checking it against the content hash). MAC schemes often play an
important role in web application security.
Random number generation
Cryptographic systems need a source of random numbers from which to generate keys. But
algorithms aren’t known for their random and unpredictable behavior. What to do?
The gold standard for randomness is data from physically random processes such as radioactive
decay and RF noise from the galactic core. These sources do exist: see random.org for access to
some actual random data and an explanation of how it’s derived. Interesting, but unfortunately
not directly helpful for day-to-day cryptography.
Traditional “pseudo-random” number generators use methods similar to those of hash functions
to generate sequences of random-looking data. However, the process is deterministic. Once you
know the internal state of the random number generator, you can reproduce the output sequence
exactly. Ergo, this is usually a poor option for cryptography. When you generate a random 2048-
bit key, you want 2048 bits’ worth of randomness, not 128 bits of number generator state that’s
been algorithmically massaged into occupying 2048 bits.
Fortunately, kernel developers have put considerable effort into recording subtle variations in
system behavior and using these as sources of randomness. Sources include everything from the
timing of packets seen on a network to the timing of hardware interrupts to the vagaries of
communication with hardware devices such as disk drives. Even on virtual and cloud servers,
there’s still enough entropy available in the environment to generate reasonably random
numbers.

All these sources feed forward into a secondary pseudo-random number generator that ensures
the output stream of random data will have reasonable statistical properties. That data stream is
then made available through a device driver. In Linux and FreeBSD, it’s presented as
/dev/random and /dev/urandom.
Two main things to know about random numbers:

      Nothing that runs in user space can compete with the quality of the kernel’s random
      number generator. Never allow cryptographic software to generate its own random
      data; always make sure it uses random data from /dev/random or /dev/urandom.
      Most software does this by default.
      The choice of /dev/random vs. /dev/urandom is a matter of dispute, and
      unfortunately, the arguments are too subtle and mathematical to summarize here. The
      short version is that /dev/random on Linux is not guaranteed to generate data at all if
      the kernel feels that the system has not been accumulating enough entropy. Either get
      educated and pick one side or the other, or just use /dev/urandom and don’t worry
      your pretty little head about this issue. Most experts seem to recommend the latter
      approach. FreeBSD users are excused from battle, as /dev/random and
      /dev/urandom on the BSD kernel are identical.
Cryptographic software selection
There is good reason to be highly suspicious of all security software, and the packages that
provide cryptographic services most of all. Major international governments are rumored to have
attempted to influence the design phases of cryptographic protocols and algorithms. It seems safe
to assume that several well-funded groups are eager to compromise any cryptographic project
that is not fully nailed down.
That said, we trust open source software more than closed. Projects such as OpenSSL have a
history of serious vulnerabilities, but those problems are disclosed, mitigated, and released in a
transparent, open forum. The project history and source code are examined by thousands of
people.
Never rely on home-grown cryptography of any sort. It is difficult enough just to use libraries
correctly! Bespoke cryptosystems are doomed to vulnerability.
The openssl command
openssl is an administrator’s TLS multitool. You can use it to generate public/private key pairs,
encrypt and decrypt files, examine the cryptographic properties of remote systems, create
certificate authorities, convert among file formats, and myriad other cryptographic operations.

Preparing keys and certificates
One of the most common administrative functions of openssl is to prepare certificates for signing
by a CA. Start by creating a 2048-bit private key:

Use the private key to create a certificate signing request. openssl prompts for metadata known
as the Distinguished Name (DN) to include with the request. It’s also possible to present this
information in an answers file instead of in-line, as shown below.

Submit the contents of admin.com.csr to the CA. The CA will perform a validation process to
confirm that you are associated with the domain for which you’re obtaining a certificate (usually
by sending email to an address within that domain), and will subsequently return a signed
certificate. You can then use admin.com.key and the CA-signed certificate in your web server
configuration.
Most of these fields are fairly arbitrary, but the Common Name is important. It must match the
name of the subdomain you want to serve. If, for instance, you want to serve TLS for
www.admin.com, make that your Common Name. You can request multiple names for a single
certificate or a wild card that matches all the names in a subdomain; for example, *.admin.com.
Once you have the certificate, you can examine its properties. Here are some of the details of a
wild card certificate for *.google.com:
The validity period is from Dec 15, 2016 through March 9, 2017. Clients who connect outside of
this window will see error messages that the certificate is no longer valid. Tracking and
managing certificate expiration dates is a common sysadmin responsibility.

Debugging TLS servers
Use openssl s_client to examine the TLS details of a remote server. This information can be
quite useful when you are debugging web servers having certificate problems. For example, to
examine the TLS properties of google.com (output truncated for brevity):

You can use openssl s_client to check which versions of the TLS protocol a server supports. See
also openssl s_server, which starts a generic TLS server. That can be handy for testing and
debugging clients.
PGP: Pretty Good Privacy

     See this page for more information about email privacy.

Phil Zimmermann’s PGP package provides a tool chest of bread-and-butter cryptographic
utilities focused primarily on email security. It can encrypt data, generate signatures, and verify
the origin of files and messages.
PGP has an interesting history that includes lawsuits, criminal prosecutions, and the privatization
of portions of the original PGP suite. Recently, PGP has been heavily criticized for exposing too
much metadata in its most common usage modes. Exposed message length, recipients, and clear-
text draft storage (among other things) are weaknesses that could potentially be exploited by
attackers, especially nation-state actors with generous resources. That said, PGP is still
significantly better than sending information in plain text.
PGP’s file formats and protocols are being standardized by the IETF under the name OpenPGP,
and multiple implementations of the proposed standard exist. The GNU project provides an
excellent, free, and widely used implementation known as GnuPG at gnupg.org. For clarity, we
refer to the systems collectively as PGP even though individual implementations have their own
names.
Unfortunately, the UNIX and Linux versions are nuts-and-bolts enough that you have to
understand a fair amount of cryptographic background to use them. Although you may find PGP
useful in your own work, we don’t recommend that you support it for users because it has been
known to spark many puzzled questions. We have found the Windows version to be considerably
easier to use than the gpg command with its dozens of different operating modes.

Software packages on the Internet are often distributed with a PGP signature file that purports to
guarantee the origin and purity of the software. However, it is difficult or impossible for people
who are not die-hard PGP users to validate these signatures. Users must have collected a library
of public keys from people whose identities they have personally verified. Downloading a single
public key along with a signature file and software distribution is approximately as secure as
downloading the distribution alone.
Some email clients add on a simple GUI for encrypted incoming and outgoing messages. Google
Chrome users can install the “end to end” extension to incorporate PGP support for Gmail.
Kerberos: a unified approach to network security
The Kerberos system, designed at MIT, attempts to address some of the issues of network
security in a consistent and extensible way. Kerberos is an authentication system, a facility that
“guarantees” that users and services are in fact who they claim to be. It does not afford any
additional security or encryption beyond that.
Kerberos uses symmetric and asymmetric cryptography to construct nested sets of credentials
called “tickets.” Tickets are passed around the network to certify your identity and to give you
access to network services. Each Kerberos site must maintain at least one physically secure
machine (called the authentication server) on which to run the Kerberos daemon. This daemon
issues tickets to users or services that present credentials (such as passwords) when they request
authentication.
In essence, Kerberos improves on traditional password security in only two ways: it never
transmits unencrypted passwords on the network, and it relieves users from having to type
passwords repeatedly, making password protection of network services somewhat more
palatable.
The Kerberos community boasts one of the most lucid and enjoyable documents ever written
about a cryptosystem, Bill Bryant’s “Designing an Authentication System: a Dialogue in Four
Scenes.” Despite its age it remains required reading for anyone interested in cryptography and is
available at

  web.mit.edu/kerberos/www/dialogue.html
Kerberos offers a better network security model than does the “ignoring network security
entirely” model, but it is neither perfectly secure nor painless to install and run. It does not
supersede the other security measures described in this chapter.
Unfortunately (and perhaps predictably), the Kerberos system distributed as part of Windows’
Active Directory uses proprietary, undocumented extensions to the protocols. As a result, it does
not interoperate well with distributions based on the MIT code. Fortunately, the sssd daemon lets
UNIX and Linux systems interact with Active Directory’s version of Kerberos. See the sections
starting on this page for more information.
27.7 SSH, THE SECURE SHELL
The SSH system, invented by Tatu Ylönen, is a protocol for remote logins and for securing
network services on an insecure network. SSH’s capabilities include remote command execution,
shell access, file transfer, port forwarding, network proxy services, and even VPN tunneling. It is
an indispensable tool, a veritable Swiss Army knife for system administrators.
SSH is a client/server protocol that uses cryptography for authentication, confidentiality, and
integrity of communications between two hosts. It is designed for algorithmic flexibility,
allowing the underlying cryptographic protocols to be updated and deprecated as the industry
evolves. SSH is documented as a group of related protocols in RFCs 4250 through 4256.

In this section we discuss OpenSSH, the open source SSH implementation that is included and
enabled by default on nearly every version of UNIX and Linux. We also mention a few
alternative solutions for the adventurous and open-minded.
OpenSSH essentials
OpenSSH was developed by the OpenBSD project in 1999 and has since been maintained by that
organization. The software suite consists of several commands:

      ssh, the client
      sshd, the server daemon
      ssh-keygen, for generating public/private key pairs
      ssh-add and ssh-agent, tools for managing authentication keys

      ssh-keyscan, for retrieving public keys from servers
      sftp-server, the server process for file transfer over SFTP
      sftp and scp, file transfer client utilities

In the most common and basic usage, a client establishes a connection to the server, authenticates
itself, and subsequently opens a shell to execute commands. Authentication methods are
negotiated according to mutual support and the preferences of the client and server. Many users
can log in simultaneously. A pseudo-terminal is allocated for each, connecting their input and
output to the remote system.
To initiate this process, a user invokes ssh with the remote host as the first argument:

ssh attempts a TCP connection on port 22, the standard SSH port assigned by IANA. When the
connection is established, the server sends its public key for verification. If the server isn’t
already known and trusted, ssh prompts the user to confirm the server by presenting a hash of the
server’s public key called the key fingerprint:

The intent is that a server administrator can communicate the host key to users in advance. Users
can then compare the information they received from the administrator to the server’s proffered
fingerprint when they first connect. If the two match, the host’s identity is proved.
Once the user accepts the key, the fingerprint is added to ~/.ssh/known_hosts for future use. ssh
won’t mention the server’s key again unless the key changes, in which case ssh displays a nasty
warning message that the server’s identity has changed.
In practice, this server verification dance is routinely ignored. Administrators rarely send the host
key to users, and users blindly accept the host key without verification. This rubber-stamping of
new host keys subjects users to man-in-the-middle attacks. Fortunately, the process can be
automated and streamlined. We discuss this issue in Host key verification with SSHFP.
Once the host key has been accepted, the server lists the authentication methods it supports.
OpenSSH implements all the methods described by the SSH RFCs, including simple UNIX
password authentication, trusted hosts, public keys, GSSAPI for integration with Kerberos, and a
flexible challenge/response scheme to support PAM and one-time passwords. Of these, public
key authentication is the most commonly used and is the method we recommend for most sites. It
offers the best balance of strong security and convenience. We discuss the use of public keys
with SSH in more detail in Public key authentication.

ssh and sshd can be tuned for varying needs and security types. Configuration is found in the
/etc/ssh directory, an uncharacteristically standard location among all flavors of UNIX and
Linux. Table 27.1 enumerates the files found in that directory.

Table 27.1: Configuration files found in /etc/ssh

In addition to /etc/ssh, OpenSSH uses ~/.ssh for storing public and private keys, for per-user
client configuration overrides, and for a few other purposes. The ~/.ssh directory is ignored
unless its permissions are set to 0700.
OpenSSH has a respectable though not impeccable track record for security vulnerabilities.
According to the CVE database (cve.mitre.org), several critical vulnerabilities were discovered in
early versions. The last of these was documented in 2006. Occasional denial-of-service and
bypass vulnerabilities continue to be announced, but most of them are considered relatively low
risk. Still, it’s wise to update the OpenSSH packages as part of your regular patching schedule.
The ssh client
Getting started with ssh is straightforward, but its power and versatility lie in its many options.
Through configuration you can choose cryptographic algorithms and ciphers, create convenient
host aliases, set up port forwarding, and much more.
The basic syntax is

For example, to check the disk space of /var/log:

If you specify a command, ssh authenticates itself to the host, runs the command, and exits
without opening an interactive shell. If you do not specify a username, ssh uses your local
username on the remote host.
ssh reads configuration settings from the site-wide file /etc/ssh/ssh_config and processes
additional options and overrides on a per-user basis from ~/.ssh/config. Table 27.2 lists some of
the more interesting options that you can tune in these files. We discuss some of these options in
more detail later in this chapter.

Table 27.2: Useful SSH client configuration options

When ssh assembles a final configuration, command-line arguments take precedence over entries
in ~/.ssh/config. The global configuration set in /etc/ssh/ssh_config is the lowest-priority source
of configuration options.
ssh sends the current username as the login name if another value is not specified. You can
supply a different username with the -l flag or the @ syntax:

Client options that are not available as direct arguments to ssh can still be set on the command
line with the -o flag. For example, you could disable host checks for a server:

The -v option prints debug messages. Specify it multiple times (maximum of three) to increase
verbosity. You’ll find this flag to be invaluable when debugging authentication problems.
For convenience, ssh returns the exit status of the remote command. Use this behavior to check
for error conditions when invoking ssh from scripts.
Consult man ssh and man ssh_config to familiarize yourself with available options and features.
Run ssh -h for a succinct summary.
Public key authentication
OpenSSH (and the SSH protocol generally) can use public key cryptography to authenticate
users to remote systems. As a user, you start by creating a public/private key pair. You give the
public key to the server administrator, who adds it to the server in the file
~/.ssh/authorized_keys. You can then log in to the remote server by running ssh with the remote
username and matching private key.

Use ssh-keygen to generate a key pair. You can specify which cryptographic algorithm to use, as
well as bit length and other characteristics. For example, to generate an ECDSA key pair with a
384-bit elliptic curve size:

The public key (~/.ssh/id_ecdsa.pub) and private key (~/.ssh/id_ecdsa) files are base64-encoded
ASCII files. Never share the private key! ssh-keygen sets the permissions on the public and
private key correctly as 0644 and 0600, respectively. This example uses ECDSA, but it’s also
fine to use -t rsa with 2048 or 4096 bits.

ssh-keygen prompts for an optional passphrase to encrypt the private key. If you use a
passphrase, you must type it to decrypt the key before ssh can read it. A passphrase improves
security because the authentication process gains an additional verification step: you must both
have the key file and know the passphrase that decrypts it before you can authenticate.
We suggest setting a passphrase on all privileged accounts (that is, those with sudo privileges). If
you need to use a key without a passphrase to enable an automated process, limit the
corresponding server account’s permissions.
If you’re the server administrator and you need to add a public key for a new user, follow these
steps:
   1. Ensure that the user has an active account with a valid shell.
   2. Get a copy of the user’s public key from the user.
   3. Create the user’s .ssh directory with permissions 0700.
   4. Add the public key to ~user/.ssh/authorized_keys and set the permissions of that file
      to 0600.
For example, if user hsolo’s public key were saved in /tmp/hsolo.pub, the process would look
like this:

If you do this more than once you’ll almost certainly find it prudent to script the procedure.
Configuration management systems like Ansible and Chef handle this task cleanly.
The ssh-agent
The ssh-agent daemon caches decrypted private keys. You load your private keys into the agent,
and ssh then automatically offers those keys when it connects to new servers, simplifying the
process of connecting.
Use the ssh-add command to load a new key. If the key requires a passphrase, you’ll be
prompted to enter it. To list the currently loaded keys, type ssh-agent -l:

You can have many keys active at once. Remove a key with ssh-add -d path, or purge all loaded
keys with ssh-add -D.
Oddly, to remove the private key from the agent, the public key must be in the same directory
and have the same filename but with a .pub extension. If the public key is not available, you
might receive a confusing error message that the key does not exist:

You can easily fix this problem by extracting the public key with ssh-keygen and saving it to the
expected filename. (This extraction is possible because the private key file contains a copy of the
public key as well as the private key.)

ssh-agent is even more useful when you leverage its key forwarding feature, which makes the
loaded keys available to remote hosts while you are logged in to them through ssh. You can use
this feature to jump from one server to another without copying your private key to remote
systems. See Exhibit C.

Exhibit C: ssh-agent forwarding
To enable agent forwarding, either add ForwardAgent yes to your ~/.ssh.config file or use ssh -A.

Use key forwarding only on servers that you trust. Anyone in control of the server you’ve
forwarded to can assume your identity and access remote systems. They cannot read your private
keys directly, but they can use any that are available through the forwarding agent.
Host aliases in ~/.ssh/config
You’ll undoubtedly encounter many different SSH configurations if you interact with or
administer a large number of servers. To simplify your life, the ~/.ssh/config file lets you set up
aliases and overrides for individual hosts.
For example, consider two systems. The first is a web server with IP address 54.84.253.153
where sshd listens on port 2222. Your username on that server is han and you have a private key
for authentication. The other is debian.admin.com, where your username is hsolo. You’d prefer
to disable password authentication entirely, but the Debian server requires it.
To connect to these servers from the command line you could use option-larded commands such
as these:

Your client in this case must leave password authentication enabled (the default) because it’s a
hassle to type -o PasswordAuthentication=no all the time.
The following ~/.ssh/config sets up aliases for these hosts and has the added benefit of disabling
password authentication by default:

Now you can use the much simpler commands ssh web and ssh debian to reach these hosts. The
client reads the aliases and sets options automatically for each system.
ssh also understands some basic patterns for matching hosts. For example:
This example tells ssh to keep idle connections open for 30 minutes on all servers. It also sets
username “luke” when connecting to hosts on the 172.20/16 network.
Host aliases become more powerful than you can possibly imagine when combined with other
tricks of the OpenSSH trade.
Connection multiplexing
            is a nifty ssh feature that enables connection multiplexing, thus considerably
ControlMaster
improving SSH performance over WAN links. When enabled, the first connection to a host
creates a socket that can be reused. Subsequent connections share the socket but require separate
authentication.
Turn on multiplexing with the ControlMaster, ControlPath, and ControlPersist options in a Host alias:

ControlMaster auto enables the feature. ControlPath creates a socket at the designated location. See man
ssh_config for the substitutions that can be used in the ControlPath filename. In this case, the file is
named according to the remote login username, host IP address, and port. Connecting to this host
results in a socket like this one:

Such a pattern guarantees a unique filename for each socket. ControlPersist saves the socket for the
specified period of time even if the first connection (the “master”) disconnects.
Spend the 30 seconds it takes to set this up, then make a donation to the OpenBSD foundation to
thank them for implementing multiplexing and saving you time.
Port forwarding
Another useful ancillary feature of SSH is its ability to tunnel TCP connections securely through
an encrypted channel, thereby allowing connectivity to insecure or firewalled services at remote
sites. Exhibit D shows a typical use of an SSH tunnel and should help clarify how it works.

Exhibit D: An SSH tunnel for HTTP

In this scenario, a remote user—let’s call her Alice—wants to establish an HTTP connection to a
web server on an enterprise network. Access to that host or to port 80 is blocked by the firewall,
but having SSH access, Alice can route the connection through the SSH server.
To set this up, Alice logs in to the remote SSH server with ssh. On the ssh command line, she
specifies an arbitrary (but specific; in this case, 8000) local port that ssh should forward through
the secure tunnel to the remote web server’s port 80.

All source ports in this example are marked as random since programs choose an arbitrary port
from which to initiate connections.
To access the web server, Alice can now connect to port 8000 on her own machine. The local ssh
receives the connection and tunnels Alice’s traffic over the existing SSH connection to the
remote sshd. In turn, sshd forwards the connection to the web server on port 80.
Of course, tunnels such as these can be intentional or unintentional back doors as well. Use
tunnels with caution and also watch for unauthorized use of this facility by users. You can
disable port forwarding in sshd with the AllowTCPForwarding no configuration option.
sshd: the OpenSSH server
The OpenSSH server daemon, sshd, listens on port 22 (by default) for connections from clients.
Its configuration file, /etc/ssh/sshd_config, boasts myriad options, some of which may need to
be tuned for your site.
sshd runs as root. It forks an unprivileged child process for each connected client with the same
permissions as the connecting user. If you make changes to the sshd_config file, you can force
sshd to reload by sending a HUP signal to the parent process.

In Linux, you can also run sudo systemctl reload sshd. The changes take effect for new
connections. Existing connections are preserved without interruption but continue to use their
previous settings.
The following example sshd_config includes some commonly adjusted options configured to
balance server security with users’ convenience:
We encourage you to list the acceptable ciphers and key exchange algorithms explicitly. We
don’t include the details here because the names are quite long and are a moving target anyway.
Follow Mozilla’s OpenSSH configuration guidelines, which can be found at goo.gl/Xxgx7H
(deep link into wiki.mozilla.org).
Host key verification with SSHFP
Recall from earlier in this section that SSH server host keys are routinely ignored by server
administrators and users alike. Cloud instances exacerbate the problem because even the
administrator has no knowledge of the host key before logging in.
Fortunately, a DNS record known as SSHFP has been developed to address this issue. The
premise is that the server’s key is stored as a DNS record. When a client connects to an unknown
system, SSH looks up the SSHFP record to verify the server’s key rather than asking the user to
verify it.
The sshfp utility, available from github.com/xelerance/sshfp, generates SSHFP DNS resource
records either by scanning a remote server (the -s flag) or by parsing a previously accepted key
from a known_hosts file (the -k flag; this is also the default). Of course, either choice assumes
that the source of the key is known to be correct.
For example, the following command generates a BIND-compatible SSHFP record for
server.admin.com:

Add these records to the domain’s zone file (be mindful of the names and the $ORIGIN), reload the
domain, and use dig to verify the key:

ssh does not consult SSHFP records by default. Add the VerifyHostKeyDNS option to
/etc/ssh/ssh_config to enable checking. As with most SSH client options, you can also pass -o
VerifyHostKeyDNS=yes on the ssh command line when you first access a new system.
You can automate this process by generating the SSHFP record in the server’s initialization
scripts. Use dynamic DNS or your favorite DNS provider’s API to create the record.
File transfers
OpenSSH has two utilities for transferring files: scp and sftp. On the server side, sshd runs a
separate process called sftp-server to handle file transfers. SFTP has no relationship to the older
and insecure File Transfer Protocol, FTP.
You can use scp to copy files from your system to a remote host, from a remote host to your
system, or between remote hosts. The syntax mirrors that of cp with some extra decorations to
designate hosts and usernames.

sftp is an interactive experience similar to a traditional FTP client. You can also find graphical
SFTP interfaces for most desktop operating systems.
Alternatives for secure logins
Most systems and sites rely on OpenSSH for secure remote access, but it is not the only choice.
Dropbear is an SSH implementation with a focus on maintaining a compact footprint. It compiles
to a statically linked 110KiB binary, perfect for consumer-grade routers and other embedded
devices. It includes some of the same features as OpenSSH, such as public key authentication
and agent forwarding.
Gravitational’s Teleport is another alternative SSH server that offers several advantages. Its
authentication model relies on expiring certificates, which eliminates the problem of distributing
and configuring users’ public keys. Among Teleport’s impressive features are an optional audit
trail for each connection and a nifty collaboration system that lets multiple users share a session.
Compared to OpenSSH, Teleport is relatively new and unproven, but to date there have been no
reported vulnerabilities. We expect Gravitational to continue their rapid pace of development.
Mosh, developed by a brilliant team at MIT, is a replacement for SSH. Unlike SSH, Mosh
operates on encrypted and authenticated UDP datagrams. It is designed for better performance
over WAN connections and for roaming. For example, you can resume connections if you move
from one IP address to another or if your connection drops. First released in 2012, Mosh has a
much shorter history than OpenSSH, but in its first few years it has had no reported security
vulnerabilities. Like Dropbear, it has a much smaller footprint than OpenSSH.
27.8 FIREWALLS
In addition to protecting individual machines, you can also implement security precautions at the
network level. The basic tool of network security is the firewall, a device or piece of software
that prevents unwanted packets from accessing networks and systems. Firewalls are ubiquitous
today and are found in devices ranging from desktop systems and servers to consumer routers
and enterprise-grade network appliances.
Packet-filtering firewalls
A packet-filtering firewall limits the types of traffic that can pass through your Internet gateway
(or through an internal gateway that separates domains within your organization) according to
information in the packet header. It’s much like driving your car through a customs checkpoint at
an international border crossing. You specify which destination addresses, port numbers, and
protocol types are acceptable, and the gateway simply discards (and in some cases, logs) packets
that don’t meet the profile.
Packet-filtering software is included in Linux systems in the form of iptables (and its easier-to-
use front end, ufw) and on FreeBSD as ipfw. See the details beginning here for more
information.
Although these tools are capable of sophisticated filtering and bring a welcome extra dose of
security, we generally discourage the use of UNIX and Linux systems as network routers and,
most especially, as enterprise firewall routers. The complexity of general-purpose operating
systems makes them inherently less secure and less reliable than task-specific devices. Dedicated
firewall appliances such as those made by Check Point and Cisco are a better option for site-wide
network protection.
Filtering of services
Most well-known services are associated with a network port in the /etc/services file or its
vendor-specific equivalent. The daemons responsible for these services bind to the appropriate
ports and wait for connections from remote sites. Most of the well-known service ports are
“privileged,” meaning that their port numbers are in the range 1 to 1023. These ports can be used
only by a process running as root (or with an appropriate Linux capability). Port numbers 1024
and higher are referred to as nonprivileged ports.
Service-specific filtering is predicated on the assumption that the client (the machine that initiates
a TCP or UDP conversation) uses a non-privileged port to contact a privileged port on the server.
For example, if you wanted to allow only inbound HTTP connections to a machine with the
address 192.108.21.200, you would install a filter that allowed TCP packets destined for port 80
at that address and that permitted outbound TCP packets from that address to anywhere. (Port 80
is the standard HTTP port as defined in /etc/services.) The exact way that such a filter is installed
depends on the kind of router or filtering system you are using.
Modern security-conscious sites use a two-stage filtering scheme. One filter is a gateway to the
Internet, and a second filter lies between the outer gateway and the rest of the local network. The
idea is to terminate all inbound Internet connections on systems that lie between these two filters.
If these systems are administratively separate from the rest of the network, they can handle a
variety of services for the Internet with reduced risk. The partially secured network is usually
called the demilitarized zone or DMZ.
The most secure way to use a packet filter is to start with a configuration that allows no inbound
connections. You can then liberalize the filter bit by bit as you discover useful things that don’t
work and, hopefully, move any Internet-accessible services onto systems in the DMZ.
Stateful inspection firewalls
The theory behind stateful inspection firewalls is that if you could carefully listen to and
understand all the conversations (in all languages) that were taking place in a crowded airport,
you could make sure that someone wasn’t planning to bomb a plane later that day. Stateful
inspection firewalls are designed to inspect the traffic that flows through them and compare the
actual network activity to what “should” be happening.
For example, if the packets exchanged in an H.323 video sequence name a port to be used later
for a data connection, the firewall should expect a data connection to occur only on that port.
Attempts by the remote site to connect to other ports are presumably bogus and should be
dropped.
So what are vendors really selling when they claim to deliver stateful inspection? Their products
either monitor a limited number of connections or protocols or they search for a particular set of
“bad” situations. Not that there’s anything wrong with that; clearly, some benefit is derived from
any technology that can detect traffic anomalies. In this particular case, however, remember that
the claims are mostly marketing hype.
Firewalls: safe?
A firewall should not be your only means of defense against intruders. It’s only one component
of what ought to be a carefully considered, multilayered security strategy. Firewalls often confer
a false sense of security. If a firewall lulls you into relaxing other safeguards, it will have had a
negative effect on the security of your site.
Every host within your organization should be individually patched, hardened, and monitored
with tools such as Bro, Snort, Nmap, Nessus, and OSSEC. Likewise, your entire user community
needs to be educated about basic security hygiene.
Ideally, local users should be able to connect to any Internet service they like, but machines on
the Internet should only be able to connect to a limited set of local services hosted within your
DMZ. For example, you might want to allow SFTP access to a local archive server and allow
SMTP connections to a server that receives incoming email.
To maximize the value of your Internet connection, we recommend that you emphasize
convenience and accessibility when deciding how to set up your network. At the end of the day,
it’s the system administrator’s vigilance that makes a network secure, not a fancy piece of
firewall hardware.
27.9 VIRTUAL PRIVATE NETWORKS (VPNS)
In its simplest form, a VPN is a connection that makes a remote network appear as if it were
directly connected, even if it is physically thousands of miles and many router hops away. For
increased security, the connection is not only authenticated in some way (usually with a “shared
secret” such as a passphrase), but the end-to-end traffic is also encrypted. Such an arrangement is
usually referred to as a “secure tunnel.”
Here’s a good example of the kind of situation in which a VPN is handy. Suppose that a
company has offices in Chicago, Boulder, and Miami. If each office has a connection to a local
ISP, the company can use VPNs to transparently (and, for the most part, securely) connect the
offices across the untrusted Internet. The company could achieve a similar result by leasing
dedicated lines to connect the three offices, but that would be considerably more expensive.

Another good example is a company whose employees telecommute from their homes. VPNs let
those users reap the benefits of their high-speed and inexpensive cable modem service while
making it appear that they are directly connected to the corporate network.
Because of the convenience and popularity of this functionality, everybody is offering some type
of VPN solution. You can buy it from your router vendor as a plug-in for your operating system
or even as a dedicated VPN device for your network. Depending on your budget and scalability
needs, you may want to consider one of the many commercial VPN solutions.
If you’re without a budget and looking for a quick fix, SSH can do secure tunneling for you. See
Port forwarding.
IPsec tunnels
If you’re a fan of IETF standards (or of saving money) and need a real VPN solution, take a look
at IPsec (Internet Protocol security). IPsec was originally developed for IPv6, but it has also been
widely implemented for IPv4. IPsec is an IETF-approved, end-to-end authentication and
encryption system. Almost all serious VPN vendors ship a product that has at least an IPsec
compatibility mode. Linux and FreeBSD include native kernel support for IPsec.
IPsec uses strong cryptography to implement both authentication and encryption services.
Authentication ensures that packets are from the right sender and have not been altered in transit,
and encryption prevents the unauthorized examination of packet contents.
In tunnel mode, IPsec encrypts the transport layer header, which includes the source and
destination port numbers. Unfortunately, this scheme conflicts with most firewalls. For this
reason, most modern implementations default to transport mode, in which only the payloads of
packets (the data being transported) are encrypted.
There’s a gotcha involving IPsec tunnels and MTU size. You must ensure that once a packet has
been encrypted by IPsec, nothing fragments it along the network path the tunnel traverses. To
achieve this feat, you might have to lower the MTU on the devices in front of the tunnel. (In the
real world, 1,400 bytes usually works.) See this page in the TCP chapter for more information
about MTU size.
All I need is a VPN, right?
Sadly, there’s a downside to VPNs. Although they do build a (mostly) secure tunnel across the
untrusted network between the two endpoints, they don’t usually address the security of the
endpoints themselves. For example, if you set up a VPN between your corporate backbone and
your CEO’s home, you may inadvertently be creating a path for your CEO’s 15-year-old
daughter to have direct access to everything on your network.
Bottom line: you need to treat connections from VPN tunnels as external connections and grant
them additional privileges only as necessary and only after careful consideration. Think about
adding a special section to your site security policy to cover the rules applying to VPN
connections.
27.10 CERTIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS
If the subject matter of this chapter seems daunting to you, don’t fret. Computer security is a
complicated and vast topic, as countless books, web sites, and magazines can attest. Fortunately,
much has been done to help quantify and organize the available information. Dozens of standards
and certifications exist, and mindful system administrators should reflect on their guidance.
Certifications
Large corporations often employ many full-time employees whose job is guarding information.
To gain credibility in the field and keep their knowledge current, these professionals attend
training courses and obtain certifications. Prepare yourself for acronym-fu as we work through a
few of the most popular certifications.
One of the most widely recognized security certifications is the CISSP, or Certified Information
Systems Security Professional. It is administered by (ISC)2, the International Information
Systems Security Certification Consortium (say that ten times fast!). One of the primary draws of
the CISSP is (ISC)2’s notion of a “common body of knowledge” (CBK), essentially an industry-
wide best practices guide for information security. The CBK covers law, cryptography,
authentication, physical security, and much more. It’s an incredible reference for security folks.
One criticism of the CISSP has been its concentration on breadth and consequent lack of depth.
So many topics in the CBK, and so little time! To address this, (ISC)2 has issued CISSP
concentration programs that focus on architecture, engineering, and management. These
specialized certifications add depth to the more general CISSP certification.
The SANS Institute created the Global Information Assurance Certification (GIAC) suite of
certifications in 1999. Three dozen separate exams cover the realm of information security with
tests divided into five categories. The certifications range in difficulty from the moderate two-
exam GISF to the 23-hour, expert-level GSE. The GSE is notorious as one of the most difficult
certifications in the industry. Many of the exams focus on technical specifics and require quite a
bit of experience.

Finally, the Certified Information Systems Auditor (CISA) credential is an audit and process
certification. It focuses on business continuity, procedures, monitoring, and other management
content. Some consider the CISA an intermediate certification that is appropriate for an
organization’s security officer role. One of its most attractive aspects is that it involves only a
single exam.
Although certifications are a personal endeavor, their application to business is undeniable. More
and more companies now recognize certifications as the mark of an expert. Many businesses
offer higher pay and promotions to certified employees. If you decide to pursue a certification,
work closely with your organization to have it help pay for the associated costs.
Security standards
Because of the ever-increasing reliance on data systems, laws and regulations have been created
to govern the management of sensitive, business-critical information. Major pieces of U.S.
legislation such as HIPAA, FISMA, NERC CIP, and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) have all
included sections on IT security. Although the requirements are sometimes expensive to
implement, they have helped give the appropriate level of focus to a once-ignored aspect of
technology.

     For a broader discussion of industry and legal standards that affect IT environments,
     see this page.

Unfortunately, the regulations are filled with legalese and can be difficult to interpret. Most do
not contain specifics on how to achieve their requirements. As a result, standards have been
developed to help administrators reach the lofty legislative requirements. These standards are not
regulation-specific, but following them usually ensures compliance. It can be intimidating to
confront the requirements of all the various standards at once, so it’s usually best to first work
through one standard in its entirety.

ISO 27001:2013
The ISO/IEC 27001 (formerly ISO 17799) standard is probably the most widely accepted in the
world. First introduced in 1995 as a British standard, it is 34 pages long and is divided into 11
sections that run the gamut from policy through physical security to access control. Objectives
within each section define specific requirements, and controls under each objective describe the
suggested best practice solutions. The document costs about $200.
The requirements are nontechnical and can be fulfilled by any organization in a way that best fits
its needs. On the downside, the general wording of the standard leaves the reader with a sense of
broad flexibility. Critics complain that the lack of specifics leaves organizations open to attack.
Nonetheless, this standard is one of the most valuable documents available to the information
security industry. It bridges an often tangible gap between management and engineering and
helps focus both parties on minimizing risk.

PCI DSS
The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) is a different beast entirely. It
arose from the perceived need to improve security in the credit card processing industry
following a series of dramatic exposures. For example, in 2013, the U.S. government revealed
the exposure of 160 million credit card numbers by various Visa licensees, including JCPenney.
This is the largest cybercrime case in U.S. history; it’s estimated that more than $300 million was
lost.
The PCI DSS standard is the result of a joint effort between Visa and MasterCard, though it is
currently maintained by Visa. Unlike ISO 27001, it is freely available for anyone to download. It
focuses entirely on protecting cardholder data systems and has 12 sections that define
requirements for protection.
Because PCI DSS is focused on card processors, it is not generally appropriate for businesses
that don’t deal with credit card data. However, for those that do, strict compliance is necessary to
avoid hefty fines and possible criminal prosecution. You can find the document at
pcisecuritystandards.org.

NIST 800 series
The fine folks at NIST have created the Special Publication (SP) 800 series of documents to
report on their research, guidelines, and outreach efforts in computer security. These documents
are most often used in connection with measuring FISMA (the Federal Information Security
Management Act of 2002) compliance for those organizations that handle data for the U.S.
federal government. More generally, they are publicly available standards with excellent content
and have been widely adopted by industry.
The SP 800 series includes more than 100 documents. All of them are available from
csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html. Table 27.3 lists a few that you might want to consider
starting with.

Table 27.3: Recommended publications in the NIST SP 800 series

The Common Criteria
The Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation (commonly known as the
“Common Criteria”) is a standard for evaluating the security level of IT products. These
guidelines were established by an international committee consisting of members from various
manufacturers and industries. See commoncriteriaportal.org to learn more about the standard.

OWASP: the Open Web Application Security Project
OWASP is a nonprofit world-wide organization focused on improving the security of application
software. It is best known for its “top 10” list of web application security risks, which helps
remind all of us where to focus our energies when securing applications. Find the current list and
a bunch of other great material at owasp.org.

CIS: the Center for Internet Security
CIS has excellent resources for administrators. Perhaps the most valuable are the CIS
benchmarks, a collection of technical configuration recommendations for securing operating
systems. You can find benchmarks for each of our example UNIX and Linux systems. CIS also
has benchmarks for cloud providers, mobile devices, desktop software, network devices, and
more. Learn more at cisecurity.org.
27.11 SOURCES OF SECURITY INFORMATION
Half the battle of keeping your systems secure consists of staying abreast of security-related
developments in the world at large. If your site is broken into, the break-in probably won’t
happen through the use of a novel technique. More likely, the chink in your armor will turn out to
have been a known vulnerability that has been widely discussed in vendor knowledge bases, on
security-related newsgroups, and on mailing lists.
SecurityFocus.com, the BugTraq mailing list, and the OSS mailing list
SecurityFocus.com specializes in security-related news and information. The news includes
current articles on general issues and on specific problems. The site also includes an extensive
technical library of useful papers, nicely sorted by topic.
SecurityFocus’s archive of security tools contains software for a variety of operating systems
along with blurbs and user ratings. It is the most comprehensive and detailed source of tools that
we are aware of.
The BugTraq list is a moderated forum for the discussion of security vulnerabilities and their
fixes. To subscribe, visit securityfocus.com/archive. Traffic on this list can be fairly heavy,
however, and the signal-to-noise ratio is poor. A database of BugTraq vulnerability reports is
also available from the web site.
The oss-security mailing list (openwall.com/lists/oss-security) is an excellent source of security
tidbits from the open source community.
Schneier on Security
Bruce Schneier’s blog is a valuable and sometimes entertaining source of information about
computer security, cryptography, and squid. Schneier is the author of the well-respected books
Applied Cryptography and Secrets and Lies, among others. Information from the blog is also
captured in the form of a monthly newsletter known as the Crypto-Gram. Learn more at
schneier.com/crypto-gram.html.
The Verizon Data Breach Investigations Report
Released annually, this report is packed with statistics about the causes and sources of data
breaches, and it’s an entertaining read to boot. The 2016 edition suggests, based on an analysis of
3,141 incidents, that around 80% of data breaches are financially motivated. Espionage comes in
a distant second. This publication includes a useful breakdown of the types of attacks being seen
in the wild.
The SANS Institute
The SANS (SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security) Institute is a professional organization that
sponsors security-related conferences and training programs, as well as publishing a variety of
security information. Their web site, sans.org, is a useful resource that occupies something of a
middle ground between SecurityFocus and CERT. It’s neither as frenetic as the former nor as
stodgy as the latter.
SANS offers several weekly and monthly email bulletins that you can sign up for on their web
site. The weekly NewsBites are nourishing, but the monthly summaries seem to contain a lot of
boilerplate. Neither is a great source of late-breaking security news.
Distribution-specific security resources
Because security problems have the potential to generate a lot of bad publicity, vendors are
usually eager to help customers keep their systems secure. Most large vendors have an official
mailing list to which security-related bulletins are posted, and many maintain a web site about
security issues as well. It’s common for security-related software patches to be distributed for
free, even by vendors that normally charge for software support.
Security portals on the web, such as SecurityFocus.com, contain vendor-specific information and
links to the latest official vendor dogma.
Ubuntu maintains a security mailing list at
  https://lists.ubuntu.com/mailman/listinfo/ubuntu-security-announce

For Red Hat security information, subscribe to the “enterprise watch” list to get announcements
about the security of Red Hat’s product line. Find it at
  https://redhat.com/mailman/listinfo/enterprise-watch-list
Although CentOS advisories typically (always?) mirror Red Hat security advisories, it’s probably
worthwhile to subscribe to the CentOS list at
  https://lists.centos.org/pipermail/centos-announce/

FreeBSD has an active security group with a mailing list at
  https://lists.freebsd.org/mailman/listinfo/freebsd-security
Other mailing lists and web sites
The contacts listed above are just a few of the many security resources available on the net.
Given the volume of information that’s now available and the rapidity with which resources
come and go, we thought it would be most helpful to point you toward some metaresources.
One good starting point is linuxsecurity.com, which logs several posts each day on pertinent
Linux security issues. It also maintains a running collection of Linux security advisories,
upcoming events, and user groups.
(IN)SECURE magazine is a free bimonthly magazine that includes news about current security
trends, product announcements, and interviews with notable security professionals. Some of the
articles should be read with a vial of salt nearby, and always check the bylines. In many cases,
authors are just pimping their own products.
The Linux Weekly News is a tasty treat that includes regular updates about the kernel, security,
distributions, and other topics. LWN’s security section can be found at lwn.net/security.
27.12 WHEN YOUR SITE HAS BEEN ATTACKED
The key to handling an attack is simple: don’t panic. It’s very likely that by the time you discover
an intrusion, most of the damage has already been done. In fact, it has probably been going on for
weeks or months. The chance that you’ve discovered a break-in that just happened an hour ago is
slim to none.
In that light, the wise owl says to take a deep breath and begin developing a carefully thought out
strategy for dealing with the break-in. You need to avoid tipping off the intruder by announcing
the break-in or performing any other activity that would seem abnormal to someone who may
have been watching your site’s operations for many weeks. Hint: performing a system backup is
usually a good idea at this point and (hopefully!) will appear to be a normal activity to the
intruder. (If system backups are not a “normal” activity at your site, you have much bigger
problems than the security intrusion.)

This is also a good time to remind yourself that some studies have shown that 60% of security
incidents involve an insider. Be very careful with whom you discuss the incident until you’re
sure you have all the facts.
Here’s a quick 9-step plan that may assist you in your time of crisis:
   1. Don’t panic. In many cases, a problem isn’t noticed until hours or days after it took
      place. Another few hours or days won’t affect the outcome. The difference between a
      panicky response and a rational response will. Many recovery situations are
      exacerbated by the destruction of important log, state, and tracking information during
      an initial panic.
   2. Decide on an appropriate level of response. No one benefits from an overhyped
      security incident. Proceed calmly. Identify the staff and resources that must
      participate, and leave others to assist with the postmortem after it’s all over.

   3. Hoard all available tracking information. Check accounting files and logs. Try to
      determine where the original breach occurred. Back up all your systems. Make sure
      that you physically write-protect removable media if you connect them to a live
      system.
   4. Assess your degree of exposure. Determine what crucial information (if any) has
      “left” the company, and devise an appropriate mitigation strategy. Determine the level
      of future risk.
   5. Pull the plug. If necessary and appropriate, disconnect compromised machines from
      the network. Close known holes and stop the bleeding. CERT recommends steps for
      analyzing an intrusion. The document can be found at cert.org/tech_tips/win-UNIX-
      system_compromise.html.
   6. Devise a recovery plan. With a creative colleague, draw up a recovery plan on
      nearby whiteboard. This procedure is most effective when performed away from a
      keyboard. Focus on putting out the fire and minimizing the damage. Avoid assigning
      blame or creating excitement. In your plan, don’t forget to address the psychological
      fallout your user community may experience. Users inherently trust others, and
      blatant violations of trust make many folks uneasy.
   7. Communicate the recovery plan. Educate users and management about the effects
      of the break-in, the potential for future problems, and your preliminary recovery
      strategy. Be open and honest. Security incidents are part of life in a modern
      networked environment. They are not a reflection on your ability as a system
      administrator or on anything else worth being embarrassed about. Openly admitting
      that you have a problem is 90% of the battle, as long as you can demonstrate that you
      have a plan to remedy the situation.

   8. Implement the recovery plan. You know your systems and networks better than
      anyone. Follow your plan and your instincts. Speak with a colleague at a similar
      institution (preferably one who knows you well) to keep yourself on the right track.
   9. Report the incident to authorities. If the incident involved outside parties, report the
      matter to CERT. They have a hotline at (412) 268-5800 and can be reached by email
      at cert@cert.org. Include as much information as you can.
A standard form is available from cert.org to help jog your memory. Here are some of the more
useful pieces of information you might include:

      The names, hardware, and OS versions of the compromised machines
      The list of patches that had been applied at the time of the incident

      A list of accounts that are known to have been compromised
      The names and IP addresses of any remote hosts that were involved
      Contact information (if known) for the administrators of remote sites
      Relevant log entries or audit information

If you believe that a previously undocumented software problem may have been involved, report
the incident to the software vendor as well.
27.13 RECOMMENDED READING
DYKSTRA, JOSIAH. Essential Cybersecurity Science: Build, Test, and Evaluate Secure Systems.
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2016.
FRASER, B., EDITOR. RFC2196: Site Security Handbook. rfc-editor.org, 1997.

GARFINKEL, SIMSON, GENE SPAFFORD, AND ALAN SCHWARTZ. Practical UNIX and Internet Security
(3rd Edition). Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2003.
KERBY, FRED, ET AL. “SANS Intrusion Detection and Response FAQ.” SANS. 2009.
sans.org/resources/idfaq
LYON, GORDON “FYODOR”. Nmap Network Scanning: The Official Nmap Project Guide to
Network Discovery and Security Scanning. Nmap Project, 2009. How to use nmap, from the
author of nmap.
RISTIĆ, IVAN. Bulletproof SSL and TLS: Understanding and Deploying SSL/TLS and PKI to
Secure Servers and Web Applications. London, UK: Feisty Duck, 2014.

SCHNEIER, BRUCE. Liars and Outliers: Enabling the Trust that Society Needs to Thrive. New York,
NY: Wiley, 2012.
THOMPSON, KEN. “Reflections on Trusting Trust.” in ACM Turing Award Lectures: The First
Twenty Years 1966-1985. Reading, MA: ACM Press (Addison-Wesley), 1987.
