28 Monitoring

A commitment to monitoring is the distinguishing characteristic of a professional system
administrator. Inexperienced sysadmins often leave systems unmonitored and allow failures to be
“detected” when a frustrated, angry user calls the help desk because they’re unable to complete
an intended task. Slightly more clued-in administrative groups set up a monitoring platform but
disable after-hours notifications because they are too bothersome. In either case, fire fighting and
hilarity ensue. These approaches adversely affect the enterprise, complicate recovery efforts, and
give the sysadmin team a bad reputation.
Professional sysadmins adopt monitoring as their religion. Every system is added to the
monitoring platform before it goes live, and the battery of checks is regularly tested and tuned.
Metrics and trends are evaluated proactively so that problems can be spotted before they affect
users or put data at risk.
A major on-line video streaming service you may have heard of values their telemetry system so
much that they’d rather have a service outage than a monitoring outage. Without monitoring,
they’d have no idea what was happening anyway.
A monitoring-first philosophy (along with its associated tools) makes you a sysadmin superhero.
You develop a better understanding of your software and applications, fix small problems before
they snowball into catastrophic failures, and become more effective at finding error conditions,
debugging problems, and understanding the performance of complex systems. Monitoring also
improves your quality of life by letting you fix most issues at your convenience rather than at
3:00 a.m. on Thanksgiving Day.
28.1 AN OVERVIEW OF MONITORING
The goals of monitoring are to ensure that the IT infrastructure as a whole operates as expected
and to compile, in an accessible and easily digested form, data that are useful for management
and planning. Simple, right? But this high-level description covers a potentially vast territory.
Real-world monitoring systems vary in every possible dimension, but they all share this same
basic structure:

      Raw data is harvested from systems and devices of interest.

      The monitoring platform reviews the data and determines what actions are
      appropriate, usually by applying administratively set rules.
      The raw data and any actions decided on by the monitoring system flow through to
      back ends that take appropriate action.

Real-world monitoring systems range from trivially simple to arbitrarily complex. For example,
the following Perl script includes all the elements listed above:

The script runs the uptime command to obtain the system’s load averages. If the one-minute load
average is larger than 5.0, it sends mail to an administrator. Data, evaluation, reaction.
Once upon a time, a “fancy” monitoring setup involved collections of scripts like this that ran
from cron and commandeered a modem to send messages to sysadmins’ pagers. Today, you
have multiple options available at every stage of the monitoring pipeline.
Of course, you can still write individual monitoring scripts and run them from cron. If this is
really all you need, by all means keep things simple. But unless you are responsible for only one
or two servers, this ad hoc approach is normally not sufficient.

The following sections review the stages of the pipeline in a bit more detail.
Instrumentation
A wide range of data that may prove useful to your organization includes performance figures
(response time, utilization, transfer rate), availability figures (reachability and uptime), capacity,
state changes, log entries, and even business metrics such as average shopping cart value or click
conversion rate.
Because anything one might do on a computer is potentially of monitoring interest, monitoring
systems are usually data-source agnostic. They often come with built-in support for a variety of
inputs. Even data sources that lack direct support can normally be brought in with a few lines of
adapter code or a separate data gateway such as StatsD (see this page).
With so much data out there begging to be collected, the hard part of designing a collection
system can be knowing what to ignore. Avoid collecting data that does not have a clear and
actionable purpose. Data overcollection loads down both the monitoring system and the entities
being monitored. It also tends to obscure the values that are truly important, drowning them in a
sea of noise.
Unfortunately, it’s often not easy to distinguish useful data from dross. You must continually
reevaluate what is monitored and rethink how that data will be acted on throughout a system’s
life.
Data types
At the highest level, monitoring data can be grouped into three general categories:

      Real-time metrics, which characterize the operational state of the environment. These
      are typically numbers or Boolean values. In general, it’s the responsibility of the
      monitoring system to test these metrics against expectations and generate an alert if a
      current value exceeds a predefined range or threshold.
      Events, which often take the form of log file entries or “push” notifications from
      subsystems. These events, sometimes known as pattern-based metrics, can indicate
      that a state change, alarm condition, or other action has occurred. Events can be
      processed to form numeric metrics (e.g., a total or a rate), or they can trigger
      monitoring responses directly.

      Many of the data points collected by application monitoring software fall into the
      “event” category; sometimes they have quantitative data attached as well.
      Interrelationships among events (e.g., “the user looked at the Settings page but then
      canceled without changing anything”) are often helpful to investigate. General-
      purpose monitoring platforms tend not to be very good at this sort of cross-
      referencing, which is one reason that application monitoring is a category of its own.

      Aggregated and summarized historic trends, which are often time-series collections
      of real-time metrics. They allow for analysis and visualization of changes over time.
Intake and processing
Most monitoring systems revolve around a central monitoring platform that absorbs data from
monitored systems, performs appropriate processing, and applies administrative rules to
determine what should happen in response.
First-generation platforms such as Nagios and Icinga focused on detecting and responding to
problems as they occurred. These systems were revolutionary for their day and led us into the
modern world of monitoring. Nevertheless, they have been eclipsed over time by the industry’s
gradual realization that all monitoring data is time-series data. If values didn’t vary, you wouldn’t
be monitoring them.
Clearly, a more data-oriented approach was needed. However, monitoring data is usually so
voluminous that you can’t simply dump it all into a traditional database and allow it to
accumulate. That’s a recipe for poor performance and overflowing disks.
The modern approach is to organize monitoring around a data store that’s specialized for
handling time-series data. All data is stored for an initial period, but as the data ages, the store
applies increasingly high levels of summarization to limit storage requirements. For example, the
store might keep an hour’s worth of data at one-second resolution, a week’s worth of data at one-
minute resolution, and a year’s worth of data at one-hour resolution.

Historical data is useful not only for dashboard presentations, but also as a baseline for
comparison. Is the current network error rate 25% or more above its historical average?
Notifications
Once you have a monitoring framework in place, put careful thought into what to do with the
monitoring results. The first priority is usually to notify administrators and developers about a
problem that needs attention.
Notifications must be actionable. Structure your monitoring system so that everyone who
receives a given notification must potentially do something in response, even if the action is
something as general as “check later to be sure this was taken care of.” Notifications that are
purely informational train staff to ignore notifications.
In most cases, notifications need to extend beyond email to be optimally effective. For critical
issues, SMS notifications (that is, text messages) to administrators’ cell phones are easy and
efficient. Recipients can set their ring tones and phone volume so that they’ll be awakened in the
middle of the night if desired.

     See this page for more comments on ChatOps.

Notifications should also be integrated with your team’s ChatOps implementation. Less critical
notifications (such as job statuses, login failures, and informational notices) can be sent to one or
more chat rooms so that interested parties can actively receive subsets of alerts in which they
might be interested.
Beyond these basic channels, the possibilities are endless. An LED lighting system that changes
colors according to system status can be useful for at-a-glance status indication in a data center or
network operations center, for example. Other options for responding to situations identified by
the monitoring systems include

      Automated actions, such as dumping a database or rotating logs
      Calling an administrator on the phone
      Sending data to a wall board for public display

      Storing data in a time-series database for later analysis
      Doing nothing, and allowing later review through the system itself
Dashboards and UIs
Beyond alerting for clearly exceptional circumstances, one of the main goals of monitoring is to
present the state of the environment in a manner that’s more structured and easier to assimilate
than a bunch of raw data. Such displays are generically termed “dashboards.”
Dashboards are designed by administrators or by other stakeholders with an interest in particular
aspects of the environment. They use several different techniques to transform raw data into
infographic gold.
First, they’re selective in what they present. They concentrate on the most important metrics for a
given domain, the ones that indicate general states of health or performance. Second, they give
context clues to the significance and import of the data that’s shown. For example, problematic
numbers and states are typically shown in red, and primary metrics are depicted in larger font
sizes. Relationships among values are shown through grouping. Third, dashboards display data
series as charts, making them easy to assess at a glance.
Of course, most data that’s collected never shows up on a dashboard. It’s helpful if your
monitoring system also has a generalized UI that facilitates investigation and modification of the
data schema, allows you to make arbitrary database queries, and charts arbitrarily defined
sequences of data on the fly.
28.2 THE MONITORING CULTURE
This chapter is mostly about tools, but culture is at least as important. When you embark on a
monitoring journey, embrace the following tenets:

      If someone cares about or depends on a system or service, it must be monitored. Full
      stop. Nothing in the environment that a service or user depends on can remain
      unmonitored.
      If a production device, system, or service exposes monitorable attributes, those
      attributes should be monitored. Don’t let a server with a fancy “lights out” hardware
      management interface spend weeks futilely trying to notify you that a fan has failed.

      All high-availability constructs must be monitored. It would be unfortunate to learn
      that a primary server had failed only after the backup server failed, too.
      Monitoring is not optional. The work plans of every sysadmin, developer, ops staff
      member, manager, and project manager should include provisions for monitoring.
      Monitoring data (especially historical data) is useful to everyone. Make data easily
      accessible and visible so that everyone can use it to help with root cause analysis,
      planning, life cycle management, and architectural improvement opportunities. Put
      effort and resources into creating and promoting monitoring dashboards.
      Everyone should respond to alerts. Monitoring is not just an ops problem. All
      technical roles should receive notifications and work together to resolve issues. This
      approach encourages bona fide root cause analysis by whichever individuals are most
      suited to fix the underlying issue.

      Properly implemented, monitoring impacts quality of life in a positive way. A solid
      monitoring regimen frees you from the burden of worrying about what state your
      systems are in and empowers others to support you. Without monitoring and
      appropriate documentation, you are essentially on call 24 × 7 × 365.
      Train responders to fix alerts, not just suppress them. Evaluate false-positive or noisy
      alerts and tune them so that they no longer trigger inappropriately. Spurious alerts
      encourage everyone to ignore the monitoring system.
28.3 THE MONITORING PLATFORMS
If you plan to monitor multiple systems and more than a few metrics, it’s worth investing some
time into the deployment of a full-service monitoring platform. These are general-purpose
systems that collect data from multiple sources, facilitate the display and summarization of status
information, and establish a standard way to define actions and alerts.
The good news is that there are a variety of choices. The not-as-good news is that no single,
perfect platform as yet exists. When selecting from among the available options, consider the
following issues:

      Data-gathering flexibility. All platforms can absorb data from a variety of sources.
      However, that doesn’t mean that all platforms are equivalent in this regard. Consider
      the data sources you want to actually use. Will you need to read data from an SQL
      database? From DNS records? From an HTTP connection?

      User interface quality. Many systems offer customizable GUIs or web interfaces.
      Most well-marketed packages today tout their ability to understand JSON templates
      for data presentation. A UI is not just marketing hype; you need an interface that
      relays information clearly, simply, and comprehensibly. Will you need different user
      interfaces for different groups within your organization?
      Cost. Some commercial management packages come at a stiff price. Many
      corporations find value in being able to say that their site is managed by a high-end
      commercial system. If that isn’t so important to your organization, look at free
      options such as Zabbix, Sensu, Cacti, and Icinga.
      Automated discovery. Many systems offer to “discover” your network. Through a
      combination of broadcast pings, SNMP requests, ARP table lookups, and DNS
      queries, they identify all your local hosts and devices. All the discovery
      implementations we have seen work pretty well, but accuracy is lower on complex or
      heavily firewalled networks.
      Reporting features. Many products can send alert email, integrate with ChatOps, send
      text messages, and automatically generate tickets for popular trouble-tracking
      systems. Make sure that the platform you choose accommodates flexible reporting.
      Who knows what electronic devices you’ll be dealing with in a few years?
Open source real-time platforms
Although the platforms in this section—Nagios, Icinga, and Sensu Core—do a little bit of
everything, they’re known for their strength in handling instantaneous (or threshold-based)
metrics.
These systems have their proponents, but as first-generation monitoring tools, they’re gradually
losing favor to time-series systems, which we describe starting here. Most sites starting from
scratch would be better advised to opt for a time-series system.

Nagios and Icinga
Nagios and Icinga specialize in real-time notification of error conditions. Although they do not
help you determine how much your bandwidth utilization has increased over the last month, they
can track you down when your web server goes off-line.

Nagios and Icinga were originally forks of a single source tree, but modern-day Icinga 2 has been
completely rewritten. However, it remains compatible with Nagios in most respects.
Both systems include scores of scripts for monitoring services of all shapes and sizes, along with
extensive SNMP monitoring capabilities. Perhaps their greatest strength is their modular and
heavily customizable configuration system, which allows you to write custom scripts to monitor
any conceivable metric.
You can whip up new monitors in Perl, PHP, Python, or even C if you’re feeling ambitious and
masochistic. Many standard notification methods are built in—email, web reports, text messages,
etc. And as with monitoring plug-ins, it’s easy to roll your own notification and action scripts.
Nagios and Icinga both work well for networks of fewer than a thousand hosts and devices. They
are easy to customize and extend, and include powerful features such as redundancy, remote
monitoring, and notification escalation.

If you are deploying new monitoring infrastructure from scratch, we recommend Icinga 2 over
Nagios. Its code base is generally cleaner, and it has been rapidly accreting fans and community
support. From a functional perspective, its UI is cleaner and faster, and it’s able to autobuild
service dependencies, which can be essential in complex environments.

Sensu
Sensu is a full-stack monitoring framework that’s available both as an open source edition (Sensu
Core) and with paid, commercially supported add-ons. It has an ultramodern UI and can run any
legacy Nagios, Icinga, or Zabbix monitoring plug-in. It was designed as a replacement for
Nagios, so plug-in compatibility is one of its most attractive features. Sensu allows for easy
integration with Logstash and Slack notifications, and its installation process is particularly easy.
Open source time-series platforms
Detecting and responding to current problems is just one aspect of monitoring. It’s often equally
important to know how values are changing over time and how they relate to other values. Four
popular time-series platforms aim to scratch this itch: Graphite, Prometheus, InfluxDB, and
Munin.
These systems put the database front and center within the monitoring ecosystem. They vary in
their degree of completeness as stand-alone monitoring systems, and in general are designed for a
more modular world than traditional systems such as Icinga. You may need to supply some
additional components to build a complete monitoring platform.

Graphite
Graphite was arguably the vanguard of the new generation of time-series monitoring platforms.
At its core is a flexible time-series database with an easy-to-use query language. The reason for
the #monitoringlove movement and for the enormous influence that Graphite has had on front-
end UIs is the way that it aggregates and summarizes metrics. It started the move away from per-
minute monitoring and toward sub-second monitoring.

As you might guess from the name, Graphite includes graphing features for web visualization.
However, this aspect of the package has been somewhat eclipsed by Grafana. Graphite is better
known these days for its other components, Carbon and Whisper, which form the core of the data
management system.
Graphite can be combined with other tools to create a scalable, distributed, clustered, monitoring
environment that is capable of absorbing and reporting on hundreds of thousands of metrics.
Exhibit A shows an architectural diagram of such an implementation.

Exhibit A: Clustered Graphite architecture
Prometheus
Our favorite time-series platform today is Prometheus. It’s a comprehensive platform that
includes integrated collection, trending, and alerting components. The components are both
sysadmin- and developer-friendly, which makes it a great choice for a DevOps shop. It does not
allow for clustering, however, which may mean that it’s not the right fit for sites that require high
availability.

InfluxDB
InfluxDB is an extraordinarily developer-friendly time-series monitoring platform that supports a
broad array of programming languages. Much like Graphite, InfluxDB is really just a time-series
database engine. You’ll need to complete the package with external components such as Grafana
to form a complete monitoring system that includes features like alerting.
The data management features of InfluxDB are much richer than those of the alternatives listed
above. However, InfluxDB’s additional features also add some unwelcome complexity for
typical installations.
InfluxDB has had a somewhat troubled history of bugs and incompatibilities. However, the
current version appears to be stable and is probably the best current alternative to Graphite if you
are seeking a stand-alone data management system.

Munin
Munin has historically been quite popular, especially in Scandinavia. It’s built on a clever
architecture in which the data collection plug-ins not only provide data but also tell the system
how the data should be presented. Although Munin is still perfectly usable, modern alternatives
such as Prometheus should be considered for new deployments. Munin is still a useful tool for
application-specific monitoring in some cases; see this page.
Open source charting platforms
The two main choices for creating dashboards and charts are the graphing features built into
Graphite and a newer package, Grafana.
Graphite can draw data from stores other than Whisper (the native data-storage component of the
Graphite package), but this isn’t necessarily a well-trodden path.
As a database-agnostic package, Grafana does quite well at accommodating foreign data stores,
including all those listed in the previous section. At last count, more than 30 back ends were
supported. Grafana originally started out as an attempt to improve graphing for Graphite, so it’s
quite comfortable in a Graphite environment, too.
Both Graphite and Grafana present a dashboard-like graphing interface that can generate insight-
provoking and management-pleasing visualizations. You can use them to display anything from
low-level system metrics to business-level indicators. Bake-offs usually give the nod to Grafana
for its superior UI and prettier graphs.

Exhibit B shows a simple Grafana dashboard.

Exhibit B: Grafana dashboard example
Commercial monitoring platforms
Hundreds of companies sell monitoring software, and new competitors enter the market every
week. If you are looking for a commercial solution, you should at least consider the options listed
in Table 28.1.

Table 28.1: Popular commercial monitoring platforms

Whether their systems reside in the cloud, on a data center hypervisor, or in a closet, most
businesses should not be building their own monitoring stack. Outsourcing is cheaper and more
reliable. Hence, consider Datadog, Librato, SignalFx, or Sysdig Cloud if you need a monitoring
stack for a common set of applications or servers.
When investigating commercial monitoring platforms, you often first consider price. But don’t
forget to research the operational details as well:

      How easy is it to integrate into your configuration management system?

      How does the system deploy new plug-ins or checks to your hosts? Are they pushed
      or pulled?
      Does it integrate well with your existing notification platform if you have one?
      Does your environment allow the type of external connectivity needed to facilitate a
      cloud-based monitoring solution?

These are just a few of the questions you should be asking when researching platforms. In the
end, the best platform for your site is one that is easily configurable, meets your budget, and is
easily adopted by your users.
Hosted monitoring platforms
If you’re not interested in setting up and maintaining your own network monitoring tools, you
might want to consider a hosted (cloud) solution. Many free and commercial options exist, but a
popular one is StatusCake, statuscake.com. An external provider’s ability to see the internal
details of your network is limited, but hosted options work well for validating the health of
public-facing services and web sites.
A hosted monitoring provider can also liberate you from the constraints of your organization’s
normal Internet connection. If you rely on your upstream network to transport notifications from
an internal monitoring system—as most sites ultimately do—you may want to ensure that your
upstream network is itself monitored and instrumented so that staff can be marshaled in the event
of trouble.
28.4 DATA COLLECTION
The previous sections reviewed a variety of packages that can serve as a site’s central monitoring
engine. However, selecting and deploying one of these systems is only the first part of the setup
process. You must now make sure that the data and events you’re interested in monitoring make
their way into the central monitoring platform.
The details of this instrumentation process depend on the systems you want to monitor and the
philosophy of your monitoring platform. In many cases, you’ll need to write some simple glue
scripts to convert status information into a form that your monitoring platform can understand.
Some platforms, such as Icinga, come with a wide variety of plug-ins that harvest standard
metrics from commonly monitored systems. Others, such as Graphite and InfluxDB, make no
real provision for data input at all and must be supplemented by a front end that handles this role.

In the following sections, we first look at StatsD, a general-purpose data collection front end,
then review some tools and techniques for instrumenting some commonly monitored systems.
StatsD: generic data submission protocol
StatsD was written by engineers at Etsy as a way to track anything and everything within their
own environment. It’s a UDP-based front-end proxy that dumps any data you throw at it into a
monitoring platform for consumption, calculation, and display. StatsD’s superpower is its ability
to ingest and perform calculations on arbitrary statistics.
Etsy’s StatsD daemon was written in Node.js. But these days, “StatsD” refers more to the
protocol than to any one of the many software packages that implement it. (Truth be told, even
Etsy’s version is not the original; it was inspired by a similarly named project at Flickr.)
Implementations have been written in many different languages, but we focus on the Etsy release
here.
StatsD depends on Node.js, so make sure that package has been installed and configured
appropriately before you move on to installing StatsD. The Etsy implementation isn’t included in
most OS vendors’ package repositories, though other versions of StatsD often are; make sure you
don’t confuse them. It’s easiest to clone the Etsy version directly from GitHub:

StatsD is incredibly modular and can feed the incoming data to a variety of back ends and clients.
Let’s look at a simple example that uses Graphite as the back end.
To ensure that Graphite and StatsD communicate correctly, you must modify Carbon, Graphite’s
storage component. Edit /etc/carbon/storage-schemas.conf and add a stanza similar to the
following:

This configuration tells Carbon to keep 12 hours of data at 10-second intervals. Carbon
summarizes expiring data at 1-minute intervals and keeps that summary information for an
additional 7 days. Similarly, data at 10-minute granularity is maintained for a full year. There’s
nothing magic about these choices; you’ll need to determine what’s appropriate for your
organization’s retention needs and the data being collected.
The exact definition of what it means to “summarize” time-series data varies according to the
type of data. If you’re counting network errors, for example, you probably want to summarize by
adding up values. If you’re looking at metrics that represent load or utilization, you probably
want an average. You might also need to specify appropriate ways of handling missing data.

These policies are specified in the file /etc/carbon/storage-aggregation.conf. If you don’t
already have a working Graphite installation, you might find Graphite’s sample configuration
useful as a starting point:
Below are some reasonable defaults to include in the storage-aggregation.conf file.

Note that every configuration block has a regular expression pattern that attempts to match the
names of data series. Blocks are read in order, and the first matching block becomes the
controlling specification for each data series. For example, a series named sample.count would
match the pattern for the [count] block. The values would be rolled up by adding up data points
(aggregationMethod = sum).

The xFilesFactor setting determines the minimum number of samples needed to meaningfully
downsample your metric. It’s expressed as a number between 0 and 1 that represents the
percentage of non-null values that must exist at the more granular layer in order for the rollup
layer to have a non-null value. For example, the xFilesFactor setting for [min] and [max] above is 10%,
so even a single data value will satisfy this criterion, given our settings in the storage-
schema.conf file. The default is 50%. If the numbers aren’t thoughtfully set, you’ll get
inaccurate or missing data!
We can send some test data to StatsD with netcat (nc):
This command submits a value of 1 as a count metric (as indicated by the c) to the sample.count
data set. The packet goes to port 8125 on statsd.admin.com; this is the port on which statsd
listens by default. If this datum shows up in your Graphite dashboard, you’re ready to collect all
kinds of monitoring data through one of the many StatsD clients. See the StatsD GitHub wiki
page (github.com/etsy/statsd/wiki) for a list of some of the clients that can communicate with
StatsD. Or write your own! The protocol is simple and the possibilities are endless.
Data harvesting from command output
If you can investigate something from the command line, you can track it in your monitoring
platform. All you need is a few lines of scripting glue to extract the data nuggets you’re
interested in, which you then massage into a format your monitoring platform can accept.
For example, uptime shows the length of time that the system has been up, the number of
logged-in users, and the load averages over the last 1, 5, and 15 minutes.

As a human, you can parse the output at a glance and see that the current load average is 1.20. If
you want to write a script to check that value regularly or to feed it to another monitoring
process, you can use text manipulation commands to isolate the desired value:

Here, we use Perl to split the output wherever there’s a sequence of spaces and commas and to
print the contents of the tenth field (the 1-minute load average). Voilà!
Although Perl has been eclipsed by modern languages like Python and Ruby in most domains, it
remains the king of quick-and-dirty text wrangling. It’s probably not worth learning Perl solely
for this use, but Perl’s ability to phrase sophisticated text transformations as one-line commands
does come in handy.
We can easily expand this one-liner into a short script that determines the load average and
submits it to StatsD:

Compare this script with our one-line StatsD test command from this page and our one-line
parsing of uptime output above. Here, Perl has to run the uptime command and process its
output as a string, so that portion looks somewhat different from its one-liner equivalent. (The
one-liner relies on Perl’s autosplit mode.)
Instead of using nc to handle the network transmission of data to StatsD, we use a simple StatsD
wrapper that we downloaded from the Comprehensive Perl Archive Network at cpan.org. That’s
generally the preferred approach; libraries are less brittle than hacks, and they clarify the code’s
intent.
Many commands can generate more than one output format. Check the man page for the
command to see what options are available before you attempt to parse its output. Some formats
are much easier to deal with than others.

A few commands support an output format that specifically facilitates parsing. Others have
configurable output systems in which you ask for only the fields that you really want. Yet
another common option is a flag that suppresses descriptive header lines in the output.
28.5 NETWORK MONITORING
Network status monitoring has traditionally been many sites’ first foray into the wider world of
monitoring and dashboards, so it’s the first of several types of monitoring that we look at in a bit
more depth. In subsequent sections, we also look at OS-level monitoring, application and service
monitoring, and security monitoring.
The basic unit of network monitoring is the network ping, also known as an ICMP Echo Request
packet. We discuss the technical details more thoroughly starting here, along with the ping and
ping6 commands, which initiate pings from the command line.

The concept is simple: you send an echo request packet to another host on the network, and that
host’s IP implementation returns a packet to you in response. If you receive a response to your
probe, you know that all the network gateways and devices that lie between you and the target
host are operational. You also know that the target host is powered on and that its kernel is up
and running. However, because pings are handled within the TCP/IP protocol stack, they don’t
guarantee anything about the state of higher-level software that might be running on the target
host.
Pings don’t impose much overhead on the network, so it’s OK to send them frequently; say,
every ten seconds. Design your pinging strategy thoughtfully, so that it covers all important
gateways and networks. Keep in mind that if a ping can’t get through a gateway, neither can
monitoring data that reports the failure of pings. You’ll want at least one set of pings to originate
on the central monitoring host itself.
Network gateways aren’t required to answer ping packets, so pings might be dropped by a busy
gateway. Even a properly functioning network loses a packet now and then. Ergo, don’t set off
alarms at the first sign of trouble. It makes sense to collect ping data as binary event records (got
through/didn’t get through) and roll it up into aggregate measures of percentage packet loss over
longer terms.
You might also find it interesting to measure throughput between two points on the network.
That can be done with iPerf; see this page for details.

Most network devices support the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP), an industry-
standard way of naming and collecting operational data. Although SNMP has metastasized far
beyond its networking roots, we consider it obsolete for purposes other than basic network
monitoring.
SNMP is a rather large topic of its own, so we defer further discussion of it until later in this
chapter. See SNMP: the Simple Network Management Protocol for details.
28.6 SYSTEMS MONITORING
Since the kernel controls a system’s CPU, memory, I/O, and devices, most of the interesting
system-level state information you might want to monitor lives somewhere inside the kernel.
Whether you’re investigating a particular system by hand or setting up an automated monitoring
platform, you need the right tools to extract and expose this state information. Most kernels
define formal channels through which such information is exported.
Unfortunately, kernels are like other types of software; error checking, instrumentation, and
debugging features are often something of an afterthought. Although recent years have brought
improvements in transparency, identifying and understanding the exact parameter you might
want to monitor can be challenging and sometimes impossible.

    See this page for more information about the /proc filesystem.

A particular value can often be obtained in more than one way. In the case of load averages, for
example, you can read the values directly from /proc/loadavg on Linux systems or with sysctl -n
vm.loadavg on FreeBSD. Load averages are also included in the output of the uptime, w, sar,
and top commands (though top would be a poor choice for noninteractive use). It’s generally
easiest and most efficient to access values directly from the kernel (through sysctl or /proc) if
you can.
Monitoring platforms such as Nagios and Icinga include a rich set of community-developed
monitoring plug-ins that you can use to get your hands on commonly monitored elements. They,
too, are often simply scripts that run commands and parse the resulting output, but they come
already tested and debugged, and they often work on multiple platforms. If you can’t find a plug-
in that yields the value you’re interested in, you can write your own.
Commands for systems monitoring
Table 28.2 lists some command that are commonly used in monitoring. Many of these commands
yield wildly different output depending on the command-line options you supply, so check the
man pages for details.

Table 28.2: Commands that yield commonly monitored parameters

The Swiss Army knife of command-line data extraction is sar (short for “system activity
report”). This command has a sordid history, having originally been introduced in System V
UNIX in the 1980s. Old-school sysadmins are often identifiable by their fluency in sar.
The primary attraction of this command is that it has been implemented on a wide variety of
systems, so it enhances the portability of both scripts and sysadmins. Sadly, the BSD port is no
longer maintained.

The example below requests reports every two seconds for a period of one minute (i.e., 30
reports). The DEV argument is a literal keyword, not a placeholder for a device or interface
name.

This example is from a Linux machine with two network interfaces. The output includes both
instantaneous and average readings of interface utilization in units of both bytes and packets. The
second interface (eth1) is clearly not in use.
collectd: generalized system data harvester
As the work of system administration has evolved from wrangling individual systems to
managing fleets of virtualized instances, simple command-line tools have started to create a lot of
friction in the monitoring world. Although writing scripts to collect and analyze parameters is a
utilitarian and flexible approach, maintaining the consistency of that code base across multiple
systems quickly becomes cumbersome. Modern tools such as collectd, sysdig, and dtrace offer a
more scalable approach to collecting this type of data.
Collection of system statistics should be a continuous process, and the UNIX solution to an
ongoing task is to create a daemon to handle it. Enter collectd, the system statistics collection
daemon.
This popular and mature tool runs on both Linux and FreeBSD. Typically, collectd runs on the
local system, collects metrics at specified intervals, and stores the resulting values. You can also
configure collectd to run in client/server mode, where one or more collectd instances aggregate
data from a group of other servers.
Specification of the metrics to be collected and the destinations to which they are saved is
flexible; over 100 plug-ins are available to suit your exact needs. Once collectd is running, it can
be queried by a platform such as Icinga or Nagios for instantaneous monitoring or can forward
data to a platform such as Graphite or InfluxDB for time-series analysis.

An example collectd configuration file is shown below.
This basic configuration collects a variety of interesting system statistics every 30 seconds and
writes RRDtool-compatible data files in /var/lib/collectd/rrd.
sysdig and dtrace: execution tracers
sysdig (Linux) and dtrace (BSD) comprehensively instrument both kernel and user process
activity. They include components that are inserted into the kernel itself, exposing not only deep
kernel parameters but also per-process system calls and other performance statistics. These tools
are sometimes described as “Wireshark for the kernel and processes.”

     See this page for more information about Wireshark.

Both of these tools are complex. However, they are well worth tackling. A weekend spent
learning either one will give you amazing new superpowers and ensure your status as an A-list
guest on the sysadmin cocktail circuit.

     See Chapter 25 for more information about Docker and containers.

sysdig is container-aware, so it confers extraordinary visibility into environments where tools
such as Docker and LXC are in use. sysdig is distributed as open source, and you can integrate it
with other monitoring tools such as Nagios or Icinga. The developers also offer a commercial
monitoring service (Sysdig Cloud) that has full monitoring and alerting capability.
28.7 APPLICATION MONITORING
At the top of the software ziggurat, we find the holy grail: application monitoring. This type of
monitoring is rather vaguely defined, but the general idea is that it attempts to validate the status
and performance of particular pieces of software rather than systems or networks as a whole. In
many cases, application monitoring can reach into those systems and profile their internal
operations.
To make sure you’re monitoring the right things, you need business units and developers to join
the party and tell you more about their interests and concerns. If you have a web site that runs on
the LAMP stack, for example, you’ll probably want to make sure you’re monitoring page load
times, flagging critical PHP errors, keeping tabs on the MySQL database, and monitoring for
specific issues such as excessive connection attempts.

Although monitoring for this layer can be complex, this domain is also where monitoring gets
sexy. Imagine monitoring (and pulling into your beautiful Grafana dashboard) the number of
widgets you’ve sold in the past hour or the average length of time that an item stays in a
shopping cart. If you show your application developers and process owners that level of
functionality, you usually get immediate buy-in to add more monitoring and may even get some
help implementing it. Eventually, this layer of monitoring becomes invaluable to the business,
and you start to be viewed as the champion of monitoring, metrics, and data analysis.
Application-level monitoring can yield additional insight into other events within your
environment. For example, if widget sales decrease quickly, that might be an indication that one
of your advertisement networks is down.
Log monitoring
In its most basic form, log monitoring involves grepping through log files to find interesting data
you’d like to monitor, pulling out that data, and processing it into a form that’s usable for
analysis, display, and alerting. Since log messages consist of free-form text, implementation of
this pipeline can range in complexity from trivial to challenging.
Logs are typically best managed with a comprehensive aggregation system designed for that
purpose. We address such systems in the section Management of logs at scale. Although these
systems focus primarily on centralizing log data and making it easy to search and review, most
aggregation systems also support threshold, alarm, and reporting functionality.
If you need automated log review for a few specific purposes and are reluctant to commit to a
more general log management solution, we recommend a couple of smaller-scale tools: logwatch
and OSSEC.
logwatch is a flexible, batch-oriented log summarizer. Its primary use is to create daily
summaries of events reported in the logs. You can run logwatch more often than once a day, but
it isn’t designed for real-time monitoring. For that, you would probably want to take a look at
OSSEC, which we discuss here. OSSEC is promoted as a security tool, but its architecture is
general enough that it’s useful for other kinds of monitoring as well.
Supervisor + Munin: a simple option for limited domains
An all-singing, all-dancing platform such as Icinga or Prometheus might be overkill for your
needs or your environment. What if you’re only interested in monitoring one particular
application process and don’t want the headache of a full-fledged monitoring platform? Consider
combining Munin and Supervisor. They’re easy to install, require little configuration, and work
well together.
Supervisor and its server process supervisord help you monitor processes and generate events or
notifications when the processes exit or throw an exception. The system is similar in spirit to
Upstart or to the process-management portions of systemd.
As mentioned on this page, Munin is a general monitoring platform with particular strengths in
application monitoring. It’s written in Perl and requires an agent known as a Munin Node to be
running on all the systems you want to monitor. Setting up a new Node is easy: just install the
munin-node package, edit munin-node.conf to point to the master machine, and you’re good to
go.
Munin defaults to creating RRDtool graphs with the data that it collects, so it’s a nice way to get
some graphical feedback without much configuration. More than 300 plug-ins are distributed
with Munin, and nearly 200 others are available as contributed libraries. It’s likely that you can
find an existing plug-in that meets your needs. If not, it’s easy to write a new script for munin-
node to execute.
Commercial application monitoring tools
If you search Google for “application monitoring tool,” you’ll discover many pages of
commercial offerings to evaluate. For gold-star due diligence, you’ll also need to scrub through
layers of recent discussions regarding application performance monitoring (APM).

     See this page for more information about DevOps.

You’ll see many references to DevOps in these venues, and for good reason: application
monitoring and APM are key tenets of DevOps. They supply quantitative metrics that teams can
use to decide which areas of the stack would most benefit from efforts to improve performance
and stability.
We think New Relic (newrelic.com) and AppDynamics (appdynamics.com) are standouts in this
area. These systems’ capabilities overlap in many ways, but AppDynamics typically targets more
a “full stack” monitoring solution, whereas New Relic deals more with profiling behavior inside
the application layer itself.

Regardless of how you monitor your applications, it’s crucial to keep the development team
involved in the process. They’ll help ensure that all important metrics are being monitored. Close
cooperation on monitoring fosters the relationship between teams and limits duplication of effort.
28.8 SECURITY MONITORING
Security monitoring is a universe of its own. This area of operational practice is sometimes
known as security operations or SecOps.
Dozens of open source and commercial tools and services can be enlisted to help monitor an
environment’s security. Third parties, sometimes called managed security service providers
(MSSPs), render outsourced services. Despite all these options, security breaches remain
common and often go undetected for months or years.

It always sounds attractive to outsource security operations; then it becomes someone else’s
problem to make sure your environment is secure. But think of it this way: would you be
comfortable paying someone to watch your cash-filled wallet sit on a table with 10,000 other
wallets in a busy train station? If so, an MSSP might be a good fit for you!
Perhaps the most important thing to know about security monitoring is that no automated tool or
service is enough. You must implement a comprehensive security program that includes
standards for user behavior, data storage, and incident response procedures, just to name a few
elements. Chapter 27, Security, covers these basics.
Two core security functions should be integrated with your automated, continuous monitoring
strategy: system integrity verification and intrusion detection.
System integrity verification
System integrity verification (often called file integrity monitoring or FIM) is the validation of
the current state of the system against a known-good baseline. Most often, this validation
compares the contents of the system files (kernel, executable commands, config files) with a
cryptographically sound checksum such as SHA-512. If the checksum value of the file in the
running system is different from that of the baseline version, a sysadmin is notified. Of course,
regular maintenance activities such as planned changes, updates, and patches must be taken into
account; not all changes are suspicious.
Acceptable hashing algorithms change over time. For example, MD5 is no longer considered
cryptographically secure and should no longer be used.
The most commonly deployed FIM platforms are Tripwire and OSSEC; the latter is described in
more detail starting here. The Linux version of AIDE also includes file integrity monitoring, but
unfortunately, the FreeBSD version lacks this component.
Simpler is often better. A great bare-bones FIM option is mtree, which is native to FreeBSD and
has recently been ported to Linux. mtree is an easy way to monitor file state and content
changes, and it’s easily integrated into your monitoring scripts. Here’s an example of a quick
script that uses mtree:
With the -b flag, this script creates and stores the baseline. When run again with the -v flag, it
validates the current contents of /sbin against the baseline.
As with so many aspects of system administration, setting up a FIM platform and operating it
over time are wildly different propositions. You’ll need a defined process in place to maintain the
FIM data and respond to FIM alerts. We suggest feeding information from your FIM platform
into your monitoring and alerting infrastructure so that it is not sidelined or ignored.
Intrusion detection monitoring
Two common forms of intrusion detection systems (IDSs) are in use: host-based (HIDS) and
network-based (NIDS). NIDS systems examine the traffic transiting the network and attempt to
identify unexpected or suspicious patterns. The most common NIDS system is based on Snort
and is covered in detail starting here.
HIDS systems run as a set of processes on each system. They typically keep tabs on a variety of
things, including network connections, file modification times and checksums, daemon and
applications logs, use of elevated privileges, and other clues that may signal the operation of
tools designed to facilitate unauthorized access (“root kits”). A HIDS is not a one-stop solution
for security, but it’s a valuable component of a comprehensive approach.
The two most popular open source HIDS platforms are OSSEC (Open Source SECurity) and
AIDE (the Advanced Intrusion Detection Environment). In our experience, OSSEC is hands-
down the better choice. Although AIDE is a nice FIM platform on Linux, OSSEC includes a
broader array of functions. It can even be used in a client/server mode that supports non-UNIX
clients such as Microsoft Windows and a variety of network infrastructure devices.
Much like FIM alerts, HIDS data is only as useful as the attention that’s paid to it. HIDS is not a
“set it and forget it” subsystem, and you will need to integrate HIDS alerts with your overall
monitoring system. The most effective strategy we’ve found for addressing this issue is to auto-
open tickets for HIDS alerts in your trouble ticketing system. You can then add a monitoring
check that alerts on any unresolved HIDS tickets.
28.9 SNMP: THE SIMPLE NETWORK MANAGEMENT PROTOCOL
Years ago, the networking industry decided it would be helpful to create a standard protocol for
the collection of monitoring data. Hence, the Simple Network Management Protocol, aka SNMP.
Despite its name, SNMP is actually quite complex. It defines a hierarchical namespace of
management data and methods for reading and writing that data on each network device. SNMP
also defines a way for managed servers and devices (“agents”) to send event notification
messages (“traps”) to management stations.

Before we delve into the arcana of SNMP, we should note that the terminology associated with it
is some of the most wretched technobabble to be found in the networking arena. In many cases,
the standard names for SNMP concepts and objects actively lead you away from an
understanding of what’s going on.
That said, the protocol itself is simple; most of SNMP’s complexity lies above the protocol layer
in the conventions for constructing the namespace and in the unnecessarily baroque vocabulary
that surrounds SNMP like a protective shell. As long as you don’t think too hard about its
internal mechanics, SNMP is easy to use.
SNMP was designed to be implementable by dedicated network hardware such as routers, in
which context it remains a plausible option. SNMP was later extended to include monitoring of
servers and desktop systems, but its fitness for this purpose has always been questionable. Today,
much better alternatives (e.g., collectd; see this page) are available.
We suggest that you approach SNMP as a low-level data collection protocol for use with special-
purpose devices that don’t support anything else. Get data out of the SNMP world as quickly as
possible and turn it over to a general-purpose monitoring platform for storage and processing.
SNMP can be an interesting neighborhood to visit, but you wouldn’t want to live there!
SNMP organization
SNMP data is arranged in a standardized hierarchy. The naming hierarchy is made up of
“Management Information Bases” (MIBs), structured text files that describe the data accessible
through SNMP. MIBs contain descriptions of specific data variables, which are referred to with
names known as object identifiers, or OIDs. An OID is just a fancy way of naming a specific
managed piece of information.
All current SNMP-capable devices support the structure for MIB-II defined in RFC1213. But
each vendor can and does extend that MIB further to add more data and metrics.
OIDs exist within a hierarchical namespace where the nodes are numbered rather than named.
However, for ease of reference, nodes also have conventional text names. The separator for
pathname components is a dot. For example, the OID that refers to the uptime of a device is
1.3.6.1.2.1.1.3. This OID is also known by the human-readable (though not necessarily “human-
understandable without additional documentation”) name
  iso.org.dod.internet.mgmt.mib-2.system.sysUpTime

Table 28.3 presents a sampling of OID nodes that might be interesting to monitor for assessing
network availability.

Table 28.3: Selected OIDs from MIB-II

In addition to the universally supported MIB-II, there are MIBs for various kinds of hardware
interfaces and protocols, MIBs for individual vendors, MIBs for different snmpd server
implementations, and MIBs for particular hardware products.
A MIB is only a schema for naming management data. To be useful, a MIB must be backed up
with agent-side code that maps between the SNMP namespace and the device’s actual state.
SNMP agents that run on UNIX, Linux, or Windows come with built-in support for MIB-II.
Most can be extended to support supplemental MIBs and to interface with scripts that do the
actual work of fetching and storing these MIBs’ associated data. You’ll see lots of software like
this that’s left over from a bygone era when SNMP was the new hotness. But it’s all smoke and
no fire; you shouldn’t be running an SNMP agent on a UNIX system at all these days, except
perhaps to answer the most basic queries about network configuration.
SNMP protocol operations
Only four basic SNMP operations exist: get, get-next, set, and trap.
Get and set are the basic operations for reading and writing data to the node identified by a
specific OID. Get-next steps through a MIB hierarchy and can read the contents of tables as well.
A trap is an unsolicited, asynchronous notification from server (agent) to client (manager) that
reports the occurrence of an interesting event or condition. Several standard traps are defined,
including “I’ve just come up” notifications, reports of failure or recovery of a network link, and
announcements of various routing and authentication problems. The mechanism by which the
destinations of trap messages are specified depends on the implementation of the agent.
Since SNMP messages can potentially modify configuration information, some security
mechanism is needed. The simplest version of SNMP security uses the concept of an SNMP
“community string,” which is really just a horribly obfuscated way of saying “password.”
There’s usually one community string for read-only access and another that allows writing.

Many systems come with the default community string set to “public”. Never leave this default
in place; set real passwords for both the read-only and read/write community strings.
These days it makes a lot more sense to set up the SNMPv3 management framework, which
allows for more security including authorization and access control for individual users.
Net-SNMP: tools for servers
On Linux and FreeBSD, the most common package that implements SNMP is called Net-SNMP.
It includes an agent (snmpd), some command-line tools, a server for receiving traps, and even a
library for developing SNMP-aware applications.
These days, Net-SNMP is primarily of interest because of its commands and libraries rather than
its agent. It has been ported to many different UNIX-like systems, so it acts as a consistent
platform on top of which you can write scripts. So, most distributions just separate out the Net-
SNMP agent into a package of its own, making it easier to install only the commands.
           On Debian and Ubuntu, the Net-SNMP packages are called snmp and snmpd. Install
           only the commands with apt-get install snmp.
           On Red Hat and CentOS, the analogous packages are net-snmp and net-snmp-tools.
           Install the commands with yum install net-snmp-tools.

    On Linux, configuration information goes in /etc/snmp; take note of the snmpd.conf file
    and snmp.d directory in that location. Run systemctl start snmpd to start up the agent
daemon.
     On FreeBSD, everything is included in one package: pkg install net-snmp. Configuration
     information goes in /usr/local/etc/snmp, which you’ll have to create by hand. You can start
the agent by hand with service snmpd start, or put

in /etc/rc.conf to start it at boot time.
On all systems where you need to run the SNMP agent, you’ll need to ensure that UDP port 162
is not blocked by a firewall.
The commands that come with Net-SNMP can familiarize you with SNMP, and they’re also
great for one-off checks of specific OIDs. Table 28.4 lists the most commonly used tools.

Table 28.4: Command-line tools in the Net-SNMP package
Basic SNMP checks generally use some combination of snmpget and snmpdelta. Other
programs are helpful when you want to identify new OIDs to monitor from your fancy enterprise
management tool. For example, snmpwalk starts at a specified OID (or at the beginning of the
MIB, by default), and repeatedly makes “get next” calls to the agent. This process dumps a
complete list of available OIDs and their associated values.
For example, here’s a truncated sample snmpwalk of the host tuva, a Linux system. The
community string is “secret813community,” and -v1 specifies simple authentication.

In this example, general information about the system is followed by statistics about the host’s
network interfaces: lo0, eth0, and eth1. Depending on the MIBs supported by the agent you are
managing, a complete dump can run to hundreds of lines. In fact, a full install on an Ubuntu
system configured to serve every MIB spits out over 12,000 lines!
If you looked up the MIBs for the latest version of Net-SNMP on an Ubuntu system (check out
mibdepot.com or install the snmp-mibs-downloader package), you would see that the five-
minute load average OID is 1.3.6.1.4.1.2021.10.1.3.2. If you were interested in seeing the five-
minute load average for the local host (configured with a community string of “public”), you
would run:

Many useful SNMP-related Perl, Ruby, and Python modules are available from these languages’
respective module repositories. Although you can write scripts in terms of Net-SNMP
commands, it’s usually easier and cleaner to make use of native modules that are customized for
your language of choice.
28.10 TIPS AND TRICKS FOR MONITORING
Over the years, we’ve picked up a few tips on how to maximize the effectiveness of monitoring.
These are the main ideas:

      Avoid monitoring burn-out. Ensure that sysadmins who receive notifications outside
      of regular work hours get regular breaks. This goal is best achieved with a rotation
      system in which teams of two or more individuals are on call for a day or a week,
      then the next team takes over. Failure to heed this advice results in crabby sysadmins
      who hate their jobs.
      Define what circumstances really require 24 × 7 attention, and make sure this
      information is clearly communicated to your monitoring team, your on-call teams,
      and the customers or business units you support. The mere fact that you’re
      monitoring something doesn’t mean that administrators should be mustered at 3:30
      a.m. when the value goes out of bounds. Many issues should be addressed during
      normal business hours.

      Eliminate monitoring noise. If false positives or notifications for noncritical services
      are being generated, make time to stop and fix them. Otherwise, like the boy who
      cried wolf, all notifications will eventually fail to receive the necessary attention.
      Create run books for everything. Any common restart, reset, or corrective procedure
      should be documented in a form that allows a responder who is not intimately
      familiar with the system in question to take appropriate action. The costs of not
      having such documentation are that problems will not be fixed quickly, mistakes will
      be made, and additional staff will be rousted to handle emergencies. Wikis are great
      for maintaining this type of documentation.
      Monitor the monitoring platform. This one will seem obvious once you’ve missed a
      critical outage because the monitoring platform was also down. Learn from our
      mistakes and make sure something is watching your watchful eyes.
      Miss an outage because of something that wasn’t monitored? Make sure it gets added
      so you catch the problem next time.

      Finally, and perhaps most importantly: no server or service goes into production
      without first being added to the monitoring system. No exceptions.
28.11 RECOMMENDED READING
HECHT, JAMES. Rethinking Monitoring for Container Operations. Great details on strategy and
philosophy for monitoring containers. Find it at
  http://thenewstack.io/monitoring-reset-containers/

TURNBULL, JAMES. The Art of Monitoring. Seattle, WA: Amazon Digital Services, 2016.
DIXON, JASON. Monitoring with Graphite: Tracking Dynamic Host and Application Metrics at
Scale. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2017.
