29 Performance Analysis

Performance analysis and tuning are often treated as a form of system administration witchcraft.
They’re not really witchcraft, but they do qualify as both science and art. The “science” part
involves making careful quantitative measurements and applying the scientific method. The “art”
part relates to the need to balance resources in a practical, level-headed way, since optimizing for
one application or user can result in other applications or users suffering. As with so many things
in life, you will often find that it’s impossible to make everyone happy.
Folks often assert that today’s performance problems are somehow wildly different from those of
previous decades. That claim is inaccurate. It’s true that systems have become more complex, but
the baseline determinants of performance and the high-level abstractions for measuring and
managing it remain the same as always. Unfortunately, improvements in system performance
correlate strongly with the community’s ability to create new applications that suck up all
available resources.
An added complexity of recent years is the many layers of abstraction that often sit between your
servers and the physical infrastructure of the cloud. It’s often impossible to know exactly what
hardware is providing storage or CPU cycles to your server.
The magic and the challenge of the cloud are two aspects of the same form. Despite popular
belief, you do not get to ignore performance considerations just because your servers are virtual.
In fact, the billing models used by cloud providers create an even more direct link between
operational efficiency and server costs. Knowing how to measure and evaluate performance has
become more important than ever.
This chapter focuses on the performance of systems that are used as servers. Desktop systems
(and laptops) typically do not experience the same types of performance issues that servers do.
The answer to the question of how to improve performance on a desktop machine is almost
always, “Upgrade the hardware.” Users like this answer because it means they get fancy new
systems more often.
29.1 PERFORMANCE TUNING PHILOSOPHY
One way that UNIX and Linux differ from other mainstream operating systems is that copious
data are available to characterize their inner workings. Detailed information is generated by every
level of the system, and administrators control a variety of tunable parameters. Source code is
usually available for review if you have trouble identifying the cause of a performance problem
despite the available instrumentation. For these reasons, UNIX and Linux are typically the
operating systems of choice at performance-conscious sites.
Even so, performance tuning isn’t easy. Users and administrators alike often think that if they
only knew the right “magic,” their systems would be twice as fast. But that’s rarely true.

One common fantasy involves tweaking the kernel variables that control the paging system and
the buffer pools. These days, kernels are pretuned to achieve reasonable (though admittedly, not
optimal) performance under a variety of load conditions. If you try to optimize the system on the
basis of one particular measure of performance (e.g., buffer utilization), the chances are high that
you will distort the system’s behavior relative to other performance metrics and load conditions.
The most serious performance issues often lie within applications and have little to do with the
underlying operating system. This chapter discusses system-level performance tuning and mostly
leaves application-level tuning to others. As a system administrator, you need to be mindful that
application developers are people, too. How many times have you said, or thought, that “It must
be a network problem”? In a similar way, application developers often initially assume that any
issues must originate in a subsystem that is someone else’s responsibility.
Given the complexity of modern applications, some problems can only be resolved through
collaboration among application developers, system administrators, server engineers, DBAs,
storage administrators, and network architects. In this chapter, we help you determine what data
and information to take back to these other folks to help them solve a performance problem—if,
indeed, the problem lies in their area. This approach is far more productive than just saying,
“Everything looks fine; it’s not my problem.”
In all cases, take everything you read on the Internet with a tablespoon of salt. In the area of
system performance, you will see superficially convincing arguments on all sorts of topics.
However, most of the proponents of these theories do not have the knowledge, discipline, and
time required to design valid experiments. Popular support means very little; for every hare-
brained proposal, you can expect to see a Greek chorus of “I increased the size of my buffer
cache by a factor of ten just like Joe said, and the system feels much, much faster!!!” Right.
Here are some rules to keep in mind:

      Collect and review historical information about your system. If the system was
      performing fine a week ago, an examination of the aspects of the system that have
      changed may well lead you to a smoking gun. Keep baselines and trends in your hip
pocket to pull out in an emergency. As a first step, review log files to see if an
underlying hardware problem has developed.
Familiarize yourself with the trend collection and analysis tools discussed in Chapter
28, Monitoring. These tools are critical for performance assessment.

Tune your system in a way that lets you compare the current results to the system’s
previous baseline.
Don’t intentionally overload your systems or your network. The kernel gives each
process the illusion of infinite resources. But once 100% of the system’s resources
are in use, the kernel has to work hard to maintain that illusion, delaying processes
and often consuming a sizable fraction of the resources itself.
As in particle physics, the more information you collect with system monitoring
utilities, the more you affect the system you are observing. It is best to rely on
something simple and lightweight that runs in the background (e.g., sar or vmstat)
for routine observation. If those feelers show something significant, you can
investigate further with other tools.
When making changes, change only one thing at a time, and document each change
that you make. Observe, record, and ponder the results before changing anything else.

Always make sure you have a rollback plan in case your magic fix actually makes
things worse.
29.2 WAYS TO IMPROVE PERFORMANCE
Here are some specific things you can do to improve performance:

      Ensure that the system has enough memory. As we see in the next section, memory
      size has a major influence on performance. If you’re running a system in the cloud,
      the amount of memory allocated to an instance is usually easy to adjust (though it’s
      often bundled with other resource allocations into a full-system profile).
      Eliminate storage resources’ dependence on mechanical operations where possible.
      Solid state disk drives (SSDs) are widely available and can yield big performance
      boosts because they don’t require the physical movement of a disk or armature to
      read bits. SSDs are easily installed (or, in the case of cloud environments, chosen) in
      place of existing old-school disk drives.

      If you are using UNIX or Linux as a web server or as some other type of network
      application server, you may want to spread traffic among several systems with a
      (physical or virtual) load balancer. Such an appliance balances the load according to
      one of several user-selectable algorithms such as “most responsive server” or “round
      robin.”

      These load balancers also add useful redundancy should a server go down. They’re
      really quite necessary if your site must handle unexpected traffic spikes.

      Double-check the configuration of the system and of individual applications. Many
      applications can be tuned to yield tremendous performance improvements (e.g., by
      spreading data across disks, by not performing DNS lookups on the fly, or by running
      multiple instances of a server).
      Correct problems of usage, both those caused by “real work” (too many services
      running at once, inefficient programming practices, batch jobs run at excessive
      priority, and large jobs run at inappropriate times of day) and those caused by the
      system (such as unwanted daemons).
      Organize hard disks and filesystems so that load is evenly balanced, maximizing I/O
      throughput. For specific applications such as databases, you can use a fancy multidisk
      technology such as striped RAID to optimize data transfers. Consult your database
      vendor for recommendations. For Linux systems, ensure that you’ve selected the
      appropriate Linux I/O scheduler for your disk (see this page for details).

      Remember that different types of applications and databases respond differently to
      being spread across multiple disks. RAID comes in many forms; take time to
      determine which form (if any) is appropriate for your particular application.
      Monitor your network to be sure that it is not saturated with traffic and that the error
      rate is low. A wealth of network information is available through the netstat
      (FreeBSD) and ss (Linux) commands.
      Identify cases where the system is fundamentally inadequate to satisfy the demands
      being made of it. You cannot tune your way out of these situations.

These steps are listed in rough order of effectiveness. Adding memory, converting to SSDs, and
balancing traffic across multiple servers can often make a huge difference in performance. The
effectiveness of the other measures ranges from noticeable to none.

Analysis and optimization of software data structures and algorithms almost always lead to
significant performance gains. But unless you have a substantial base of local software, this level
of design is usually out of your control.
29.3 FACTORS THAT AFFECT PERFORMANCE
Perceived performance is determined by the basic capacities of the system’s resources and by the
efficiency with which those resources are allocated and shared. The exact definition of a
“resource” is rather vague. It can include such items as cached contexts on the CPU chip and
entries in the address table of the memory controller. However, to a first approximation, only the
following four resources have much effect on performance:

      CPU utilization (and stolen cycles, see below)
      Memory
      Storage I/O
      Network I/O

If resources are still left after active processes have taken what they want, the system’s
performance is about as good as it can be.
If there are not enough resources to go around, processes must take turns. A process that does not
have immediate access to the resources it needs has to wait around doing nothing. The amount of
time spent waiting is one of the basic measures of performance degradation.

Historically, CPU utilization was one of the easiest resources to measure because a constant
amount of processing power was always available. Nowadays, some virtualized or cloud
environments may allocate CPU more dynamically. A process that’s using more than 90% of the
allocated CPU is entirely CPU bound and is consuming essentially all of the system’s available
computing power.
Many people assume that CPU resources are the most important factor affecting a system’s
overall performance. Given infinite amounts of all other resources or certain types of applications
(e.g., numerical simulations), a faster CPU (or more CPU cores) does make a dramatic
difference. But in the everyday world, CPU is actually relatively unimportant.
Disk bandwidth is a common performance bottleneck. Because traditional hard disks are
mechanical systems, it takes many milliseconds to locate a disk block, fetch its contents, and
wake up the process that’s waiting for it. Delays of this magnitude overshadow every other
source of performance degradation. Each disk access causes a stall worth millions of CPU
instructions. Solid state drives (SSDs) are one tool you can use to address this problem.
Because of virtual memory, disk bandwidth and memory can be directly related if the demand for
physical memory is greater than the supply. Situations in which physical memory becomes
scarce often result in memory pages being written to disk so that they can be reclaimed and
reused for another purpose. In these situations, using memory is just as expensive as using the
disk. Avoid this trap when performance is important; make sure that every system has adequate
physical memory.
Network bandwidth resembles disk bandwidth in many ways because of the latencies involved in
network communication. However, networks are atypical in that they involve entire communities
rather than individual computers. They are also particularly susceptible to hardware problems
and overloaded servers.
29.4 STOLEN CPU CYCLES
The promise of the cloud (and of virtualization more generally) is that your server always has the
resources it needs. In reality, much of this bounty is created with smoke and mirrors. Even in a
large-scale virtualization environment, resource contention can have a noticeable effect on a
virtual server’s performance.
CPU is the resource most commonly affected. There are two ways by which CPU cycles can be
stolen from your virtual machine:

      The hypervisor running your VM enforces a CPU quota based on how much CPU
      power you have contracted for. Shortfalls can be addressed by allocation of more
      resources at the hypervisor level or by your purchasing a larger instance size from the
      cloud provider.

      The physical hardware is oversubscribed, and there are not enough physical CPU
      cycles available to meet the current needs of all VM instances, even though these
      instances may all be under their CPU quotas. On a cloud provider, fixing this issue
      may be as simple as restarting your instance so that it gets reassigned to new physical
      hardware. In a data center of your own, the solution may require upgrading your
      virtualization environment with more resources.

Although CPU stealing can happen to any operating system running on a virtualized platform,
Linux gives you some visibility into this phenomenon with the st metric (“stolen”) in top,
vmstat, and mpstat.
Here’s an example from top:

In this example, 16.2% of the time, the system is ready to do work but is unable to run because
CPU is being diverted away from the VM by the hypervisor. This time spent waiting translates
directly to reduced throughput. Monitor this metric carefully on virtual servers to ensure that
your workloads aren’t being unintentionally starved of CPU.
29.5 ANALYSIS OF PERFORMANCE PROBLEMS
It can be difficult to isolate performance problems in a complex system. As a sysadmin, you
often receive anecdotal problem reports that suggest a particular cause or fix (e.g., “The web
server has gotten painfully sluggish because of all those damn AJAX calls…”). Take note of this
information, but don’t assume that it’s accurate or reliable; do your own investigation.
Rigorous, transparent application of the scientific method helps you reach conclusions that you
and others in your organization can rely on. Such an approach lets others evaluate your results,
increases your credibility, and raises the likelihood that your suggested changes will actually fix
the problem.

“Being scientific” doesn’t mean that you have to gather all the relevant data yourself. External
information usually helps a lot. Don’t spend hours doing experiments related to issues that can
just as easily be looked up in a FAQ.
We suggest the following five steps:
   1. Formulate the question. Pose a specific question in a defined functional area, or state
      a tentative conclusion or recommendation that you are considering. Be specific about
      the type of technology, the components involved, the alternatives you are considering,
      and the outcomes of interest.
   2. Gather and classify evidence. Conduct a systematic search of documentation,
      knowledge bases, known issues, blogs, white papers, forums, and other resources to
      locate external evidence related to your question. On your own systems, capture
      telemetry data and, where necessary or possible, instrument specific system and
      application areas of interest.

   3. Critically appraise the data. Review each data source for relevance and critique it for
      validity. Abstract key information and note the quality of the sources.
   4. Summarize the evidence both narratively and graphically. Combine findings from
      multiple sources into a narrative précis and, if possible, a graphic representation. Data
      that appears equivocal in numeric form can often become decisive once charted.
   5. Develop a conclusion statement. State your conclusions (i.e., the answer to your
      question) concisely. Assign a grade to indicate the overall strength or weakness of the
      evidence that supports your conclusions.
29.6 SYSTEM PERFORMANCE CHECKUP
Enough generalities—let’s look at some specific tools and areas of interest. Before you take
measurements, you need to know what you’re looking at.
Taking stock of your equipment
Start your inquiry with an inventory of your (physical or virtual) hardware, especially CPU and
memory resources. This inventory can help you interpret the information presented by other tools
and can help you set realistic expectations regarding the upper bounds on performance.
     On Linux systems, the /proc filesystem is the place to find an overview of the hardware
     your operating system thinks you have. (More detailed hardware information can be found
in /sys; see this page.) Table 29.1 shows some of the key files. See this page for general
information about /proc.

Table 29.1: Sources of hardware information on Linux

Four lines in /proc/cpuinfo help you identify the system’s exact CPU: vendor_id, cpu family, model,
and model name. Some of the values are cryptic; it’s best to look up the decoding on-line.

The exact info contained in /proc/cpuinfo varies by system and processor, but here’s a
representative example:

The file contains one entry for each processor core seen by the OS. The data vary slightly by
kernel version. The processor value uniquely identifies each core. physical id values are unique per
CPU socket, and core id values (not shown above) are unique per core within a CPU socket. Cores
that support hyperthreading (duplication of CPU contexts without duplication of other processing
features) are identified by an ht in the flags field (not shown above). If hyperthreading is actually in
use, the siblings field for each core shows how many contexts are available on a given core.
Another command to run for information on both FreeBSD and Linux is dmidecode. It dumps
the system’s Desktop Management Interface (DMI, aka SMBIOS) data. The most useful option
is -t type; Table 29.2 shows the valid types.

Table 29.2: Type values for dmidecode -t

The example below shows typical information:

Bits of network configuration information are scattered about the system. ifconfig -a (FreeBSD)
and ip a (Linux) are the best sources of IP and MAC information for each configured interface.
Gathering performance data
Most performance analysis tools tell you what’s going on at a particular point. However, the
number and character of loads probably change throughout the day. Be sure to gather a cross-
section of data before taking action. The best information on system performance often becomes
clear only after a long period (a month or more) of data collection. It is particularly important to
collect data during periods of peak use. Resource limitations and system misconfigurations are
often visible only when the machine is under heavy load. See Chapter 28, Monitoring, for more
information about collecting and analyzing data.
Analyzing CPU usage
You will probably want to gather three kinds of CPU data: overall utilization, load averages, and
per-process CPU consumption. Overall utilization can help identify systems on which the CPU’s
speed is itself the bottleneck. Load averages profile overall system performance. Per-process
CPU consumption data can identify specific processes that are hogging resources.
You can obtain summary information with the vmstat command. vmstat takes two arguments:
the number of seconds to monitor the system for each line of output and the number of reports to
print. If you don’t specify the number of reports, vmstat runs until you press <Control-C>. For
example:

Although exact columns vary among systems, CPU utilization statistics are fairly consistent
across platforms. User time, system (kernel) time, idle time, and time waiting for I/O are shown
in the us, sy, id, and wa columns on the far right. CPU numbers that are heavy on user time generally
indicate computation, and high system numbers indicate that processes are making a lot of
system calls or are performing lots of I/O.
A rule of thumb for general-purpose compute servers that has served us well over the years is
this: the system should spend approximately 50% of its non-idle time in user space and 50% in
system space; the overall idle percentage should be nonzero. If you are dedicating a server to a
single, CPU-intensive application, the majority of time should be spent in user space.
The cs column shows context switches per interval (that is, the number of times that the kernel
changed which process was running). The number of interrupts per interval (usually generated by
hardware devices or components of the kernel) is shown in the in column. Extremely high cs or in
values typically indicate a misbehaving or misconfigured hardware device. The other columns
are useful for memory and disk analysis, which we discuss later in this chapter.
Long-term averages of the CPU statistics let you determine whether there is fundamentally
enough CPU power to go around. If the CPU usually spends part of its time in the idle state, there
are cycles to spare. Upgrading to a faster CPU won’t do much to improve the overall throughput
of the system, although it may speed up individual operations.
As you can see from this example, the CPU generally flip-flops back and forth between heavy
use and idleness. Therefore, be sure to observe these numbers as an average over time. The
smaller the monitoring interval, the less consistent the results.
On multiprocessor machines, most tools present an average of processor statistics across all
processors. On Linux, the mpstat command generates vmstat-like output for each individual
processor. The -P flag lets you specify a specific processor to report on. mpstat is useful for
debugging software that supports symmetric multiprocessing—it’s also enlightening to see how
(in)efficiently your system uses multiple processors. Here’s an example that shows the status of
each of four processors:

On a workstation with only one user, the CPU generally spends most of its time idle. Then when
you render a web page or switch windows, the CPU is used heavily for a short period. In this
situation, information about long-term average CPU usage is not meaningful.
The second CPU statistic that’s useful for characterizing the burden on your system is the “load
average,” which represents the average number of runnable processes. It gives you a good idea of
how many pieces the CPU pie is being divided into. The load average is obtained with the
uptime command:

Three values are given, corresponding to the 1, 5, and 15-minute averages. In general, the higher
the load average, the more important the system’s aggregate performance becomes. If there is
only one runnable process, that process is usually bound by a single resource (commonly disk
bandwidth or CPU). The peak demand for that one resource becomes the determining factor in
performance.

When more processes share the system, loads may or may not be more evenly distributed. If the
processes on the system all consume a mixture of CPU, disk, and memory, the performance of
the system is less likely to be dominated by constraints on a single resource. In this situation, it
becomes most important to look at average measures of consumption, such as total CPU
utilization.

     See this page for more information about priorities.

The system load average is an excellent metric to track as part of a system baseline. If you know
your system’s load average on a normal day and it is in that same range on a bad day, this is a
hint that you should look elsewhere (such as the network) for performance problems. A load
average above the expected norm suggests that you should look at the processes running on the
system itself.
Another way to view CPU usage is to run the ps -aux command to see how much of the CPU
each process is using. On a busy system, at least 70% of the CPU is often consumed by just one
or two processes. Deferring the execution of the CPU hogs or reducing their priority makes the
CPU more available to other processes.

    See this page for more information about top.

An excellent alternative to ps is a program called top. It presents about the same information as
ps, but in a live, regularly updated format that shows the status of the system over time.
Refreshing top’s output too rapidly can itself be quite a CPU hog, so be judicious in your use of
top.
Understanding how the system manages memory
The kernel manages memory in units called pages that are usually 4KiB or larger. It allocates
virtual pages to processes as they request memory. Each virtual page is mapped to real storage,
either to RAM or to “backing store” on disk. The kernel uses a “page table” to keep track of the
mappings between these made-up virtual pages and real pages of memory.
The kernel can effectively allocate as much memory as processes ask for by augmenting real
RAM with swap space. Since processes expect their virtual pages to map to real memory, the
kernel may have to constantly shuffle pages between RAM and swap as different pages are
accessed. This activity is known as paging. Ages ago, a second process known as “swapping”
could occur in which all of a process’s pages were pushed out to disk at the same time. Today,
demand paging is used in all cases.
The kernel tries to manage the system’s memory so pages that have been recently accessed are
kept in memory and less active pages are paged out to disk. This scheme is known as an LRU
system since the least recently used pages are the ones that get shunted to disk.
It would be inefficient for the kernel to keep track of all memory references, so it uses a cache-
like algorithm to decide which pages to keep in memory. The exact algorithm varies by system,
but the concept is similar across platforms. This system is cheaper than a true LRU system and
produces comparable results.

When memory is low, the kernel tries to guess which pages on the inactive list were least
recently used. If those pages have been modified by a process, they are considered “dirty” and
must be paged out to disk before the memory can be reused. Pages that have been laundered in
this fashion (or that were never dirty to begin with) are “clean” and can be recycled for use
elsewhere.
When a process refers to a page on the inactive list, the kernel returns the page’s memory
mapping to the page table, resets the page’s age, and transfers the page from the inactive list to
the active list. Pages that have been written to disk must be paged in before they can be
reactivated if the page in memory has been remapped. A “soft fault” occurs when a process
references an in-memory inactive page, and a “hard fault” results from a reference to a
nonresident (paged-out) page. In other words, a hard fault requires a page to be read from disk
and a soft fault does not.
The kernel tries to stay ahead of the system’s demand for memory, so there is not necessarily a
one-to-one correspondence between page-out events and page allocations by running processes.
The goal of the system is to keep enough free memory handy that processes don’t have to
actually wait for a page-out each time they make a new allocation. If paging increases
dramatically when the system is busy, it would probably benefit from more RAM.
     You can tune the kernel’s “swappiness” parameter (/proc/sys/vm/swappiness) to tell the
     kernel how to balance between reclaiming swap-backed and file-backed pages. Setting
swappiness to zero focuses reclamations entirely on file-backed pages; a swappiness of 100
makes an equal balance between the two. By default, the swappiness parameter has a value of 60.
(If you find yourself tempted to modify this parameter, it’s probably time to buy more RAM for
the system.)
If the kernel is unable to reclaim pages, Linux uses an “out-of-memory killer” to handle this
condition. The killer function selects and kills a process to free up memory. Although the kernel
attempts to kill off the least important user process on your system, running out of memory is
always something to avoid. In this situation, it’s likely that a substantial portion of the system’s
resources are being devoted to memory housekeeping rather than to useful work.
Analyzing memory usage
Two numbers summarize memory activity: the total amount of active virtual memory and the
current paging rate. The first number tells you the total demand for memory, and the second
suggests the proportion of that memory that is actively used. Your goal is to reduce activity or
increase memory until paging remains at an acceptable level. Occasional paging is inevitable;
don’t try to eliminate it completely.
Run swapon -s to determine the amount of paging (swap) space that’s currently in use:

swapon reports usage in kilobytes. The sizes quoted by these programs do not include the
contents of core memory, so you have to compute the total amount of virtual memory yourself:
  VM = size of real memory + amount of swap space used
On FreeBSD systems, paging statistics obtained with vmstat look like this:

CPU information has been removed from this example. Under the procs heading are shown the
number of processes that are immediately runnable, blocked on I/O, and runnable but swapped. If
the value in the w column is ever nonzero, it is likely that the system’s memory is pitifully
inadequate relative to the current load.
Under the memory heading, you can see both the active virtual memory (avm) and free virtual
memory (fre). The columns under the page heading give information about paging activity. All
columns represent average values per second. Table 29.3 shows their meanings.

Table 29.3: Decoding guide for FreeBSD vmstat paging statistics
On Linux systems, paging statistics obtained with vmstat look like this:

As in the FreeBSD output, the number of processes that are immediately runnable and that are
blocked on I/O are shown under the procs heading. Paging statistics are condensed to two
columns, si and so, which represent pages swapped in and out, respectively.

Any apparent inconsistencies among the memory-related columns are for the most part illusory.
Some columns count pages and others count kilobytes. All values are rounded averages.
Furthermore, some are averages of scalar quantities and others are average deltas.
Use the si and so fields to evaluate the system’s swapping behavior. A page-in (si) represents a
page being recovered from the swap area. A page-out (so) represents data being written to the
swap area after being forcibly ejected by the kernel.
If your system has a constant stream of page-outs, it’s likely that you would benefit from more
physical memory. But if paging happens only occasionally and does not produce annoying
hiccups or user complaints, you can ignore it. If your system falls somewhere in the middle,
further analysis should depend on whether you are trying to optimize for interactive performance
(e.g., a workstation) or for a more server-like workload.
Analyzing disk I/O
You can monitor disk performance with the iostat command. Like vmstat, it accepts optional
arguments to specify an interval in seconds and a repetition count, and its first line of output is a
summary since boot. iostat output on Linux looks like this:

Each hard disk has the columns tps, kB_read/s, kB_wrtn/s, kB_read, and kB_wrtn, indicating transfers per
second, kilobytes read per second, kilobytes written per second, total kilobytes read, and total
kilobytes written.
The cost of seeking is the most important factor affecting mechanical disk drive performance. To
a first approximation, the rotational speed of the disk and the speed of the bus to which the disk
is connected have relatively little impact. Modern mechanical disks can transfer hundreds of
megabytes of data per second if they are read from contiguous sectors, but they can only perform
about 100 to 300 seeks per second. If you transfer one sector per seek, you can easily realize less
than 5% of the drive’s peak throughput. SSD disks have a significant advantage over their
mechanical predecessors because their performance is not tied to platter rotation or head
movement.
Whether you’re using mechanical or SSD disks, you should put filesystems that are used together
on separate disks to maximize performance. Although bus architectures and device drivers
influence efficiency, most computers can manage multiple disks independently, thereby
increasing throughput. For example, it’s often worthwhile to segregate frequently accessed web
server data and web server logs onto different disks.
It’s especially important to split the paging (swap) area among several disks if possible, since
paging tends to slow down the entire system. Many systems can use both dedicated swap
partitions and swap files on a formatted filesystem.

     See this page for more information about lsof and fuser.

The lsof command, which lists open files, and the fuser command, which shows the processes
that are using a filesystem, can be helpful for isolating disk I/O performance issues. These
commands show interactions between processes and filesystems, some of which may be
unintended. For example, if an application is writing its log to the same device used for database
logs, a disk bottleneck may result.
fio: testing storage subsystem performance
fio (github.com/axboe/fio) is available for both Linux and FreeBSD. Use it to test the
performance of the storage subsystem. It’s particularly helpful in large environments where
shared storage resources (such as a Storage Area Network) are deployed. If you find yourself in a
situation where storage performance is a concern, it’s often valuable to determine quantitative
values for the following:

      Throughput in I/O operations per second (IOPS) (read, write, and mixed)
      Average latency (read and write)
      Maximum latency (peak read or write latency)

As part of the fio distribution, config (.fio) files for common tests such as these are included in
the examples subdirectory. Here’s an example of a simple read/write test:

As with so many performance-related metrics, there is no universally correct value for any of
these measures. It’s best to establish a benchmark, make adjustments, and remeasure.
sar: collecting and reporting statistics over time
The sar command is a performance monitoring tool that has lingered through multiple UNIX and
Linux epochs despite its somewhat obscure command-line syntax. The original command had its
roots in early AT&T UNIX.
At first glance, sar seems to display much the same information as vmstat and iostat. However,
there’s one important difference: sar can report on historical as well as current data.

     The Linux package that contains sar is called sysstat.

Without options, the sar command reports CPU utilization for the day at 10-minute intervals
since midnight, as shown below. This historical data collection is made possible by the sal script,
which is part of the sar toolset and must be set up to run from cron at periodic intervals. sar
stores the data it collects underneath the /var/log directory in a binary format.

In addition to CPU information, sar can also report on metrics such as disk and network activity.
Use sar -d for a summary of this day’s disk activity or sar -n DEV for network interface
statistics. sar -A reports all available information.

     See this page for more information about Grafana.

sar has some limitations, but it’s a good bet for quick-and-dirty historical information. If you’re
serious about making a long-term commitment to performance monitoring, we suggest that you
set up a data collection and graphing platform such as Grafana.
Choosing a Linux I/O scheduler
     Linux systems use an I/O scheduling algorithm to mediate among processes competing to
     perform disk I/O. The I/O scheduler massages the order and timing of disk requests to
achieve the best possible overall I/O performance for a given application or situation.
Three different scheduling algorithms are available in current Linux kernels:

      Completely Fair Queuing: This is the default algorithm and is usually the best choice
      for mechanical hard disks on general-purpose servers. It tries to evenly distribute
      access to I/O bandwidth. (If nothing else, the algorithm surely deserves an award for
      marketing: who could ever say no to a completely fair scheduler?)
      Deadline: This algorithm tries to minimize the latency for each request. It reorders
      requests to increase performance.
      NOOP: This algorithm implements a simple FIFO queue. It assumes that I/O requests
      have already been optimized or reordered by the driver, or that they will be optimized
      or reordered by the device (as might be done by an intelligent controller). This option
      may be the best choice in some SAN environments and is the best choice for SSD
      drives (because SSD drives don’t have variable retrieval latencies).

You can view or set the algorithm in use for any particular device through the file
/sys/block/disk/queue/scheduler. The active scheduler is enclosed in brackets.

By determining which scheduling algorithm is most appropriate for your environment (you may
need to run trials with each scheduler) you may be able to improve I/O performance.

     See this page for more information about GRUB.

Unfortunately, the scheduling algorithm does not persist across reboots when set in this manner.
You can set it for all devices at boot time with the elevator=algorithm kernel argument. That
configuration is usually set in the GRUB boot loader’s configuration file, grub.conf.
perf: profiling Linux systems in detail
Linux kernel versions 2.6 and higher include a perf_events interface that affords user-level access to
the kernel’s performance metric event stream. The perf command is a powerful, integrated
system profiler that reads and analyzes information from this stream. All components of a system
can be profiled: hardware, kernel modules, the kernel itself, shared libraries, and applications.
     To get started with perf, you’ll need to get a full set of the linux-tools packages:

Once you’ve installed the software, check out the tutorial at goo.gl/f88mt for examples and use
cases. (This is a deep link into perf.wiki.kernel.org.)

The TL;DR path to getting started is to try perf top, which is a top-like display of system-wide
CPU use. Of course, the simple example below only scratches the surface of perf’s capabilities.

The Overhead column shows the percentage of the time the CPU was in the corresponding function
when it was sampled. The Shared Object column is the component (e.g., the kernel), shared library,
or process in which the function resides, and the Symbol column is the name of the function (in
cases where symbol information hasn’t been stripped).
29.7 HELP! MY SERVER JUST GOT REALLY SLOW!
In previous sections, we’ve talked mostly about issues that relate to the average performance of a
system. Solutions to these long-term concerns generally take the form of configuration
adjustments or upgrades.
However, you will find that even properly configured systems are sometimes more sluggish than
usual. Luckily, transient problems are often easy to diagnose. Most of the time, they are caused
by a greedy process that is simply consuming so much CPU power, disk, or network bandwidth
that other processes are affected. On occasion, malicious processes hog available resources to
intentionally slow a system or network, a scheme known as a “denial of service” (DOS) attack.

The first step in diagnosis is to run ps auxww or top to look for obvious runaway processes. Any
process that’s using more than 50% of the CPU is likely to be at fault. If no single process is
getting an inordinate share of the CPU, check to see how many processes are getting at least
10%. If you snag more than two or three (don’t count ps itself), the load average is likely to be
quite high. This is, in itself, a cause of poor performance. Check the load average with uptime,
and use vmstat or top to check whether the CPU is ever idle.
If no CPU contention is evident, run vmstat to see how much paging is going on. All disk
activity is interesting: a lot of page-outs may indicate contention for memory, and disk traffic in
the absence of paging may mean that a process is monopolizing the disk by constantly reading or
writing files.
There’s no direct way to tie disk operations to processes, but ps can narrow down the possible
suspects for you. Any process that is generating disk traffic must be using some amount of CPU
time. You can usually make an educated guess about which of the active processes is the true
culprit. Use kill -STOP to suspend the process and test your theory.
A large virtual address space or resident set used to be a suspicious sign, but shared libraries have
made these numbers less useful. ps is not very smart about separating system-wide shared library
overhead from the address spaces of individual processes. Many processes wrongly appear to
have tens or hundreds of megabytes of active memory.

Suppose you do find that a particular process is at fault—what should you do? Usually, nothing.
Some operations just require a lot of resources and are bound to slow down the system. It doesn’t
necessarily mean that they’re illegitimate. It is sometimes useful, however, to renice an obtrusive
process that is CPU-bound.
Sometimes, application tuning can dramatically reduce a program’s demand for CPU resources;
this effect is especially visible with custom network server software such as web applications.
Processes that are disk or memory hogs often can’t be dealt with so easily. renice generally does
not help. You do have the option of killing or stopping such processes, but we recommend
against this if the situation does not constitute an emergency. As with CPU pigs, you can use the
low-tech solution of asking the owner to run the process later.
      Linux has a handy option for dealing with processes that consume excessive disk bandwidth
      in the form of the ionice command. This command sets a process’s I/O scheduling class; at
least one of the available classes supports numeric I/O priorities (which can be set through ionice
as well). The most useful invocation to remember is ionice -c 3 -p pid, which allows the named
process to perform I/O only if no other processes wants to.

The kernel allows a process to restrict its own use of physical memory by calling the setrlimit
system call. This facility is also available in the shell through the built-in ulimit command (limits
on FreeBSD). For example, the command

causes all subsequent commands that the user runs to have their use of physical memory limited
to 32MB. This feature is roughly equivalent to renice for memory-bound processes. More
granular resource management can be achieved through the Class-based Kernel Resource
Management functionality; see ckrm.sourceforge.net.

If a runaway process doesn’t seem to be the source of poor performance, investigate two other
possible causes. The first is an overloaded network. Many programs are so intimately bound up
with the network that it’s hard to tell where system performance ends and network performance
begins.
Some network overloading problems are hard to diagnose because they come and go very
quickly. For example, if every machine on the network runs a network-related program out of
cron at a particular time each day, there will often be a brief but dramatic glitch. Every machine
on the net will hang for five seconds, and then the problem will disappear as quickly as it came.
Server-related delays are another possible cause of performance crises. UNIX and Linux systems
are constantly consulting remote servers for NFS, Kerberos, DNS, and any of a dozen other
facilities. If a server is dead or some other problem makes the server expensive to communicate
with, the effects ripple back through client systems.
For example, on a busy system, some process may use the gethostent library routine every few
seconds or so. If a DNS glitch makes this routine take two seconds to complete, you will likely
perceive a difference in overall performance. DNS forward and reverse lookup configuration
problems are responsible for a surprising number of server performance issues.
29.8 RECOMMENDED READING
DREPPER, ULRICH. What Every Programmer Should Know about Memory. You can find this
article on-line at lwn.net/Articles/250967.
EZOLT, PHILLIP G. Optimizing Linux Performance. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR,
2005.

GREGG, BRENDAN. Systems Performance: Enterprise and the Cloud. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall PTR, 2013.
KOZIOL, PRABHAT, AND QUINCEY KOZIOL. High Performance Parallel I/O. London: CRC Press,
2014.
