30 Data Center Basics

A service is only as reliable as the data center that houses it. For those with hands-on experience,
that’s just common sense. (Of course, it’s possible to distribute a service among multiple data
centers, thereby limiting the impact of a failure in any one center.)
Proponents of cloud computing sometimes seem to imply that the cloud can magically break the
chains that join the physical and virtual worlds. But although cloud providers offer a variety of
services that help boost resilience and availability, every cloud resource ultimately lives
somewhere in mundane reality.
Understanding where your data actually lives is an important part of being a system
administrator. If you are involved in selecting third party cloud providers, evaluate vendors and
their facilities quantitatively. You might also find yourself in positions where security, data
sovereignty, or political concerns dictate that you build and maintain your own data center.
A data center is composed of

      A physically safe and secure space
      Racks that hold computer, networking, and storage devices
      Electric power (and standby power) sufficient to operate the installed devices
      Cooling, to keep the devices within their operating temperature ranges
      Network connectivity throughout the data center, and to places beyond (enterprise
      network, partners, vendors, Internet)
      On-site operational staff to support the equipment and infrastructure

Certain aspects of data centers—such as their physical layout, power, and cooling—were
traditionally designed and maintained by “facilities” or “physical plant” staff. However, the fast-
moving pace of IT technology and the increasingly low tolerance for downtime have forced a
shotgun marriage of IT and facilities staff as partners in the planning and operation of data
centers.
30.1 RACKS
The days of the traditional raised-floor data center—in which power, cooling, network
connections, and telecommunications lines are all hidden underneath the floor—are over. Have
you ever tried to trace a cable that runs under the floor of one of these labyrinths? Our experience
is that although it looks nice through glass, a “classic” raised-floor machine room is really just a
hidden rat’s nest. Today, you should use a raised floor to hide electrical power feeds, to distribute
cooled air, and for nothing else. Network cabling (both copper and fiber) should be routed
through overhead raceways designed specifically for this purpose. (These days, electrical feeds
are often found overhead as well.)
In a dedicated data center, storing equipment in racks (as opposed to, say, setting it on tables or
on the floor) is the only maintainable, professional choice. The best storage schemes use racks
that are interconnected with an overhead track system through which cables can be routed. This
approach confers that irresistible high-tech feel without sacrificing organization or
maintainability.

The best overhead track system that we know of is manufactured by Chatsworth Products. You
can construct homes for both shelf-mounted and rack-mounted servers from standard 19” single-
rail telco racks. Two back-to-back 19” telco racks make a high-tech-looking “traditional” rack
for situations in which you need to attach rack hardware both in front of and in back of
equipment. Chatsworth provides the racks, cable races, and cable management doodads, as well
as all the hardware necessary to mount them in your building. Since the cables lie in visible
tracks, they are easy to trace and you will naturally be motivated to keep them tidy.
30.2 POWER
Several strategies may be needed to provide a data center with clean, stable, fault-tolerant power.
Common options include

      Uninterruptible power supplies (UPSs) – UPSs provide power when the normal
      long-term power source (e.g., the commercial power grid) becomes unavailable.
      Depending on size and capacity, a UPS can provide anywhere from a few minutes to
      a couple of hours of power. UPSs alone cannot support a site in the event of a long-
      term outage.
      On-site power generation – If the commercial grid is unavailable, on-site standby
      generators can provide long-term power. Generators are usually fueled by diesel, LP
      gas, or natural gas and can support the site as long as fuel is available. It is customary
      to store at least 72 hours of fuel on-site and to arrange to buy fuel from multiple
      providers.

      Redundant power feeds – In some locations, it may be possible to obtain more than
      one power feed from the commercial power grid (possibly from different power
      generators).

           See this page for more information about shutdown procedures.

In all cases, servers and network infrastructure equipment should at least be put on
uninterruptible power supplies. Good UPSs have an Ethernet or USB interface that can be
attached either to the machine to which they supply power or to a centralized monitoring
infrastructure that can elicit a higher-level response. Such connections let the UPS warn
computers or operators that power has failed and that a clean shutdown should be performed
before the batteries run out.
UPSs are available in various sizes and capacities, but even the largest ones cannot provide long-
term backup power. If your facility must operate on standby power for longer than a UPS can
handle, you need a local generator in addition to a UPS.

A large selection of standby power generators is available, ranging in capacity from 5 kW to
more than 2,500 kW. The gold standard is the family of generators made by Cummins Onan
(power.cummins.com). Most organizations select diesel as their fuel type. If you’re in a cold
climate, make sure you fill the tank with “winter mix diesel” or substitute Jet A-1 aircraft fuel to
prevent gelling. Diesel is chemically stable but can grow algae, so consider adding an algicide to
diesel that you plan to store for an extended period.
Generators and the infrastructure to support them are expensive, but they can save money in
some ways, too. If you install a standby generator, your UPSs need only be large enough to cover
the short gap between the power going out and your generator coming on-line.
If UPSs or generators are part of your power strategy, it is extremely important to have a periodic
test plan in place. We recommend that you test all components of your standby power system at
least every 6 months. In addition, you (or your vendor) should perform preventive maintenance
on standby power components at least annually.
Rack power requirements
Planning the power for a data center is a difficult challenge. Typically, the opportunity to build a
new data center (or to significantly remodel an existing one) comes up only every decade or so.
So it’s important to look far down the road when planning power systems.
Most architects are biased toward calculating the amount of power needed in a data center by
multiplying the center’s square footage by a magic number. This approach proves to be
ineffective in most real-world cases because the size of the data center alone tells you little about
the types of equipment it might eventually house. Our recommendation is to use a per-rack
power consumption model and to ignore the amount of floor space.
Historically, data centers have been designed to provide between 1.5 kW and 3 kW to each rack.
But now that server manufacturers have started squeezing servers into 1U of rack space and
building blade server chassis that hold 20 or more blades, the power needed to support a full rack
of modern gear has skyrocketed.
One approach to solving the power density problem is to put only a handful of 1U servers in each
rack, leaving the rest of the rack empty. Although this technique eliminates the need to provide
more power to the rack, it’s a prodigious waste of space. A better strategy is to develop a realistic
projection of the power that might be needed by each rack and to provision power accordingly.

Equipment varies in its power requirements, and it’s hard to predict exactly what the future will
hold. A good approach is to create a system of power consumption tiers that allocates the same
amount of power to all racks in a particular tier. This scheme is useful not only for meeting
current equipment needs but also for planning future use. Table 30.1 outlines some basic starting
points for tier definitions.

Table 30.1: Power-tier estimates for racks in a data center

Once you’ve defined your power tiers, estimate your need for racks in each tier. On the floor
plan, put racks from the same tier together. Such zoning concentrates the high-power racks and
lets you plan cooling resources accordingly.
kVA vs. kW
One of the many common disconnects between IT folks, facilities folks, and UPS engineers is
that each of these groups uses different units for power. The amount of power a UPS can provide
is typically labeled in kVA (kilovolt-amperes). But computer equipment and the electrical
engineers that support your data center usually express power in watts (W) or kilowatts (kW).
You might remember from fourth grade science class that watts = volts × amps. Unfortunately,
your fourth grade teacher probably failed to mention that watts is a vector value, which for AC
power includes a “power factor” (pf) in addition to volts and amps.
If you are designing a bottle-filling line at a brewery that involves lots of large motors and other
heavy equipment, ignore this section and hire a qualified engineer to determine the correct power
factor for use in your calculations. But for modern-day computer equipment, you can cheat and
use a constant for a “probably good enough” conversion between kVA and kW:
  kVA = kW / 0.85

     See this page for some additional tips on measuring power consumption.

A final point to note is that when estimating the amount of power you need in a data center (or to
size a UPS), you should measure devices’ actual power consumption rather than relying on
manufacturers’ stated values as shown on equipment labels. Label values typically represent the
maximum possible power consumption and are therefore misleading.
Energy efficiency
Energy efficiency has become a popular operational metric for evaluating data centers. The
industry has standardized on a simple ratio known as the power usage effectiveness (PUE) as a
way of expressing a plant’s overall efficiency:

A hypothetically perfect data center would have a PUE of 1.0; that is, it would consume exactly
the amount of power needed by IT gear, with no overhead. Of course, this goal is unreachable in
practical terms. Equipment generates heat that must be removed, human operators need lighting
and other environmental accommodations, etc. The higher the PUE value, the less energy
efficient (and more expensive) a data center is to operate.
Modern-day data centers that are reasonably energy efficient generally have a PUE ratio of 1.4 or
less. For reference, data centers from a decade ago typically had PUE ratios in the 2.0–3.0 range.
Google, which has made energy efficiency a focus, regularly publishes its PUE ratios and as of
2016 has achieved an average PUE of 1.12 across its data centers.
Metering
You get what you measure. If you are serious about energy efficiency, it’s important to
understand which devices are actually consuming the most energy. Although the PUE ratio gives
you a general impression of the amount of energy consumed as non-IT overhead, it says very
little about the power efficiency of the actual servers. (In fact, replacing servers with more
power-efficient models will increase the PUE rather than decreasing it.)
It’s up to the data center administrator to select components that use the minimum amount of
energy. One obvious enabling technology is power consumption metering at the aisle, rack, and
device level. Select or build data centers that can easily provide this critical usage data.
Cost
Once upon a time, the cost of power was more or less the same across data centers in different
locations. These days, the hyperscale cloud industry (Amazon, Google, Microsoft, and others)
sends data center designers hunting for potential cost efficiencies in every corner of the world.
One successful strategy has been to locate large data centers near sources of inexpensive power
such as hydroelectric power plants.
When deciding whether to operate your own data center, be sure to factor the cost of power into
your assessment. Chances are that the big guys have a built-in cost advantage in this aspect of
operations (and others). Widespread fiber and bandwidth availability have largely rendered
obsolete the traditional advice to locate your data center near your team.
Remote control
You might occasionally find yourself needing to regularly power-cycle a server because of a
kernel or hardware glitch. (Or, perhaps you have non-Linux servers in your data center that are
more prone to this type of problem.) In either case, you can consider installing a system that lets
you power-cycle problem servers by remote control.
A reasonable family of solutions is manufactured by American Power Conversion (APC). Their
remotely manageable products are conceptually similar to power strips, except that they can be
controlled by a web browser that reaches the power distribution unit through a built-in Ethernet
port.
30.3 COOLING AND ENVIRONMENT
Just like humans, computers work better and live longer if they’re happy in their environment.
Maintenance of a safe operating temperature is a prerequisite for this happiness.
The American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE)
traditionally recommended data center temperatures (measured at server inlets) in the range of
68° to 77°F (20° to 25°C). To support organizations’ attempts to reduce energy consumption,
ASHRAE released guidance in 2012 that suggests a more lenient temperature range to 64.4° to
80.6°F (18° to 27°C). Although this range seems unhelpfully broad, it does suggest that today’s
hardware can flourish in a wide range of environments.
Cooling load estimation
Temperature maintenance starts with an accurate estimate of your cooling load. Traditional
textbook models for data center cooling (even those from the 2000s) can be off from the realities
of today’s high-density blade server chassis by up to an order of magnitude. Hence, we have
found that it’s a good idea to double-check the cooling load estimates produced by your HVAC
folks.
You need to determine the heat load contributed by the following components:

      Roof, walls, and windows
      Electronic gear
      Light fixtures
      Operators (people)

Of these, only the first should be left to your HVAC folks. The other components can be assessed
by the HVAC team, but you should do your own calculations as well. Make sure that any
discrepancies between your results and those of the HVAC team are fully explained before
construction starts.

Roof, walls, and windows
Your roof, walls, and windows (don’t forget solar load) contribute to your environment’s cooling
load. HVAC engineers usually have a lot of experience with these elements and should be able to
give you good estimates.

Electronic gear
You can estimate the heat load produced by your servers (and other electronic gear) by
determining their power consumption. In practical terms, all electric power that is consumed
eventually ends up as heat.
As when planning for power-handling capacity, direct measurement of power consumption is by
far the best way to obtain this information. Your friendly neighborhood electrician can help, or
you can purchase an inexpensive meter and do it yourself. The Kill A Watt meter made by P3 is
a popular choice at around $20, but it’s limited to small loads (15 amps) that plug in to a standard
wall outlet. For larger loads or nonstandard connectors, use a clamp-on ammeter such as the
Fluke 902 (also known as a “current clamp”) to make these measurements.
Most equipment is labeled with its maximum power consumption in watts. However, typical
consumption tends to be significantly less than the maximum.
You can convert power consumption to the standard heat unit, BTUH (British thermal units per
hour), by multiplying by 3.413 BTUH/watt. For example, if you wanted to build a data center
that would house 25 servers rated at 450 watts each, the calculation would be
Light fixtures
As with electronic gear, you can estimate light fixture heat load from power consumption.
Typical office light fixtures contain four 40-watt fluorescent tubes. If your new data center had
six of these fixtures, the calculation would be

Operators
At one time or another, humans will need to enter the data center to service something. Allow
300 BTUH for each occupant. To allow for four humans in the data center at the same time:

Total heat load
Once you have calculated the heat load for each component, sum the results to determine your
total heat load. For this example, let’s assume that our HVAC engineer estimated the load from
the roof, walls, and windows to be 20,000 BTUH.

Cooling system capacity is typically expressed in tons. You can convert BTUH to tons by
dividing by 12,000 BTUH/ton. You should also allow at least a 50% slop factor to account for
errors and future growth.

See how your estimate matches up with the one from your HVAC folks.
Hot aisles and cold aisles
You can dramatically reduce your data center’s cooling difficulties by putting some thought into
its physical layout. The most common and effective strategy is to alternate hot and cold aisles.
Facilities that have a raised floor and are cooled by a traditional CRAC (computer room air
conditioner) unit are often set up so that cool air enters the space under the floor, rises up through
holes in the perforated floor tiles, cools the equipment, and then rises to the top of the room as
warm air, where it is sucked into return air ducts. Traditionally, racks and perforated tiles have
been placed “randomly” about the data center, a configuration that results in relatively even
temperature distribution. The result is an environment that is comfortable for humans but not
really optimized for computers.
A better strategy is to lay out alternating hot and cold aisles between racks. Cold aisles have
perforated cooling tiles and hot aisles do not. Racks are arranged so that equipment draws in air
from a cold aisle and exhausts it to a hot aisle; the exhaust sides of two adjacent racks are
therefore back to back. Exhibit A illustrates this basic concept.

Exhibit A: Hot and cold aisles, raised floor

This arrangement optimizes the flow of cooling so that air inlets always breathe cool air rather
than another server’s hot exhaust. Properly implemented, the alternating row strategy results in
aisles that are noticeably cold and hot. You can measure your cooling success with an infrared
thermometer such as the Fluke 62, which is an indispensable tool of the modern system
administrator. This point-and-shoot $100 device instantly measures the temperature of anything
you aim it at, up to six feet away. Don’t take it out to the bars.
If you must run cabling under the floor, run power under cold aisles and network cabling under
hot aisles.

Facilities without a raised floor can use in-row cooling units such as those manufactured by APC
(apc.com). These units are skinny and sit between racks. Exhibit B shows how this system works.
Exhibit B: Hot and cold aisles with in-row cooling (bird’s-eye view)

Both CRAC and in-row cooling units need a way to dissipate heat outside the data center. This
requirement is typically satisfied with a loop of liquid refrigerant (such as chilled water,
Puron/R410A, or R22) that carries the heat outdoors. We omitted the refrigerant loops from
Exhibit A and Exhibit B for simplicity, but most installations will require them.
Humidity
According to the 2012 ASHRAE guidelines, data center humidity should be kept between 8%
and 60%. If the humidity is too low, static electricity becomes a problem. Recent testing has
shown that there is little operational difference between 8% and the previous standard of 25%, so
the minimum humidity standard was adjusted accordingly.
If humidity is too high, condensation can form on circuit boards and cause short circuits and
oxidation.
Depending on your geographic location, you might need either humidification or
dehumidification equipment to maintain a proper level of humidity.
Environmental monitoring
If you are supporting a mission-critical computing environment, it’s a good idea to monitor the
temperature (and other environmental factors, such as noise and power) in the data center even
when you are not there. It can be disappointing to arrive on Monday morning and find a pool of
melted plastic on your data center floor.
Fortunately, automated data center monitors can watch the goods while you are away. We use
and recommend the Sensaphone product family. These inexpensive boxes monitor environmental
variables such as temperature, noise, and power, and they phone or text you when they detect a
problem.
30.4 DATA CENTER RELIABILITY TIERS
The Uptime Institute is a commercial entity that certifies data centers. They have developed a
four-tier system for classifying the reliability of data centers, which we summarize in Table 30.2.
In this table, N means that you have just enough of something (e.g., UPSs or generators) to meet
normal needs. N+1 means that you have one spare; 2N means that each device has its own spare.

Table 30.2: Uptime Institute availability classification system

Centers in the highest tier must be “compartmentalized,” which means that groups of systems are
powered and cooled in such a way that the failure of one group has no effect on other groups.
Even 99.671% availability may look pretty good at first glance, but it works out to nearly 29
hours of downtime per year. 99.995% availability corresponds to 26 minutes of downtime per
year.
Of course, no amount of redundant power or cooling will keep an application available if it’s
administered poorly or is improperly architected. The data center is a foundational building
block, necessary but not sufficient to ensure overall availability from the end user’s perspective.

You can learn more about the Uptime Institute’s certification standards (which include
certification of design, construction, and operational phases) from their web site,
uptimeinstitute.org. In some cases, organizations use the concept of these tiers without paying the
Uptime Institute’s hefty certification fees. The important part is not the framed plaque but the use
of a common vocabulary and assessment methodology to compare data centers.
30.5 DATA CENTER SECURITY
Perhaps it goes without saying, but the physical security of a data center is at least as important
as its environmental attributes. Make sure that threats of both natural (e.g., fire, flood,
earthquake) and human (e.g., competitors and criminals) origin have been carefully considered.
A layered approach to security is the best way to ensure that a single mistake or lapse will not
lead to a catastrophic outcome.
Location
Whenever possible, data centers should not be located in areas that are prone to forest fires,
tornadoes, hurricanes, earthquakes, or floods. For similar reasons, it’s advisable to avoid man-
made hazard zones such as airports, freeways, refineries, and tank farms.
Because the data center you select (or build) will likely be your home for a long time, it’s
worthwhile to invest some time in researching the available risk data when making a site
selection. The U.S. Geological Survey (usgs.gov) publishes statistics such as earthquake
probability, and the Uptime Institute produces a composite map of data center location risks.
Perimeter
To reduce the risk of a targeted attack, a data center should be surrounded by a fence that is at
least 25 feet from the building on all sides. Access to the inside of the fence perimeter should be
controlled by a security guard or a multifactor badge access system. Vehicles allowed within the
fence perimeter should not be permitted within 25 feet of the building.
Continuous video monitoring must cover 100% of the external perimeter, including all gates,
access driveways, parking lots, and roofs.
Buildings should be unmarked. No signage should indicate what company the building belongs
to or mention that it houses a data center.
Facility access
Access to the data center itself should be controlled by a security guard and a multifactor badge
system, possibly one that incorporates biometric factors. Ideally, authorized parties should be
enrolled in the physical access-control system before their first visit to the data center. If this is
not possible, on-site security guards should follow a vetting process that includes confirming
each individual’s identity and authorized actions.
One of the trickiest situations in training security guards is properly handling the appearance of
“vendors” who claim they have come to fix some part of the infrastructure, such as the air
conditioning. Make no mistake: unless the guard can confirm that someone authorized or
requested this vendor visit, such visitors must be turned away.
Rack access
Large data centers are often shared with other parties. This is a cost-effective approach, but it
comes with the added responsibility of securing each rack (or “cage of racks”). This is another
case in which a multifactor access control system (such as a card reader plus a fingerprint reader)
is needed to ensure that only authorized parties have access to your equipment. Each rack should
also be individually monitored by video.
30.6 TOOLS
A well-outfitted sysadmin is an effective sysadmin. Having a dedicated tool box is an important
key to minimizing downtime in an emergency. Table 30.3 lists some items to keep in your tool
box, or at least within easy reach.

Table 30.3: A system administrator’s tool box
30.7 RECOMMENDED READING
ASHRAE, INC. ASHRAE Thermal Guidelines for Data Processing Environments (3rd edition).
Atlanta, GA: ASHRAE, Inc., 2012.
Telecommunications Infrastructure Standard for Data Centers. ANSI/TIA/EIA 942.

A variety of useful information and standards related to energy efficiency can be found at the
Center of Expertise for Energy Efficiency in Data Centers web site at datacenters.lbl.gov.
