31 Methodology, Policy, and Politics

During the past four decades, the role of information technology in business and daily life has
changed dramatically. It’s hard to imagine a world without the instant gratification of Internet
search.
For most of this period, the predominant philosophy of IT management was to increase stability
by minimizing change. In many cases, hundreds or thousands of users depended on a single
system. If a failure occurred, hardware often had to be express shipped for repair, or hours of
downtime were needed to reinstall software and restore state. IT teams lived in fear that
something would break and that they wouldn’t be able to fix it.
Change minimization has undesirable side effects. IT departments often became stuck in the past
and failed to keep pace with business needs. “Technical debt” accumulated in the form of
systems and applications in desperate need of upgrade or replacement that everyone was afraid to
touch for fear of breaking something. IT staff became the butt of jokes and the least popular folks
everywhere from board rooms to holiday parties.
Thankfully, those times are behind us. The advents of cloud infrastructure, virtualization,
automation tools, and broadband communication have greatly reduced the need for one-off
systems. Such servers have been replaced by armies of clones that are managed as battalions. In
turn, these technical factors have enabled the evolution of a service philosophy known as
DevOps which lets IT organizations drive and encourage change rather than resisting it. The
DevOps name is a portmanteau of development and operations, the two traditional disciplines it
combines.
An IT organization is more than a group of technical folks who set up Wi-Fi hot spots and
computers. From a strategic perspective, IT is a collection of people and roles that use
technology to accelerate and support the organization’s mission. Never forget the golden rule of
system administration: enterprise needs drive IT activities, not the other way around.
In this chapter, we discuss the nontechnical aspects of running a successful IT organization that
uses DevOps as its overarching schema. Most of the topics and ideas presented in this chapter are
not specific to any particular environment. They apply equally to a part-time system
administrator or to a large group of full-time professionals. Like green vegetables, they’re good
for you no matter what size meal you’re preparing.
31.1 THE GRAND UNIFIED THEORY: DEVOPS
System administration and other operational roles within IT have traditionally been separate from
domains such as application development and project management. The theory was that app
developers were specialists who would push products forward with new features and
enhancements. Meanwhile, the stolid and change-resistant operations team would provide 24 × 7
management of the production environment. This arrangement usually creates tremendous
internal conflict and ultimately fails to meet the needs of the business and its clients.

Exhibit A: Courtesy of Dave Roth

The DevOps approach mingles developers (programmers, application analysts, application
owners, project managers) with IT operations staff (system and network administrators, security
monitors, data center staff, database administrators) in a tightly integrated way. This philosophy
is rooted in the belief that working together as a collaborative team breaks down barriers, reduces
finger pointing, and produces better results. Exhibit B summarizes a few of the main concepts.

Exhibit B: What is DevOps?
DevOps is a relatively new development in IT management. The early 2000s brought change to
the development side of the house, which moved from “waterfall” release cycles to agile
approaches that featured iterative development. This system increased the speed at which
products, features, and fixes could be created, but deployment of those enhancements often
stalled because the operations side wasn’t prepared to move as quickly as the development side.
Hitching up the development and operations groups allowed everyone to accelerate down the
road at the same pace, and DevOps was born.
DevOps is CLAMS
The tenets of DevOps philosophy are most easily described with the acronym CLAMS: Culture,
Lean, Automation, Measurement, and Sharing.

Culture
People are the ultimate drivers of any successful team, so the cultural aspects of DevOps are the
most important. Although DevOps has its own canon of cultural tips and tricks, the main goal is
to get everyone working together and focused on the overall picture.
Under DevOps, all disciplines work together to support a common business driver (product,
objective, community, etc.) through all phases of its life cycle. Achieving this goal may
ultimately require changes in reporting structure (no more isolated application development
groups), seating layout, and even job responsibilities. These days, good system administrators
occasionally write code (often automation or deployment scripts), and good application
developers regularly examine and manage infrastructure performance metrics.

Here are some typical features of a DevOps culture:

      Both developers (Dev) and operations (Ops) have 24 × 7, simultaneous (“everyone
      gets paged”), on-call responsibility for the complete environment. This rule has the
      wonderful side effect that root causes can be addressed wherever they occur. (The
      first six weeks or so of a shared on-call model is painful. Then suddenly it turns
      around. Trust us.)
      No application or service can launch without automated testing and monitoring being
      in place at both the system and application level. This rule seals in functionality and
      creates a contract between Dev and Ops. Likewise, Dev and Ops must sign off on any
      launch before it happens.
      All production environments are mirrored by identical development environments.
      This rule creates a runway for testing and reduces accidents in production.
      Dev teams do regular code reviews to which Ops is invited. Code architecture and
      functionality are no longer just Dev functions. Likewise, Ops performs regular
      infrastructure reviews in which Dev is involved. Dev must be aware of—and
      contribute to—decisions about underlying infrastructure.

      Dev and Ops have regular, joint stand-up meetings. In general, meetings should be
      minimized, but joint stand-ups serve as a useful stopgap to foster communication.
      Dev and Ops should all sit in a common chat room dedicated to discussion of both
      strategic (architecture, direction, sizing) and operational issues. This communication
      channel is often known as ChatOps, and several amazing platforms are available to
      support it. Check out HipChat, Slack, MatterMost, and Zulip, to name a few.
A successful DevOps culture pushes Dev and Ops so close that their scopes interpenetrate, and
everyone learns to be comfortable with that. The optimal level of overlap is probably higher than
most people would naturally prefer in the absence of cultural indoctrination. Team members
must learn to respond gracefully to queries and feedback about their work from colleagues who
may be formally trained in other disciplines.

Lean
The easiest way to explain the lean aspect of DevOps is to note that if you schedule a recurring
weekly meeting at your organization to discuss your DevOps implementation plan, you have
instantly failed.
DevOps is about real-time interaction and communication among people, processes, and systems.
Use real-time tools (like ChatOps) to communicate wherever possible, and focus on solving
component problems one at a time. Always ask “what can we do today” to make progress on an
issue. Avoid the temptation to boil the ocean.

Automation
Automation is the most universally recognized aspect of DevOps. The two golden rules of
automation are these:

       If you need to perform a task more than twice, it should be automated.

       Don’t automate what you don’t understand.

Automation brings many advantages:

       It prevents staff from being trapped performing mundane tasks. Staff brainpower and
       creativity can be used to solve new and more difficult challenges.
       It reduces the risk of human error.
       It captures infrastructure in the form of code, allowing versions and outcomes to be
       tracked.
       It facilitates evolution while also reducing risk. If a change fails, automated rollback
       is (well, should be) easy.
       It facilitates the use of virtualized or cloud resources to achieve scale and
       redundancy. Need more? Spin some up. Need less? Kill them off.

Tools are instrumental in the quest for automation. Systems such as Ansible, Salt, Puppet, and
Chef (covered in Chapter 23, Configuration Management) are front and center. Continuous
integration tools such as Jenkins and Bamboo (see this page) help manage repeatable or triggered
tasks. Packaging and launch utilities such as Packer and Terraform automate low-level
infrastructure tasks.
Depending on your environment, you might need one, some, or all (!?) of these tools. New tools
and enhancements are being developed rapidly, so focus on finding the tool that is a good fit for
the particular function or process you are automating, as opposed to picking a tool and then
looking for the questions it answers. Most importantly, reevaluate your tool set every year or
two.
Your automation strategy should include at least the following elements:

      Automated setup of new machines: This is not just OS installation. It also includes
      all the additional software and local configuration necessary to allow a machine to
      enter production. It’s inevitable that your site will need to support more than one type
      of configuration, so include multiple machine types in your plans from the beginning.

      Automated configuration management: Configuration changes should be entered
      in the configuration base and applied automatically to all machines of the same type.
      This rule helps keep the environment consistent.
      Automated promotion of code: Propagation of new functionality from the
      development environment to the test environment, and from the test environment into
      production, should be automated. Testing itself should be automated, with clear
      criteria for evaluation and promotion.
      Systematic patching and updating of existing machines: When you identify a
      problem with your setup, you need a standardized and easy way to deploy updates to
      all affected machines. Because servers are not turned on all the time (even if they are
      supposed to be), your update scheme must correctly handle machines that are not on-
      line when an update is initiated. You can check for updates at boot time or update on
      a regular schedule; see Periodic processes for more information.

Measurement

     See Chapter 28 for more information about monitoring.

The ability to scale virtualized or cloud infrastructure (see Chapter 9, Cloud Computing) has
pushed the world of instrumentation and measurement to new heights. Today’s gold standard is
the collection of sub-second measurements throughout the entire service stack (business,
application, database, subsystems, servers, network, and so on). Several DevOps-y tools such as
Graphite, Grafana, ELK (the Elasticsearch + Logstash + Kibana stack), plus monitoring
platforms like Icinga and Zenoss, support these efforts.
Having measurement data and doing something useful with it are two different things, however.
A mature DevOps shop ensures that metrics from the environment are visible and evangelized to
all interested parties (both inside and outside of IT). DevOps sets nominal targets for each metric
and chases down any anomalies to determine their cause.
Sharing
Collaborative work and shared development of capabilities lie at the heart of a successful
DevOps effort. Staff should be encouraged and incentivized to share their work both internally
(lunch-and-learn presentations, team show-and-tell, wiki how-to articles) and externally
(Meetups, white papers, conferences). These efforts extend the silo-busting philosophy beyond
the local workgroup and help everyone learn and grow.
System administration in a DevOps world
System administrators have always been the jacks-and-jills-of-all-trades of the IT world, and that
remains true under the broader DevOps umbrella. The system administrator role oversees
systems and infrastructure, typically including primary responsibility for these areas:

      Building, configuring, automating, and deploying system infrastructure
      Ensuring that the operating system and major subsystems are secure, patched, and up
      to date
      Deploying, supporting, and evangelizing DevOps technologies for continuous
      integration, continuous deployment, monitoring, measurement, containerization,
      virtualization, and ChatOps platforms
      Coaching other team members on infrastructure and security best practices

      Monitoring and maintaining infrastructure (physical, virtual, or cloud) to ensure that
      it meets performance and availability requirements
      Responding to user resource or enhancement requests
      Fixing problems with systems and infrastructure as they occur
      Planning for the future expansion of systems, infrastructure, and capacity

      Advocating cooperative interactions among team members
      Managing various outside vendors (cloud, co-location, disaster recovery, data
      retention, connectivity, physical plant, hardware service)
      Managing the life cycle of infrastructure components
      Maintaining an emergency stash of ibuprofen, tequila, and/or chocolate to be shared
      with other team members on those not-as-fresh days

This is just a subset of the breadth covered by a successful system administrator. The role is part
drill sergeant, part mother hen, part EMT, and part glue that keeps everything running smoothly.

Above all, remember that DevOps is founded on overcoming one’s normal territorial impulses. If
you find yourself at war with other team members, take a step back and remember that you are
most effective if you are seen as a hero who helps make everyone else successful.
31.2 TICKETING AND TASK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
A ticketing and task management system lies at the heart of every functioning IT group. As with
all things DevOps, having one ticketing system that spans all IT disciplines is critical. In
particular, enhancement requests, issue management, and software bug tracking should all be part
of the same system.
A good ticketing system helps staff avoid two of the most common workflow pitfalls:

      Tasks that fall through the cracks because everyone thinks they are being taken care
      of by someone else

      Resources that are wasted through duplication of effort when multiple people or
      groups work on the same problem without coordination
Common functions of ticketing systems
A ticket system accepts requests through various interfaces (email and web being the most
common) and tracks them from submission to solution. Managers can assign tickets to groups or
to individual staff members. Staff can query the system to see the queue of pending tickets and
perhaps resolve some of them. Users can find out the status of requests and see who is working
on them. Managers can extract high-level information such as

      The number of open tickets
      The average time to close a ticket
      The productivity of staff members
      The percentage of unresolved (rotting) tickets

      Workload distribution by time to solution

The request history stored in the ticket system becomes a history of the problems with your IT
infrastructure and also the solutions to those problems. If that history is easily searchable, it
becomes an invaluable resource for the sysadmin staff.
Resolved tickets can be provided to novice staff members and trainees, inserted into a FAQ
system, or made searchable for later discovery. New staff members can benefit from receiving
copies of closed tickets because those tickets include not only technical information but also
examples of the tone and communication style that are appropriate for use with customers.
Like all documents, your ticketing system’s historical data can potentially be used against your
organization in court. Follow the document retention guidelines set up by your legal department.
Most request tracking systems automatically confirm new requests and assign them a tracking
number that submitters can use to follow up or inquire about the request’s status. The automated
response message should clearly state that it is just a confirmation. It should be followed
promptly by a message from a real person that explains the plan for dealing with the problem or
request.
Ticket ownership
Work can be shared, but in our experience, responsibility is less amenable to distribution. Every
task should have a single, well-defined owner. That person need not be a supervisor or manager,
just someone willing to act as a coordinator—someone willing to say, “I take responsibility for
making sure this task gets done.”
An important side effect of this approach is that it is implicitly clear who implemented what or
who made what changes. This transparency becomes important if you want to figure out why
something was done in a certain way or why something is suddenly working differently or not
working anymore.
Being “responsible” for a task should not equate to being a scapegoat if problems arise. If your
organization defines responsibility as blameworthiness, you may find that the number of
available project owners quickly dwindles. Your goal in assigning ownership is simply to remove
ambiguity about who should be addressing each problem. Don’t punish staff members for
requesting help.
From a customer’s point of view, a good assignment system is one that routes problems to a
person who is knowledgeable and can solve them quickly and completely. But from a managerial
perspective, assignments must occasionally be challenging to the assignee so that staff members
continue to grow and learn in the course of doing their jobs. Your task is to balance reliance on
staff members’ strengths against the need to challenge them, all while keeping both customers
and staff members happy.

Larger tasks can be anything up to and including full-blown software engineering projects. These
tasks may require the use of formal project management and software engineering tools. We
don’t describe those tools here; nevertheless, they’re important and should not be overlooked.
Sometimes sysadmins know that a particular task needs to be done, but they don’t do it because
the task is unpleasant. A sysadmin who points out a neglected, unassigned, or unpopular task is
likely to receive that task as an assignment. This situation creates a conflict of interest because it
motivates sysadmins to remain silent regarding such situations. Don’t let that happen at your site;
give your sysadmins an avenue for pointing out problems. You can allow them to open up tickets
without assigning an owner or associating themselves to the issue, or you can create an email
alias to which issues can be sent.
User acceptance of ticketing systems
Receiving a prompt response from a real person is a critical determinant of customer satisfaction,
even if the personal response contains no more information than the automated response. For
most problems, it is far more important to let the submitter know that the ticket has been
reviewed by a real person than it is to fix the problem immediately. Users understand that
administrators receive many requests, and they’re willing to wait a fair and reasonable time for
your attention. But they’re not willing to be ignored.
The mechanism through which users submit tickets affects their perception of the system. Make
sure you understand your organization’s culture and your users’ preferences. Do they want a web
interface? A custom application? An email alias? Maybe they’re only willing to make phone
calls!
It’s also important that administrators take the time to make sure they understand what users are
actually requesting. This point sounds obvious, but think back to the last five times you emailed a
customer service or tech support alias. We’d bet there were at least a couple of cases in which the
response seemed to have nothing to do with the question—not because those companies were
especially incompetent, but because accurately parsing tickets is harder than it looks.
Once you’ve read enough of a ticket to develop an impression of what the customer is asking
about, the rest of the ticket starts to look like “blah blah blah.” Fight this! Clients hate waiting for
a ticket to find its way to a human, only to learn that the request has been misinterpreted and
must be resubmitted or restated. Back to square one.

Tickets are often vague or inaccurate because the submitter does not have the technical
background needed to describe the problem in the way that a sysadmin would. That doesn’t stop
users from making their own guesses as to what’s wrong, however. Sometimes these guesses are
perfectly correct. Other times, you must first decode the ticket to determine what the user thinks
the problem is, then trace back along the user’s train of thought to intuit the underlying problem.
Sample ticketing systems
The following tables summarize the characteristics of several well-known ticketing systems.
Table 31.1 shows open source systems, and Table 31.2 shows commercial systems.

Table 31.1: Open source ticket systems

Table 31.2 shows some of the commercial alternatives for request management. Since the web
sites for commercial offerings are mostly marketing hype, details such as the implementation
language and back end are not listed.

Table 31.2: Commercial ticket systems

Some of the commercial offerings are so complex that they need a person or two dedicated to
maintaining, configuring, and keeping them running. Others (such as Jira and ServiceNow) are
available as a “software as a service” product.
Ticket dispatching
In a large group, even one with an awesome ticketing system, one problem still remains to be
solved: it is inefficient for several people to divide their attention between the task they are
working on right now and the request queue, especially if requests come in by email to a personal
mailbox. We have experimented with two solutions to this problem.
Our first try was to assign half-day shifts of trouble queue duty to staff members in our sysadmin
group. The person on duty would try to answer as many of the incoming queries as possible
during a shift. The problem with this approach was that not everybody had the skills to answer all
questions and fix all problems. Answers were sometimes inappropriate because the person on
duty was new and was not familiar with the customers, their environments, or the specific
support contracts they were covered by. The result was that the more senior people had to keep
an eye on things and so were not able to concentrate on their own work. In the end, the quality of
service was worse and nothing was really gained.
After this experience, we created a “dispatcher” role that rotates monthly among a group of
senior administrators. The dispatcher checks the ticketing system for new entries and farms out
tasks to specific staff members. If necessary, the dispatcher contacts users to extract any
additional information that is necessary for prioritizing requests. The dispatcher uses a home-
grown database of staff skills to decide who on the support team has the appropriate skills and
time to address a given ticket. The dispatcher also makes sure that requests are resolved in a
timely manner.
31.3 LOCAL DOCUMENTATION MAINTENANCE
Just as most people accept the health benefits of exercise and leafy green vegetables, everyone
appreciates good documentation and has a vague idea that it’s important. Unfortunately, that
doesn’t necessarily mean that they’ll write or update documentation without prodding. Why
should we care, really?

      Documentation reduces the likelihood of a single point of failure. It’s wonderful to
      have tools that deploy workstations in no time and distribute patches with a single
      command, but these tools are nearly worthless if no documentation exists and the
      expert is on vacation or has quit.
      Documentation aids reproducibility. When practices and procedures are not stored in
      institutional memory, they are unlikely to be followed consistently. When
      administrators can’t find information about how to do something, they have to wing
      it.

      Documentation saves time. It doesn’t feel like you’re saving time as you write it, but
      after spending a few days re-solving a problem that has been tackled before but
      whose solution has been forgotten, most administrators are convinced that the time is
      well spent.
      Finally, and most importantly, documentation enhances the intelligibility of the
      system and allows subsequent modifications to be made in a manner that’s consistent
      with the way the system is supposed to work. When modifications are made on the
      basis of only partial understanding, they often don’t quite conform to the architecture.
      Entropy increases over time, and even the administrators that work on the system
      come to see it as a disorderly collection of hacks. The end result is often the desire to
      scrap everything and start again from scratch.

Local documentation should be kept in a well-defined spot such as an internal wiki or a third-
party service such as Google Drive. Once you have convinced your administrators to document
configurations and administration practices, it’s important to protect this documentation as well.
A malicious user can do a lot of damage by tampering with your organization’s documentation.
Make sure that people who need the documentation can find it and read it (make it searchable),
and that everyone who maintains the documentation can change it. But balance accessibility with
the need for protection.
Infrastructure as code
Another important form of documentation is known as “infrastructure as code.” It can take a
variety of forms, but is most commonly seen in the form of configuration definitions (such as
Puppet modules or Ansible playbooks) that can then be stored and tracked in a version control
system such as Git. The system and its changes are well documented in the configuration files,
and the environment can be built and compared against the standard on a regular basis. This
approach ensures that the documentation and the environment always match and are up to date,
solving the most common problem of traditional documentation. See Chapter 23, Configuration
Management, for more information.
Documentation standards
If you must document elements manually, our experience suggests that the easiest and most
effective way to maintain documentation is to standardize on short, lightweight documents.
Instead of writing a system management handbook for your organization, write many one-page
documents, each of which covers a single topic. Start with the big picture and then break it down
into pieces that contain additional information. If you have to go into more detail somewhere,
write an additional one-page document that focuses on steps that are particularly difficult or
complicated.
This approach has several advantages:

      Higher management is probably only interested in the general setup of your
      environment. That is all that’s needed to answer questions from above or to conduct a
      managerial discussion. Don’t pour on too many details or you will just tempt your
      boss to interfere in them.
      The same holds true for customers.
      A new employee or someone taking on new duties within your organization needs an
      overview of the infrastructure to become productive. It’s not helpful to bury such
      people in information.

      It’s more efficient to use the right document than to browse through a large
      document.
      You can index pages to make them easy to find. The less time administrators have to
      spend looking for information, the better.
      It’s easier to keep documentation current when you can do that by updating a single
      page.

This last point is particularly important. Keeping documentation up to date is a huge challenge;
documentation is often is the first thing to be dropped when time is short. We have found that a
couple of specific approaches keep the documentation flowing.
First, set the expectation that documentation be concise, relevant, and unpolished. Cut to the
chase; the important thing is to get the information down. Nothing makes the documentation
sphincter snap shut faster than the prospect of writing a dissertation on design theory. Ask for too
much documentation and you might not get any. Consider developing a simple form or template
for your sysadmins to use. A standard structure helps avoid blank-page anxiety and guides
sysadmins to record pertinent information rather than fluff.

Second, integrate documentation into processes. Comments in configuration files are some of the
best documentation of all. They’re always right where you need them, and maintaining them
takes virtually no time at all. Most standard configuration files allow comments, and even those
that aren’t particularly comment friendly can often have some extra information sneaked into
them.
Locally built tools can require documentation as part of their standard configuration information.
For example, a tool that sets up a new computer can require information about the computer’s
owner, location, support status, and billing information, even if these facts aren’t directly relevant
to the machine’s software configuration.

     See this page for more information about cron.

Documentation should not create information redundancies. For example, if you maintain a site-
wide master list of systems, there should be no other place where this information is updated by
hand. Not only is it a waste of your time to make updates in multiple locations, but
inconsistencies are also certain to creep in over time. When this information is required in other
contexts and configuration files, write a script that obtains it from (or updates) the master
configuration. If you cannot completely eliminate redundancies, at least be clear about which
source is authoritative. And write tools to catch inconsistencies, perhaps run regularly from cron.
The advent of tools such as wikis, blogs, and other simple knowledge management systems has
made it much easier to keep track of IT documentation. Set up a single location where all your
documents can be found and updated. Don’t forget to keep it organized, however. One wiki page
with 200 child pages all in one list is cumbersome and difficult to use. Be sure to include a search
function to get the most out of your system.
31.4 ENVIRONMENT SEPARATION
Organizations that write and deploy their own software need separate development, test, and
production environments so that releases can be staged into general use through a structured
process. Separate, that is, but identical; make sure that when development systems are updated,
the changes propagate to the test and production environments as well. Of course, the
configuration updates themselves should be subject to the same kind of structured release control
as the code. “Configuration changes” include everything from OS patches to application updates
and administrative changes.
Historically, it has been standard practice to “protect” the production environment by enforcing
role separation throughout the promotion process. For example, the developers who have
administrative privileges in the development environment are not the same people who have
administrative and promotion privileges in other environments. The fear was that a disgruntled
developer with code promotion permissions could conceivably insert malicious code at the
development stage and then promote it through to production. By distributing approval and
promotion duties to other people, multiple people would need to collude or make mistakes before
problems could find their way into production systems.

Unfortunately, the anticipated benefits of such draconian measures are rarely realized. Code
promoters often don’t have the skills or time to review code changes at a level that would
actually catch intentional mischief. Instead of helping, the system creates a false sense of
protection, introduces unnecessary roadblocks, and wastes resources.
In the DevOps era, this problem is solved in a different way. Rather than separate roles, the
preferred approach is to track all changes “as code” in a repository (such as Git) that has an
immutable audit trail. Any undesirable change is traceable back to the human that introduced it,
so strict role separation is unnecessary. Because configuration changes are applied in an
automated way across each environment, identical changes can be evaluated in lower
environments (such as dev or test) before they are promoted to production, to ensure that no
unintended consequences manifest themselves. If problems are discovered, reversion is as easy
as identifying the problematic commit and temporarily bypassing it.
In a perfect world, neither developers nor ops staff would have administrative privileges in the
production environment. Instead, all changes would be made through an automated, tracked
process that has appropriate privileges of its own. Although this is a worthy aspirational goal, our
experience has been that it is not yet realistic for most organizations. Work toward this utopian
fantasy, but don’t get trapped by it.
31.5 DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Your organization depends on a working IT environment. Not only are you responsible for day-
to-day operations, but you should also have plans in place to deal with any reasonably
foreseeable eventuality. Preparation for such large-scale problems influences both your overall
game plan and the way that you define daily operations. In this section, we look at various kinds
of disasters, the data you need to recover gracefully, and the important elements of recovery
plans.
Risk assessment
Before designing a disaster recovery plan, it’s a good idea to pull together a risk assessment to
help you understand what assets you have, what risks they face, and what mitigation steps you
already have in place. The NIST 800-30 special publication details an extensive risk assessment
process. You can download it from nist.gov.
Part of the risk assessment process is to make an explicit, written catalog of the potential
disasters you want to protect against. Disasters are not all the same, and you may need several
different plans to cover the full range of possibilities. For example, some common threat
categories are

      Malicious users, both external and internal
      Floods
      Fires
      Earthquakes
      Hurricanes and tornadoes
      Electrical storms and power spikes
      Power failures, both short- and long-term

      Extreme heat or failure of cooling equipment
      ISP/Telecom/Cloud outage
      Device hardware failures (dead servers, fried hard disks)
      Terrorism

      Zombie apocalypse
      Network device failures (routers, switches, cables)
      Accidental user errors (deleted or damaged files and databases, lost configuration
      information, lost passwords, etc.)

Historically, about half of security breaches originate with insiders. Internal misbehavior
continues to be the disaster of highest likelihood at most sites. For each potential threat, consider
and write down all the possible implications of that event.
Once you understand the threats, prioritize the services within your IT environment. Build a table
that lists your IT services and assigns a priority to each. For example, a “software as a service”
company might rate its external web site as a top-priority service, while an office with a simple,
informational external web site might not worry about the site’s fate during a disaster.
Recovery planning
More and more, organizations are designing their critical systems to automatically fail over to
secondary servers in the case of problems. This is a great idea if you have little or no tolerance
for services being down. However, don’t fall prey to the belief that because you are mirroring
your data, you do not need off-line backups. Even if your data centers are miles apart, it is
certainly possible that you could lose both of them.
Malicious hackers and ransomware can easily destroy an organization that does not maintain
read-only, off-line backups. Make sure you include data backups in your disaster planning.

     Read more about cloud computing in Chapter 9.

Cloud computing is often an essential element of disaster planning. Through services such as
Amazon’s EC2, you can get a remote site set up and functioning within minutes without having
to pay for dedicated hardware. You pay only for what you use, when you use it.

A disaster recovery plan should include the following sections (derived from the NIST disaster
recovery standard, 800-34):

      Introduction – purpose and scope of the document
      Concept of operations – system description, recovery objectives, information
      classification, line of succession, responsibilities
      Notification and activation – notification procedures, damage assessment procedures,
      plan activation
      Recovery – the sequence of events and procedures required to recover lost systems

      Return to normal operation – concurrent processing, reconstituted system testing,
      return to normal operation, plan deactivation

We are accustomed to communicating and accessing documents through the network. However,
these facilities may be unavailable or compromised after an incident. Store all relevant contacts
and procedures off-line. Know where to get recent backups and how to make use of them without
reference to on-line data.
In all disaster scenarios, you will need access to both on-line and off-line copies of essential
information. The on-line copies should, if possible, be kept in a self-sufficient environment, one
that has a rich complement of tools, has key sysadmins’ environments, runs its own name server,
has a complete local /etc/hosts file, has no file-sharing dependencies, and so on.
Here’s a list of handy data to keep in the disaster support environment:
An outline of the recovery procedure: who to call, what to say
Service contract phone numbers and customer numbers

Key local phone numbers: police, fire, staff, boss
Cloud vendor login information
Inventory of backup media and the backup schedule that produced them
Network maps

Software serial numbers, licensing data, and passwords
Copies of software installation media (can be kept as ISO files)
Copies of your systems’ service manuals
Vendor contact information
Administrative passwords
Data on hardware, software, and cloud environment configurations: OS versions,
patch levels, partition tables, and the like
Startup instructions for systems that need to be brought back on-line in a particular
order
Staffing for a disaster
Your disaster recovery plan should document who will be in charge in the event of a catastrophic
incident. Set up a chain of command and keep the names and phone numbers of the principals
off-line. We keep a little laminated card with important names and phone numbers printed in
microscopic type. Handy—and it fits in your wallet.
The best person to put in charge may be a sysadmin from the trenches, not the IT director (who is
usually a poor choice for this role).
The person in charge must be someone who has the authority and decisiveness to make tough
decisions in the context of minimal information (e.g., a decision to disconnect an entire
department from the network). The ability to make such decisions, communicate them in a
sensible way, and lead the staff through the crisis are probably more important than having
theoretical insight into system and network management.
An important but sometimes unspoken assumption made in most disaster plans is that sysadmin
staff will be available to deal with the situation. Unfortunately, people get sick, go on vacation,
leave for other jobs, and in stressful times may even turn hostile. Consider what you’d do if you
needed extra emergency help. (Not having enough sysadmins around can sometimes constitute
an emergency in its own right if your systems are fragile or your users unsophisticated.)

You might try forming a sort of NATO pact with a local consulting company that has sharable
system administration talent. Of course, you must be willing to share back when your buddies
have a problem. Most importantly, don’t operate close to the wire in your daily routine. Hire
enough system administrators and don’t expect them to work 12-hour days.
Security incidents
System security is covered in detail in Chapter 27. However, it’s worth mentioning here as well
because security considerations impact the vast majority of administrative tasks. No aspect of
your site’s management strategy can be designed without due regard for security.
For the most part, Chapter 27 concentrates on ways of preventing security incidents from
occurring. However, thinking about how you might recover from a security-related incident is an
equally important part of security planning.
Having your web site hijacked is a particularly embarrassing type of break-in. For the sysadmin
at a web-hosting company, a hijacking can be a calamitous event, especially when it involves
sites that handle credit card data. Phone calls stream in from customers, from the media, from the
company VIPs who just saw the news of the hijacking on CNN. Who will take the calls? What
should that person say? Who is in charge? What role does each person play? If you are in a high-
visibility business, it’s definitely worth thinking through this type of scenario, coming up with
some preplanned answers, and perhaps even having a practice session to work out the details.
Sites that accept credit card data have legal requirements to deal with after a hijacking. Make
sure your organization’s legal department is involved in security incident planning, and make
sure you have relevant contact names and phone numbers to call in a time of crisis.

When CNN or Reddit announces that your web site is down, the same effect that makes highway
traffic slow down to look at an accident on the side of the road causes your Internet traffic to
increase enormously, often to the point of breaking whatever it was that you just fixed. If your
web site cannot handle an increase in traffic of 25% or more, consider having your load-
balancing device route excess connections to a server that presents a page that simply says
“Sorry, we are too busy to handle your request right now.” Of course, forward-thinking capacity
planning that includes auto-scaling into the cloud (see Chapter 9) might avoid this situation
altogether.
Develop a complete incident handling guide to take the guesswork out of managing security
problems. See this page for more details on security incident management.
31.6 IT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Comprehensive IT policies and procedures serve as the groundwork for a modern IT
organization. Policies set standards for users and administrators and foster consistency for
everyone involved. More and more, policies require acknowledgement in the form of a signature
or other proof that the user has agreed to abide by their contents. Although this may seem
excessive to some, it is actually a great way to protect administrators in the long run.
The ISO/IEC 27001:2013 standard is a good basis for constructing your policy set. It interleaves
general IT policies with other important elements such as IT security and the role of the Human
Resources department. In the next few sections, we discuss the ISO/IEC 27001:2013 framework
and highlight some of its most important and useful elements.
The difference between policies and procedures
Policies and procedures are two distinct things, but they are often confused, and the words are
sometimes even used interchangeably. This sloppiness creates confusion, however. To be safe,
think of them this way:

      Policies are documents that define requirements or rules. The requirements are
      usually specified at a relatively high level. An example of a policy might be that
      incremental backups must be performed daily, with total backups being completed
      each week.
      Procedures are documents that describe how a requirement or rule will be met. So,
      the procedure associated with the policy above might say something like
      “Incremental backups are performed with Backup Exec software, which is installed
      on the server backups01…”

This distinction is important because your policies should not change often. You should review
them annually and maybe change one or two pieces. Procedures, on the other hand, evolve
continuously as you change your architecture, systems, and configurations.
Some policy decisions are dictated by the software you are running or by the policies of external
groups, such as ISPs. Some policies are mandatory if the privacy of your users’ data is to be
protected. We call these topics “nonnegotiable policy.”
In particular, we believe that IP addresses, hostnames, UIDs, GIDs, and usernames should all be
managed site-wide. Some sites (multinational corporations, for example) are clearly too large to
implement this policy, but if you can swing it, site-wide management makes things a lot simpler.
We know of a company that enforces site-wide management for 35,000 users and 100,000
machines, so the threshold at which an organization becomes too big for site-wide management
must be pretty high.

Other important issues have a larger scope than just your local IT group:

      Handling of security break-ins
      Filesystem export controls
      Password selection criteria
      Removal of logins for cause
      Copyrighted material (e.g., MP3s and movies)
      Software piracy
Policy best practices
Several policy frameworks are available, and they cover roughly the same territories. The
following topics are examples of those that are typically included in an IT policy set:

      Information security policy
      External party connectivity agreements
      Asset management policy
      Data classification system

      Human Resources security policy
      Physical security policy
      Access control policies
      Security standards for development, maintenance, and new systems

      Incident management policy
      Business continuity management (disaster recovery)
      Data retention standards
      Protection of user privacy

      Regulatory compliance policy
Procedures
Procedures in the form of checklists or recipes can codify existing practice. They are useful both
for new sysadmins and for old hands. Better yet are procedures that include executable scripts or
are captured in a configuration management tool such as Ansible, Salt, Puppet, or Chef. Over the
long term, most procedures should be automated.
Several benefits accrue from standard procedures:

      Tasks are always done in the same way.
      Checklists reduce the likelihood of errors or forgotten steps.
      It’s faster for the sysadmin to work from a recipe.

      Changes are self-documenting.
      Written procedures provide a measurable standard of correctness.

Here are some common tasks for which you might want to set up procedures:

      Adding a host
      Adding a user
      Localizing a machine

      Setting up backups/snapshots for a new machine
      Securing a new machine
      Removing an old machine
      Restarting a complicated piece of software

      Reviving a web site that is not responding
      Upgrading the operating system
      Patching software
      Installing a software package
      Upgrading critical software
      Backing up and restoring files
      Expiring old backups
      Performing emergency shutdowns
Many issues sit squarely between policy and procedure. For example:

      Who can have an account on your network?
      What happens when they leave?

The resolutions of such issues need to be written down so that you can stay consistent and avoid
falling prey to the well-known four-year-old’s ploy of “Mommy said no, let’s go ask Daddy!”
31.7 SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENTS
For the IT organization to keep users happy and meet the needs of the enterprise, the exact details
of the service being provided must be negotiated, agreed to, and documented in “service level
agreements” or SLAs. A good SLA is a tool that sets appropriate expectations and serves as a
reference when questions arise. (But remember, IT provides solutions, not roadblocks!)
When something is broken, users want to know when it’s going to be fixed. That’s it. They don’t
really care which hard disk or generator broke, or why; leave that information for your
managerial reports.

From a user’s perspective, no news is good news. The system either works or it doesn’t, and if
the latter, it doesn’t matter why. Our customers are happiest when they don’t even notice that we
exist! Sad, but true.
An SLA helps align end users and support staff. A well-written SLA addresses each of the issues
discussed in the following sections.
Scope and descriptions of services
This section is the foundation of the SLA because it describes what the organization can expect
from IT. Write it in terms that can be understood by nontechnical staff. Some example services
might be

      Email
      Chat
      Internet and web access
      File servers
      Business applications
      Authentication

The standards that IT will adhere to when providing these services must also be defined. For
example, an availability section would define the hours of operation, the agreed-on maintenance
windows, and the expectations regarding the times at which IT staff will be available to provide
live support. One organization might decide that regular support should be available from 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on weekdays but that emergency support must be available 24/7. Another
organization might decide that it needs standard live support available at all times.
Here is a list of issues to consider when documenting your standards:

      Response time
      Service (and response times) during weekends and off-hours
      House calls (support for environments at home)

      Weird (unique or proprietary) hardware
      Upgrade policy (ancient hardware, software, etc.)
      Supported operating systems
      Supported cloud platforms

      Standard configurations
      Data retention
      Special-purpose software

When considering service standards, keep in mind that many users will want to customize their
environments (or even their systems) if the software is not nailed down to prevent this. The
stereotypical IT response is to forbid all user modifications, but although this policy makes things
easier for IT, it isn’t necessarily the best policy for the organization.
Address this issue in your SLAs and try to standardize on a few specific configurations.
Otherwise, your goals of easy maintenance and scaling to grow with the organization will meet
some serious impediments. Encourage your creative, OS-hacking employees to suggest
modifications that they need for their work, and be diligent and generous in incorporating these
suggestions into your standard configurations. If you don’t, your users will work hard to subvert
your rules.
Queue prioritization policies
In addition to knowing what services are provided, users must also know about the priority
scheme used to manage the work queue. Priority schemes always have wiggle room, but try to
design one that covers most situations with few or no exceptions. Some priority-related variables
are listed below:

      The importance of the service to the overall organization
      The security impact of the situation (has there been a breach?)
      The service level the customer has paid or contracted for
      The number of users affected

      The importance of any relevant deadline
      The loudness of the affected users (squeaky wheels)
      The importance of the affected users (this is a tricky one, but let’s be honest: some
      people in your organization have more pull than others)

Although all these factors will influence your rankings, we recommend a simple set of rules
together with some common sense to deal with the exceptions. We use the following basic
priorities:

      Many people cannot work
      One person cannot work
      Requests for improvements

If two or more requests have top priority and the requests cannot be worked on in parallel, we
decide which problem to tackle first by assessing the severity of the issues (e.g., email not
working makes almost everybody unhappy, whereas the temporary unavailability of a web
service might hinder only a few people). Queues at lower priorities are usually handled in a FIFO
manner.
Conformance measurements
An SLA needs to define how the organization will measure your success at fulfilling the terms of
the agreement. Targets and goals allow the staff to work toward a common outcome and can lay
the groundwork for cooperation throughout the organization. Of course, you must make sure you
have tools in place to measure the agreed-on metrics.
At a minimum, you should track the following metrics for your IT infrastructure:

      Percentage or number of projects completed on time and on budget
      Percentage or number of SLA elements fulfilled
      Uptime percentage by system (e.g., “email 99.92% available through Q1”)

      Percentage or number of tickets that were satisfactorily resolved
      Average time to ticket resolution
      Time to provision a new system
      Percentage or number of security incidents handled according to the documented
      incident handling process
31.8 COMPLIANCE: REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS
IT auditing and governance are big issues today. Regulations and quasi-standards for specifying,
measuring, and certifying compliance have spawned myriad acronyms: SOX, ITIL, COBIT, and
ISO 27001, just to name a few. Unfortunately, this alphabet soup is leaving something of a bad
taste in system administrators’ mouths, and quality software to implement all the controls
deemed necessary by recent legislation is currently lacking.
Some of the major advisory standards, guidelines, industry frameworks, and legal requirements
that might apply to system administrators are listed below. The legislative requirements are
largely specific to the United States.

Typically, the standard you must use is mandated by your organization type or the data you
handle. In jurisdictions outside the United States, you will need to identify the applicable
regulations.

      The CJIS (Criminal Justice Information Systems) standard applies to
      organizations that track criminal information and integrate that information with the
      FBI’s databases. Its requirements can be found on-line at fbi.gov/hq/cjisd/cjis.htm.
      COBIT is a voluntary framework for information management that attempts to
      codify industry best practices. It is developed jointly by the Information Systems
      Audit and Control Association (ISACA) and the IT Governance Institute (ITGI); see
      isaca.org for details. COBIT’s mission is “to research, develop, publicize, and
      promote an authoritative, up-to-date, international set of generally accepted
      information technology control objectives for day-to-day use by business managers
      and auditors.”

      The first edition of the framework was published in 1996, and we are now at version
      5.0, published in 2012. This latest iteration was strongly influenced by the
      requirements of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. It includes 37 high-level processes
      categorized into five domains: Align, Plan, and Organize (APO); Build, Acquire, and
      Implement (BAI); Deliver, Service, and Support (DSS); Monitor, Evaluate, and
      Assess (MEA); and Evaluate, Direct, and Monitor (EDM).

      COPPA, the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act, regulates organizations
      that collect or store information about children under the age of 13. Parental
      permission is required to gather certain information; see ftc.gov for details.
      FERPA, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act, applies to all institutions
      that are recipients of federal aid administered by the Secretary of Education. This
      regulation protects student information and accords students specific rights with
      respect to their data. For details, search for FERPA at ed.gov.
FISMA, the Federal Information Security Management Act, applies to all
government agencies and their contractors. It’s a large and rather vague set of
requirements that seek to enforce compliance with a variety of IT security
publications from NIST, the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Whether or not your organization falls under the mandate of FISMA, the NIST
documents are worth reviewing. See nist.gov for more information.
The FTC’s Safe Harbor framework bridges the gap between the U.S. and E.U.
approaches to privacy legislation and defines a way for U.S. organizations that
interface with European companies to demonstrate their data security. See
export.gov/safeharbor.

GLBA, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act regulates financial institutions’ use of
consumers’ private information. If you’ve been wondering why the world’s banks,
credit card issuers, brokerages, and insurers have been pelting you with privacy
notices, that’s the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act at work. See ftc.gov for details.
Currently, the best GLBA information is in the business section of the Tips & Advice
portion of the web site. The shortcut goo.gl/vv2011 currently works as a deep link.
HIPAA, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, applies to
organizations that transmit or store protected health information (aka PHI). It is a
broad standard that was originally intended to combat waste, fraud, and abuse in
health care delivery and health insurance, but it is now used to measure and improve
the security of health information as well. See hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/index.html.
ISO 27001:2013 and ISO 27002:2013 are a voluntary (and informative) collection of
security-related best practices for IT organizations. See iso.org.
CIP (Critical Infrastructure Protection) is a family of standards from the North
American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) which promote the hardening of
infrastructure systems such as power, telephone, and financial grids against risks
from natural disasters and terrorism. In a textbook demonstration of the Nietzschean
concept of organizational “will to power,” it turns out that most of the economy falls
into one of NERC’s 17 “critical infrastructure and key resource” (CI/KR) sectors and
is therefore richly in need of CIP guidance. Organizations within these sectors should
be evaluating their systems and protecting them as appropriate. See nerc.com.

The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) was created by a
consortium of payment brands including American Express, Discover, MasterCard,
JCB, and Visa. It covers the management of payment card data and is relevant for any
organization that accepts credit card payments. The standard comes in two flavors: a
self-assessment for smaller organizations and a third-party audit for organizations
that process more transactions. See pcisecuritystandards.org.
      The FTC’s Red Flag Rules require anyone who extends credit to consumers (i.e.,
      any organization that sends out bills) to implement a formal program to prevent and
      detect identity theft. The rules require credit issuers to develop heuristics for
      identifying suspicious account activity; hence, “red flag.” Search for “red flag” at
      ftc.gov for details.
      In the 1990s and early 2000s, the Information Technology Infrastructure Library
      (ITIL) was a de facto standard for organizations seeking a comprehensive IT service
      management solution. Many large organizations deployed a formal ITIL program
      complete with project managers for each process, managers for the project managers,
      and reporting for managers of the project managers. In most cases, the results were
      not favorable. The heavy process focus combined with siloed functions resulted in
      intractable IT constipation. This red tape created opportunities for lean startups to
      steal market share from well-established companies, thus sending many career IT
      practitioners out to pasture. We hope we’ve seen the last of ITIL. Some say DevOps
      is the anti-ITIL methodology.
      Last, but certainly not least, the IT general controls (ITGC) portion of the
      Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) applies to all public companies and is designed to
      protect shareholders from accounting errors and fraudulent practices. See sec.gov.

Some of these standards contain good advice even for organizations that are not required to
adhere to them. It might be worth breezing through a few of them just to see if they contain any
best practices you might want to adopt. If you have no other constraints, check out NERC CIP
and NIST 800-53; they are our favorites with regard to thoroughness and applicability to a broad
range of situations.
The National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) publishes a host of standards that
are useful to administrators and technologists. The two most commonly used ones are mentioned
below, but if you are ever bored and looking for standards, you might check out their web site.
You will not be disappointed.
NIST 800-53, Recommended Security Controls for Federal Information Systems and
Organizations, describes how to assess the security of information systems. If your organization
has developed an in-house application that holds sensitive information, NIST 800-53 can help
you make sure you have truly secured it. Beware, however: embarking on a NIST 800-53
compliance journey is not for the faint of heart. You are likely to end up with a document that is
close to 100 pages long and that includes excruciating details. If you plan to do business with a
U.S. government agency, you may be required to complete a NIST 800-53 assessment whether
you want to or not.
NIST 800-34, Contingency Planning Guide for Information Technology Systems, is NIST’s
disaster recovery bible. It is directed at government agencies, but any organization can benefit
from it. Following the NIST 800-34 planning process takes time, but it forces you to answer
important questions such as, “Which systems are the most critical?”, “How long can we survive
without these systems?”, and “How are we going to recover if our primary data center is lost?”
31.9 LEGAL ISSUES
The U.S. federal government and several states have enacted laws regarding computer crime. At
the federal level, two pieces of legislation date from the early 1990s and three are more recent:

      The Electronic Communications Privacy Act
      The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
      The No Electronic Theft Act
      The Digital Millennium Copyright Act
      The Email Privacy Act
      The Cybersecurity Act of 2015

Some major issues in the legal arena are these: liability of sysadmins, network providers, and
public clouds; peer-to-peer file-sharing networks; copyright issues; and privacy issues. The
topics in this section comment on these issues and a variety of other legal debacles related to
system administration.
Privacy
Privacy has always been difficult to safeguard, and with the rise of the Internet, it is in more
danger than ever. Medical records have been repeatedly disclosed from poorly protected systems,
stolen laptops, and misplaced backup tapes. Databases full of credit card numbers are routinely
compromised and sold on the black market. Web sites purporting to offer antivirus software
actually install spyware when used. Fake email arrives almost daily, appearing to be from your
bank and alleging that problems with your account require you to “verify” your account data.
Technical measures can never protect against these attacks because they target your site’s most
vulnerable weakness: its users. Your best defense is a well-educated user base. To a first
approximation, no legitimate email or web site will ever

      Suggest that you have won a prize;
      Request that you “verify” account information or passwords;
      Ask you to forward a piece of email;

      Ask you to install software you have not explicitly searched for; or
      Inform you of a virus or other security problem.

Users who have a basic understanding of these dangers are more likely to make sensible choices
when a pop-up window claims they have won a free MacBook.
Policy enforcement
Log files might prove to you conclusively that person X did bad thing Y, but to a court it is all
just hearsay evidence. Protect yourself with written policies. Log files sometimes include time
stamps, which are useful but not necessarily admissible as evidence unless you can also prove
that the computer was running the Network Time Protocol (NTP) to keep its clock synced to a
reference standard.
You may need a security policy to prosecute someone for misuse. That policy should include a
statement such as this: “Unauthorized use of computing systems may involve not only
transgression of organizational policy but also a violation of state and federal laws. Unauthorized
use is a crime and may involve criminal and civil penalties; it will be prosecuted to the full extent
of the law.”
We advise you to display a splash screen that advises users of your snooping policy. You might
say something like: “Activity may be monitored in the event of a real or suspected security
incident.”
To ensure that users see the notification at least once, include it in the startup files you give to
new users. If you require the use of SSH to log in (and you should), you can configure
/etc/ssh/sshd_config so that SSH always shows the splash screen.

Be sure to specify that through the act of using their accounts, users acknowledge your written
policy. Explain where users can get additional copies of policy documents, and post key
documents on an appropriate web page. Also include the specific penalty for noncompliance
(e.g., deletion of the account).
In addition to displaying the splash screen, have users sign a policy agreement before giving
them access to your systems. Craft the acceptable use agreement in conjunction with your legal
department. If you don’t have signed agreements from current employees, make a sweep to
obtain them, then make signing the agreement a standard part of the induction process for new
hires.
You might also consider periodically offering training sessions on information security. This is a
great opportunity to educate users about important issues such as phishing scams, when it’s OK
to install software and when it’s not, password security, and any other points that affect your
environment.
Control = liability
Service providers (ISP, cloud, etc.) typically have an appropriate use policy (AUP) dictated by
their upstream providers and required of their downstream customers. This “flow down” of
liability assigns responsibility for users’ actions to the users themselves, not to the service
provider or the service provider’s upstream provider. Such policies have been used to attempt
spam control and to protect service providers in cases where customers have stored illegal or
copyrighted material in their accounts. Check the laws in your area; your mileage may vary.
Your policies should explicitly state that users are not to use organizational resources for illegal
activities. However, that’s not really enough—you also need to discipline users if you find out
they are misbehaving. Organizations that know about violations but do not act on them are
complicit and can be prosecuted. Unenforced or inconsistent policies are worse than none, from
both a practical and legal point of view.
Because of the risk of being found complicit in user activities, some sites limit the data that they
log, the length of time for which log files are kept, and the amount of log file history kept on
backup tapes. Some software packages help with the implementation of this policy by including
levels of logging that help the sysadmin debug problems but that do not violate users’ privacy.
However, always be aware of what kind of logging might be required by local laws or by any
regulatory standards that apply to you.
Software licenses
Many sites have paid for K copies of a software package and have N copies in daily use, where K
< N. Getting caught in this situation could be damaging to the company—probably more
damaging than the cost of those N-minus-K other licenses. Other sites have received a demo
copy of an expensive software package and hacked it (reset the date on the machine, found a
license key, etc.) to make it continue working after the expiration of the demo period. How do
you as a sysadmin deal with requests to violate license agreements and make copies of software
on unlicensed machines? What do you do when you find that machines for which you are
responsible are running pirated software?
It’s a tough call. Management will often not back you up in your requests that unlicensed copies
of software be either removed or paid for. Often, it is a sysadmin who signs the agreement to
remove the demo copies after a certain date, but a manager who makes the decision not to
remove them.
We are aware of several cases in which a sysadmin’s immediate manager would not deal with the
situation and told the sysadmin not to rock the boat. The admin then wrote a memo to the boss
asking for correction of the situation and documenting the number of copies of the software that
were licensed and the number that were in use. The admin quoted a few phrases from the license
agreement and carbon copied the president of the company and his boss’s managers. In one case,
this procedure worked and the sysadmin’s manager was let go. In another case, the sysadmin quit
when even higher management refused to do the right thing. No matter what you do in such a
situation, get things in writing. Ask for a written reply; if all you get is spoken words, write a
short memo documenting your understanding of your instructions and send it to the person in
charge.
31.10 ORGANIZATIONS, CONFERENCES, AND OTHER RESOURCES
Many UNIX and Linux support groups—both general and vendor-specific—help you network
with other people who are running the same software. Table 31.3 briefly lists a few such
organizations, but many other national and regional groups are not listed here.

Table 31.3: UNIX and Linux organizations of interest to system administrators

FSF, the Free Software Foundation, sponsors the GNU Project (“GNU’s Not Unix,” a recursive
acronym). The “free” in the FSF’s name is the “free” of free speech and not that of free beer. The
FSF is also the origin of the GNU Public License, which now exists in several versions and
covers many of the free software packages used on UNIX and Linux systems.
USENIX, an organization of users of Linux, UNIX, and other open source operating systems,
holds one general conference and several specialized (smaller) conferences or workshops each
year. The Annual Technical Conference (ATC) is a potpourri of in-depth UNIX and Linux topics
and is a great place for networking with the community.
The League of Professional System Administrators, LOPSA, has a fairly complex and somewhat
sordid history. It was originally associated with USENIX and was intended to assume the mantle
of USENIX’s system administration special interest group, SAGE. Unfortunately, LOPSA and
USENIX parted on less than amicable terms and are now separate organizations.

Today, LOPSA sponsors a variety of sysadmin-related networking, mentorship, and educational
programs, including events such as System Administrator Appreciation Day on the last Friday of
July. The customary gift for this holiday is bottle of scotch.
SANS offers courses and seminars in the security space and also founded a certification program,
the Global Information Assurance Certification (GIAC), which operates somewhat
independently. Certifications are available in a variety of general and specific skill areas such as
system administration, coding, incident handling, and forensics. See giac.org for details.
Many local areas have their own regional UNIX, Linux, or open systems user groups.
Meetup.com is an excellent resource for finding relevant groups in your area. Local groups
usually have regular meetings, workshops with local or visiting speakers, and often, dinner
together before or after the meetings. They’re a good way to network with other sysadmins.
31.11 RECOMMENDED READING
BROOKS, FREDERICK P., JR. The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software Engineering (2nd
Edition). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995.
KIM, GENE, KEVIN BEHR, AND GEORGE SPAFFORD. The Phoenix Project: A Novel About IT, DevOps,
and Helping Your Business Win (Revised Edition). Scottsdale, AZ: IT Revolution Press, 2014.

KIM, GENE, ET AL. The DevOps Handbook: How to Create World-Class Agility, Reliability, and
Security in Technology Organizations. Scottsdale, AZ: IT Revolution Press, 2016.
LIMONCELLI, THOMAS A. Time Management for System Administrators. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly
Media, 2005.
MACHIAVELLI, NICCOLÒ. The Prince. 1513. Available on-line from gutenberg.org.
MORRIS, KIEF. Infrastructure as Code: Managing Servers in the Cloud. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly
Media, 2016. This book is a well-written 10,000-foot overview of DevOps and large-scale tools
for system administration in the cloud. It includes few specifics about configuration management
per se, but it’s helpful for understanding how configuration management integrates into the larger
scheme of DevOps and structured administration.

The site itl.nist.gov is the landing page for the NIST Information Technology Laboratory and
includes lots of information about standards.
The web site of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, eff.org, is a great place to find commentary
on the latest issues in privacy, cryptography, and legislation. Always interesting reading.
SANS hosts a collection of security policy templates at sans.org/resources/policies.
