A Brief History of System Administration
With Dr. Peter H. Salus, technology historian

In the modern age, most folks have at least a vague idea what system administrators do: work
tirelessly to meet the needs of their users and organizations, plan and implement a robust
computing environment, and pull proverbial rabbits out of many different hats. Although
sysadmins are often viewed as underpaid and underappreciated, most users can at least identify
their friendly local sysadmin—in many cases, more quickly than they can name their boss’s boss.
It wasn’t always this way. Over the last 50 years (and the 30-year history of this book), the role
of the system administrator has evolved hand-in-hand with UNIX and Linux. A full
understanding of system administration requires an understanding of how we got here and of
some of the historical influences that have shaped our landscape. Join us as we reflect on the
many wonderful years.

THE DAWN OF COMPUTING: SYSTEM OPERATORS (1952–1960)
The first commercial computer, the IBM 701, was completed in 1952. Before the 701, all
computers had been one-offs. In 1954, a redesigned version of the 701 was announced as the
IBM 704. It had 4,096 words of magnetic core memory and three index registers. It used 36-bit
words (as opposed to the 701’s 18-bit words) and did floating-point arithmetic. It executed
40,000 instructions every second.
But the 704 was more than just an update: it was incompatible with the 701. Although deliveries
were not to begin until late 1955, the operators of the eighteen 701s in existence (the
predecessors of modern system administrators) were already fretful. How would they survive this
“upgrade,” and what pitfalls lay ahead?
IBM itself had no solution to the upgrade and compatibility problem. It had hosted a “training
class” for customers of the 701 in August 1952, but there were no textbooks. Several people who
had attended the training class continued to meet informally and discuss their experiences with
the system. IBM encouraged the operators to meet, to discuss their problems, and to share their
solutions. IBM funded the meetings and made available to the members a library of 300
computer programs. This group, known as SHARE, is still the place (60+ years later) where IBM
customers meet to exchange information. (Although SHARE was originally a vendor-sponsored
organization, today it is independent.)

FROM SINGLE-PURPOSE TO TIME SHARING (1961–1969)
Early computing hardware was physically large and extraordinarily expensive. These facts
encouraged buyers to think of their computer systems as tools dedicated to some single, specific
mission: whatever mission was large enough and concrete enough to justify the expense and
inconvenience of the computer.

If a computer were a single-purpose tool—let’s say, a saw—then the staff that maintained that
computer would be the operators of the saw. Early system operators were viewed more as “folks
that cut lumber” than as “folks that provide what’s necessary to build a house.” The transition
from system operator to system administrator did not start until computers began to be seen as
multipurpose tools. The advent of time sharing was a major reason for this change in viewpoint.
John McCarthy had begun thinking about time sharing in the mid-1950s. But it was only at MIT
(in 1961–62) that he, Jack Dennis, and Fernando Corbato talked seriously about permitting “each
user of a computer to behave as though he were in sole control of a computer.”
In 1964, MIT, General Electric, and Bell Labs embarked on a project to build an ambitious time-
sharing system called Multics, the Multiplexed Information and Computing Service. Five years
later, Multics was over budget and far behind schedule. Bell Labs pulled out of the project.

UNIX IS BORN (1969–1973)
Bell Labs’ abandonment of the Multics project left several researchers in Murray Hill, NJ, with
nothing to work on. Three of them—Ken Thompson, Rudd Canaday, and Dennis Ritchie—had
liked certain aspects of Multics but hadn’t been happy with the size and the complexity of the
system, and they often gathered in front of a whiteboard to delve into design philosophy. The
Labs had Multics running on its GE-645, and Thompson continued to work on it “just for fun.”
Doug McIlroy, the manager of the group, said, “When Multics began to work, the very first place
it worked was here. Three people could overload it.”
In the summer of 1969, Thompson became a temporary bachelor for a month when his wife,
Bonnie, took their year-old son to meet his relatives on the West Coast. Thompson recalled, “I
allocated a week each to the operating system, the shell, the editor, and the assembler…it was
totally rewritten in a form that looked like an operating system, with tools that were sort of
known; you know, assembler, editor, shell—if not maintaining itself, right on the verge of
maintaining itself, to totally sever the GECOS connection…essentially one person for a month.”
(GECOS was the General Electric Comprehensive Operating System.)

Steve Bourne, who joined Bell Labs the next year, described the cast-off PDP-7 used by Ritchie
and Thompson: “The PDP-7 provided only an assembler and a loader. One user at a time could
use the computer…The environment was crude, and parts of a single-user UNIX system were
soon forthcoming…[The] assembler and rudimentary operating system kernel were written and
cross-assembled for the PDP-7 on GECOS. The term UNICS was apparently coined by Peter
Neumann, an inveterate punster, in 1970.” The original UNIX was a single-user system,
obviously an “emasculated Multics.” But although there were aspects of UNICS/UNIX that were
influenced by Multics, there were also, as Dennis Ritchie said, “profound differences.”
“We were a bit oppressed by the big system mentality,” he said. “Ken wanted to do something
simple. Presumably, as important as anything was the fact that our means were much smaller.
We could get only small machines with none of the fancy Multics hardware. So, UNIX wasn’t
quite a reaction against Multics…Multics wasn’t there for us anymore, but we liked the feel of
interactive computing that it offered. Ken had some ideas about how to do a system that he had to
work out…Multics colored the UNIX approach, but it didn’t dominate it.”
Ken and Dennis’s “toy” system didn’t stay simple for long. By 1971, user commands included as
(the assembler), cal (a simple calendar tool), cat (catenate and print), chdir (change working
directory), chmod (change mode), chown (change owner), cmp (compare two files), cp (copy
file), date, dc (desk calculator), du (summarize disk usage), ed (editor), and over two dozen
others. Most of these commands are still in use.
By February 1973, there were 16 UNIX installations. Two big innovations had occurred. The
first was a “new” programming language, C, based on B, which was itself a “cut-down” version
of Martin Richards’ BCPL (Basic Combined Programming Language). The other innovation was
the idea of a pipe.

A pipe is a simple concept: a standardized way of connecting the output of one program to the
input of another. The Dartmouth Time-Sharing System had communication files, which
anticipated pipes, but their use was far more specific. The notion of pipes as a general facility
was Doug McIlroy’s. The implementation was Ken Thompson’s, at McIlroy’s insistence. (“It
was one of the only places where I very nearly exerted managerial control over UNIX,” Doug
said.)
“It’s easy to say ‘cat into grep into…’ or ‘who into cat into grep’ and so on,” McIlroy
remarked. “It’s easy to say and it was clear from the start that it would be something you’d like
to say. But there are all these side parameters… And from time to time I’d say ‘How about
making something like this?’ And one day I came up with a syntax for the shell that went along
with piping, and Ken said ‘I’m going to do it!’”
In an a orgy of rewriting, Thompson updated all the UNIX programs in one night. The next
morning there were one-liners. This was the real beginning of the power of UNIX—not from the
individual programs, but from the relationships among them. UNIX now had a language of its
own as well as a philosophy:

      Write programs that do one thing and do it well.

      Write programs to work together.
      Write programs that handle text streams as a universal interface.

A general-purpose time-sharing OS had been born, but it was trapped inside Bell Labs. UNIX
offered the promise of easily and seamlessly sharing computing resources among projects,
groups, and organizations. But before this multipurpose tool could be used by the world, it had to
escape and multiply. Katy bar the door!

UNIX HITS THE BIG TIME (1974–1990)
In October 1973, the ACM held its Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP) in the
auditorium at IBM’s new T.J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown Heights, NY. Ken and
Dennis submitted a paper, and on a beautiful autumn day, drove up the Hudson Valley to deliver
it. (Thompson made the actual presentation.) About 200 people were in the audience, and the talk
was a smash hit.
Over the next six months, the number of UNIX installations tripled. When the paper was
published in the July 1974 issue of the Communications of the ACM, the response was
overwhelming. Research labs and universities saw shared UNIX systems as a potential solution
to their growing need for computing resources.
According to the terms of a 1958 antitrust settlement, the activities of AT&T (parent of Bell
Labs) were restricted to running the national telephone system and to special projects undertaken
on behalf of the federal government. Thus, AT&T could not sell UNIX as a product and Bell
Labs had to license its technology to others. In response to requests, Ken Thompson began
shipping copies of the UNIX source code. According to legend, each package included a
personal note signed “love, ken.”

One person who received a tape from Ken was Professor Robert Fabry of the University of
California at Berkeley. By January 1974, the seed of Berkeley UNIX had been planted.
Other computer scientists around the world also took an interest in UNIX. In 1976, John Lions
(on the faculty of the University of New South Wales in Australia) published a detailed
commentary on a version of the kernel called V6. This effort became the first serious
documentation of the UNIX system and helped others to understand and expand on Ken and
Dennis’s work.
Students at Berkeley enhanced the version of UNIX they had received from Bell Labs to meet
their needs. The first Berkeley tape (1BSD, short for 1st Berkeley Software Distribution) included
a Pascal system and the vi editor for the PDP-11. The student behind the release was a grad
student named Bill Joy. 2BSD came the next year, and 3BSD, the first Berkeley release for the
DEC VAX, was distributed in late 1979.

In 1980, Professor Fabry struck a deal with the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency
(DARPA) to continue the development of UNIX. This arrangement led to the formation of the
Computer Systems Research Group (CSRG) at Berkeley. Late the next year, 4BSD was released.
It became quite popular, largely because it was the only version of UNIX that ran on the DEC
VAX 11/750, the commodity computing platform of the time. Another big advancement of
4BSD was the introduction of TCP/IP sockets, the generalized networking abstraction that
spawned the Internet and is now used by most modern operating systems. By the mid-1980s,
most major universities and research institutions were running at least one UNIX system.
In 1982, Bill Joy took the 4.2BSD tape with him to start Sun Microsystems (now part of Oracle
America) and the Sun operating system (SunOS). In 1983, the court-ordered divestiture of AT&T
began. One unanticipated side effect of the divestiture was that AT&T was now free to begin
selling UNIX as a product. They released AT&T UNIX System V, a well-recognized albeit
awkward commercial implementation of UNIX.
Now that Berkeley, AT&T, Sun, and other UNIX distributions were available to a wide variety
of organizations, the foundation was laid for a general computing infrastructure built on UNIX
technology. The same system that was used by the astronomy department to calculate star
distances could be used by the applied math department to calculate Mandelbrot sets. And that
same system was simultaneously providing email to the entire university.

THE RISE OF SYSTEM ADMINISTRATORS
The management of general-purpose computing systems demanded a different set of skills than
those required just two decades earlier. Gone were the days of the system operator who focused
on getting a single computer system to perform a specialized task. System administrators came
into their own in the early 1980s as people who ran UNIX systems to meet the needs of a broad
array of applications and users.
Because UNIX was popular at universities and because those environments included lots of
students who were eager to learn the latest technology, universities were early leaders in the
development of organized system administration groups. Universities such as Purdue, the
University of Utah, the University of Colorado, the University of Maryland, and the State
University of New York (SUNY) Buffalo became hotbeds of system administration.
System administrators also developed an array of their own processes, standards, best practices,
and tools (such as sudo). Most of these products were built out of necessity; without them,
unstable systems and unhappy users were the result.

Evi Nemeth became known as the “mother of system administration” by recruiting
undergraduates to work as system administrators to support the Engineering College at the
University of Colorado. Her close ties with folks at Berkeley, the University of Utah, and SUNY
Buffalo created a system administration community that shared tips and tools. Her crew, often
called the “munchkins” or “Evi slaves” attended USENIX and other conferences and worked as
on-site staff in exchange for the opportunity to absorb information at the conference.
It was clear early on that system administrators had to be rabid jacks of all trades. A system
administrator might start a typical day in the 1980s by using a wire-wrap tool to fix an interrupt
jumper on a VAX backplane. Mid-morning tasks might include sucking spilled toner out of a
malfunctioning first-generation laser printer. Lunch hour could be spent helping a grad student
debug a new kernel driver, and the afternoon might consist of writing backup tapes and hassling
users to clean up their home directories to make space in the filesystem. A system administrator
was, and is, a fix-everything, take-no-prisoners guardian angel.
The 1980s were also a time of unreliable hardware. Rather than living on a single silicon chip,
the CPUs of the 1980s were made up of several hundred chips, all of them prone to failure. It was
the system administrator’s job to isolate failed hardware and get it replaced, quickly.
Unfortunately, these were also the days before it was common to FedEx parts on a whim, so
finding the right part from a local source was often a challenge.
In one case, our beloved VAX 11/780 was down, leaving the entire campus without email. We
knew there was a business down the street that packaged VAXes to be shipped to the (then cold-
war) Soviet Union “for research purposes.” Desperate, we showed up at their warehouse with a
huge wad of cash in our pocket, and after about an hour of negotiation, we escaped with the
necessary board. At the time, someone remarked that it felt more comfortable to buy drugs than
VAX parts in Boulder.

SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION DOCUMENTATION AND TRAINING
As more individuals began to identify themselves as system administrators—and as it became
clear that one might make a decent living as a sysadmin—requests for documentation and
training became more common. In response, folks like Tim O’Reilly and his team (then called
O’Reilly and Associates, now O’Reilly Media) began to publish UNIX documentation that was
based on hands-on experience and written in a straightforward way.

     See Chapter 31 for more pointers to sysadmin resources.
As a vehicle for in-person interaction, the USENIX Association held its first conference focused
on system administration in 1987. This Large Installation System Administration (LISA)
conference catered mostly to a west coast crowd. Three years later, the SANS (SysAdmin, Audit,
Network, Security) Institute was established to meet the needs of the east coast. Today, both the
LISA and SANS conferences serve the entire U.S. region, and both are still going strong.
In 1989, we published the first edition of this book, then titled UNIX System Administration
Handbook. It was quickly embraced by the community, perhaps because of the lack of
alternatives. At the time, UNIX was so unfamiliar to our publisher that their production
department replaced all instances of the string “etc” with “and so on,” resulting in filenames such
as /and so on/passwd. We took advantage of the situation to seize total control of the bits from
cover to cover, but the publisher is admittedly much more UNIX savvy today. Our 30-year
relationship with this same publisher has yielded a few other good stories, but we’ll omit them
out of fear of souring our otherwise amicable relationship.

UNIX HUGGED TO NEAR DEATH, LINUX IS BORN (1991–1995)
By late 1990, it seemed that UNIX was well on its way to world domination. It was
unquestionably the operating system of choice for research and scientific computing, and it had
been adopted by mainstream businesses such as Taco Bell and McDonald’s. Berkeley’s CSRG
group, then consisting of Kirk McKusick, Mike Karels, Keith Bostic, and many others, had just
released 4.3BSD-Reno, a pun on an earlier 4.3 release that added support for the CCI Power 6/32
(code named “Tahoe”) processor.

Commercial releases of UNIX such as SunOS were also thriving, their success driven in part by
the advent of the Internet and the first glimmers of e-commerce. PC hardware had become a
commodity. It was reasonably reliable, inexpensive, and relatively high-performance. Although
versions of UNIX that ran on PCs did exist, all the good options were commercial and closed
source. The field was ripe for an open source PC UNIX.
In 1991, a group of developers that had worked together on the BSD releases (Donn Seeley,
Mike Karels, Bill Jolitz, and Trent R. Hein), together with a few other BSD advocates, founded
Berkeley Software Design, Inc. (BSDI). Under the leadership of Rob Kolstad, BSDI provided
binaries and source code for a fully functional commercial version of BSD UNIX on the PC
platform. Among other things, this project proved that inexpensive PC hardware could be used
for production computing. BSDI fueled explosive growth in the early Internet as it became the
operating system of choice for early Internet service providers (ISPs).
In an effort to recapture the genie that had escaped from its bottle in 1973, AT&T in 1992 filed a
lawsuit against BSDI and the Regents of the University of California, alleging code copying and
theft of trade secrets. It took AT&T’s lawyers over two years to identify the offending code.
When all was said and done, the lawsuit was settled and three files (out of more than 18,000)
were removed from the BSD code base.
Unfortunately, this two-year period of uncertainty had a devastating effect on the entire UNIX
world, BSD and non-BSD versions alike. Many companies jumped ship to Microsoft Windows,
fearful that they would end up at the mercy of AT&T as it hugged its child to near-death. By the
time the dust cleared, BSDI and the CSRG were both mortally wounded. The BSD era was
coming to an end.
Meanwhile, Linus Torvalds, a Helsinki college student, had been playing with Minix (a PC-
based UNIX clone developed by Andrew S. Tanenbaum) and began writing his own UNIX
clone. By 1992, a variety of Linux distributions (including SuSE and Yggdrasil Linux) had
emerged. 1994 saw the establishment of Red Hat and Linux Pro.

Multiple factors have contributed to the phenomenal success of Linux. The strong community
support enjoyed by the system and its vast catalog of software from the GNU archive make
Linux quite a powerhouse. It works well in production environments, and some folks argue that
you can build a more reliable and performant system on top of Linux than you can on top of any
other operating system. It’s also interesting to consider that part of Linux’s success may relate to
the golden opportunity created for it by AT&T’s action against BSDI and Berkeley. That ill-
timed lawsuit struck fear into the hearts of UNIX advocates right at the dawn of e-commerce and
the start of the Internet bubble.
But who cares, right? What remained constant through all these crazy changes was the need for
system administrators. A UNIX system administrator’s skill set is directly applicable to Linux,
and most system administrators guided their users gracefully through the turbulent seas of the
1990s. That’s another important characteristic of a good system administrator: calm during a
storm.

A WORLD OF WINDOWS (1996–1999)
Microsoft first released Windows NT in 1993. The release of a “server” version of Windows,
which had a popular user interface, generated considerable excitement just as AT&T was busy
convincing the world that it might be out to fleece everyone for license fees. As a result, many
organizations adopted Windows as their preferred platform for shared computing during the late
1990s. Without question, the Microsoft platform has come a long way, and for some
organizations it is the best option.
Unfortunately, UNIX, Linux, and Windows administrators initially approached this marketplace
competition in an adversarial stance. “Less filling” vs. “tastes great” arguments erupted in
organizations around the world. (Just for the record, Windows is indeed less filling.) Many UNIX
and Linux system administrators started learning Windows, convinced they’d be put out to
pasture if they didn’t. After all, Windows 2000 was on the horizon. By the close of the
millennium, the future of UNIX looked grim.

UNIX AND LINUX THRIVE (2000–2009)
As the Internet bubble burst, everyone scrambled to identify what was real and what had been
only a venture-capital-fueled mirage. As the smoke drifted away, it became clear that many
organizations with successful technology strategies were using UNIX or Linux along with
Windows rather than one or the other. It wasn’t a war anymore.
A number of evaluations showed that the total cost of ownership (TCO) of a Linux server was
significantly lower than that of a Windows server. As the impact of the 2008 economic crash hit,
TCO became more important than ever. The world again steered toward open source versions of
UNIX and Linux.

UNIX AND LINUX IN THE HYPERSCALE CLOUD (2010-PRESENT)
Linux and PC-based UNIX variants such as FreeBSD have continued to expand their market
share, with Linux being the only operating system whose market share on servers is growing. Not
to be left out, Apple’s current full-size operating system, macOS, is also a variant of UNIX.
(Even Apple’s iPhone runs a cousin of UNIX, and Google’s Android operating system derives
from the Linux kernel.)

Much of the recent growth in UNIX and Linux has occurred in the context of virtualization and
cloud computing. See Chapter 24, Virtualization, and Chapter 9, Cloud Computing, for more
details about these technologies.
The ability to create virtual infrastructure (and entire virtual data centers) by making API calls
has fundamentally shifted the course of the river once again. Gone are the days of managing
physical servers by hand. Scaling infrastructure no longer means slapping down a credit card and
waiting for boxes to appear on the loading dock. Thanks to services such as Google GCP,
Amazon AWS, and Microsoft Azure, the era of the hyperscale cloud has arrived.
Standardization, tools, and automation are not just novelties but intrinsic attributes of every
computing environment.
Today, competent management of fleets of servers requires extensive knowledge and skill.
System administrators must be disciplined professionals. They must know how to build and scale
infrastructure, how to work collaboratively with peers in a DevOps environment, how to code
simple automation and monitoring scripts, and how to remain calm when a thousand servers are
down at once. (One thing hasn’t changed: whiskey is still a close friend to many system
administrators.)

UNIX AND LINUX TOMORROW
Where are we headed next? The lean, modular paradigm that has served UNIX so well over the
last few decades is also one foundation of the up-and-coming Internet of Things (IoT). The
Brookings Institution estimates that 50 billion small, distributed IoT devices will exist by 2020
(see brook.gs/2bNwbya).
It’s tempting to think of these devices as we thought of the non-networked consumer appliances
(e.g., toaster ovens or blenders) of yesteryear: plug them in, use them for a few years, and if they
break, throw them in the landfill. They don’t need “management” or central administration,
right?
In fact, nothing could be further from the truth. Many of these devices handle sensitive data (e.g.,
audio streamed from a microphone in your living room) or perform mission-critical functions
such as controlling the temperature of your house.

Some of these devices run embedded software derived from the OSS world. But regardless of
what’s inside the devices themselves, the majority report back to a mother ship in the cloud that
runs—you guessed it—UNIX or Linux. In the early market-share land grab, many devices have
already been deployed without much thought to security or to how the ecosystem will operate in
the future.
The IoT craze isn’t limited to the consumer market. Modern commercial buildings are riddled
with networked devices and sensors for lighting, HVAC, physical security, and video, just to
name a few. These devices often pop up on the network without coordination from the IT or
Information Security departments. They’re then forgotten without any plan for ongoing
management, patching, or monitoring.
Size doesn’t matter when it comes to networked systems. System administrators need to advocate
for the security, performance, and availability of IoT devices (and their supporting infrastructure)
regardless of size, location, or function.
System administrators hold the world’s computing infrastructure together, solve the hairy
problems of efficiency, scalability, and automation, and provide expert technology leadership to
users and managers alike.

We are system administrators. Hear us roar!

RECOMMENDED READING
MCKUSICK, MARSHALL KIRK, KEITH BOSTIC, MICHAEL J. KARELS, AND JOHN S. QUARTERMAN. The
Design and Implementation of the 4.4BSD Operating System (2nd Edition). Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley, 1996.
SALUS, PETER H. A Quarter Century of UNIX. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1994.
SALUS, PETER H. Casting the Net: From ARPANET to Internet and Beyond. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley, 1995.
SALUS, PETER H. The Daemon, the Gnu, and the Penguin. Marysville, WA: Reed Media Services,
2008. This book was also serialized at www.groklaw.net.
