Colophon

For previous editions of this book, we used Adobe FrameMaker as our layout tool and were
(more or less) happy with its features, stability, and facility with book-length writing projects.
But although FrameMaker still exists, it now runs only on Windows and has become an
increasingly vestigial member of the Adobe lineup.
Rather than targeting the general publishing market, Adobe seems to be pitching FrameMaker
predominantly to multilingual workshops and to the poor lost souls who generate government-
mandated SGML content. The product’s core features haven’t been updated in decades. It’s like
seeing a much-admired football quarterback working at the local mini mart loading hot dogs onto
the fancy rolling cooker: someone has to do the job, but it seems like a waste of talent.

Ever since Adobe InDesign debuted in 2000, we’ve been waiting for it to grow sufficiently
mature that we could contemplate switching. It was never originally intended for long
documents, but over the years, the addition of features like tables of contents and indexing
suggested that Adobe hoped to develop InDesign as a general solution for document publishing.
For this edition, we finally allowed ourselves to be goaded into the InDesign corral. We ran
Adobe InDesign CC 2017 on macOS systems. Hilarity ensued…at least, if you find slapstick
hilarious.
InDesign has many strengths and adherents, and we’ll certainly reach for it the next time we need
to design a six-page glossy brochure. However, we’re reasonably certain that most InDesign fans
aren’t writing technical books.
One author said it best: “I have the impression that InDesign’s book features were designed
primarily to let InDesign slip past product selection committees’ screening phases.” To get this
book into your hands, we’ve had to write literally thousands of lines of InDesign JavaScript code.
Some of that code is ULSAH-specific, but a lot of it does basic book production chores that
FrameMaker handled out of the box.
Unfortunately, our complaints with InDesign go beyond its cursory support for book production.
We’ve also been continually surprised by its instability, obvious bugs, and nondeterministic
behaviors.
We wish we had some useful tooling advice to impart to other book authors, but we’re just as
puzzled as everyone else. FrameMaker has no future and InDesign has no present. Second-tier
and on-line book publishing systems seem largely to target those looking for EZ-mode, book-
length text editors. As far as we can tell, no modern GUI software addresses the task of creating a
book like this one.

Ah well, there’s always Microsoft Word. Our publisher tells us it’s still the predominant format
in which authors submit manuscripts.
We used the IndexUtilities add-on from Kerntiff Publishing Systems (kerntiff.co.uk) to
supplement InDesign’s fledgling indexing system. Indexing from A to Z by Hans H. Wellisch
remains an invaluable reference text for the art of indexing and a resource that we recommend
highly.
Lisa Haney drew the interior cartoons with a 0.05mm Staedtler pigment liner, then scanned them
and converted them to 1200dpi bitmaps. The cover artwork was executed on black Ampersand
Clayboard (a scratchboard) with Dr. Martin’s Dyes for color. After scanning, the cover art was
color-corrected in Photoshop and the layout completed in Adobe Illustrator.
The body text is Minion Pro, designed by Robert Slimbach. Headings, tables, and illustrations
are set in Myriad Pro SemiCondensed by Robert Slimbach and Carol Twombly, with Fred Brady
and Christopher Slye.

We’ve long sought a good typographical solution for “code” samples, and after trying out pretty
much every font and option on the market, we’ve finally found our one true love: the Input font
system by David Jonathan Ross, available from input.fontbureau.com. It looks great, and with
168 different variants, it’s easy to match to any given body text.
Better yet, Input has both monospaced and proportionally spaced versions. You can use well-
behaved proportional variants for most purposes, then switch to monospaced for tabular output.
The styles intermix cleanly, so readers won’t even notice a difference unless they closely
scrutinize the typography.
The authors were never in the same physical location during this project. We maintained a shared
tree of source files hosted on GitLab. Binary .indd (InDesign) files were stored in the repository
and managed with the help of a horde of custom Ruby scripts. This approach was tolerable, but
the inability to see per-commit diffs for text changes (because of InDesign’s binary file format)
limited its flexibility.
InDesign does support an XML interchange format, but unfortunately, every trip to XML resets
all internal object IDs. The same file saved out twice in XML appears to have thousands of
differences. Hence, no diffs, no merging, and no collaboration.
