Chapter 1

Introduction

1.1     Synchronization
In common use, “synchronization” means making two things happen at the
same time. In computer systems, synchronization is a little more general; it
refers to relationships among events—any number of events, and any kind of
relationship (before, during, after).
    Computer programmers are often concerned with synchronization con-
straints, which are requirements pertaining to the order of events. Examples
include:

Serialization: Event A must happen before Event B.

Mutual exclusion: Events A and B must not happen at the same time.

    In real life we often check and enforce synchronization constraints using a
clock. How do we know if A happened before B? If we know what time both
events occurred, we can just compare the times.
    In computer systems, we often need to satisfy synchronization constraints
without the benefit of a clock, either because there is no universal clock, or
because we don’t know with fine enough resolution when events occur.
    That’s what this book is about: software techniques for enforcing synchro-
nization constraints.

1.2     Execution model
In order to understand software synchronization, you have to have a model of
how computer programs run. In the simplest model, computers execute one
instruction after another in sequence. In this model, synchronization is trivial;
we can tell the order of events by looking at the program. If Statement A comes
before Statement B, it will be executed first.

    There are two ways things get more complicated. One possibility is that
the computer is parallel, meaning that it has multiple processors running at the
same time. In that case it is not easy to know if a statement on one processor
is executed before a statement on another.
    Another possibility is that a single processor is running multiple threads of
execution. A thread is a sequence of instructions that execute sequentially. If
there are multiple threads, then the processor can work on one for a while, then
switch to another, and so on.
    In general the programmer has no control over when each thread runs; the
operating system (specifically, the scheduler) makes those decisions. As a result,
again, the programmer can’t tell when statements in different threads will be
executed.
    For purposes of synchronization, there is no difference between the parallel
model and the multithread model. The issue is the same—within one processor
(or one thread) we know the order of execution, but between processors (or
threads) it is impossible to tell.
    A real world example might make this clearer. Imagine that you and your
friend Bob live in different cities, and one day, around dinner time, you start to
wonder who ate lunch first that day, you or Bob. How would you find out?
    Obviously you could call him and ask what time he ate lunch. But what if
you started lunch at 11:59 by your clock and Bob started lunch at 12:01 by his
clock? Can you be sure who started first? Unless you are both very careful to
keep accurate clocks, you can’t.
    Computer systems face the same problem because, even though their clocks
are usually accurate, there is always a limit to their precision. In addition,
most of the time the computer does not keep track of what time things happen.
There are just too many things happening, too fast, to record the exact time of
everything.
    Puzzle: Assuming that Bob is willing to follow simple instructions, is there
any way you can guarantee that tomorrow you will eat lunch before Bob?

    1.3     Serialization with messages
    One solution is to instruct Bob not to eat lunch until you call. Then, make
    sure you don’t call until after lunch. This approach may seem trivial, but
    the underlying idea, message passing, is a real solution for many synchroniza-
    tion problems. At the risk of belaboring the obvious, consider this timeline.

            Thread A (You)                                 Thread B (Bob)
1   Eat breakfast                              1   Eat breakfast
2   Work                                       2   Wait for a call
3   Eat lunch                                  3   Eat lunch
4   Call Bob

    The first column is a list of actions you perform; in other words, your thread of
    execution. The second column is Bob’s thread of execution. Within a thread,
    we can always tell what order things happen. We can denote the order of events

                                a1 < a2 < a3 < a4
                                      b1 < b2 < b3

    where the relation a1 < a2 means that a1 happened before a2.
        In general, though, there is no way to compare events from different threads;
    for example, we have no idea who ate breakfast first (is a1 < b1?).
        But with message passing (the phone call) we can tell who ate lunch first
    (a3 < b3). Assuming that Bob has no other friends, he won’t get a call until
    you call, so b2 > a4 . Combining all the relations, we get

                                b3 > b2 > a4 > a3

    which proves that you had lunch before Bob.
        In this case, we would say that you and Bob ate lunch sequentially, because
    we know the order of events, and you ate breakfast concurrently, because we
    don’t.
        When we talk about concurrent events, it is tempting to say that they happen
    at the same time, or simultaneously. As a shorthand, that’s fine, as long as you
    remember the strict definition:

          Two events are concurrent if we cannot tell by looking at the program
          which will happen first.

        Sometimes we can tell, after the program runs, which happened first, but
    often not, and even if we can, there is no guarantee that we will get the same
    result the next time.

1.4     Non-determinism
Concurrent programs are often non-deterministic, which means it is not pos-
sible to tell, by looking at the program, what will happen when it executes.
Here is a simple example of a non-deterministic program:

               Thread A                                   Thread B
1   print " yes "                          1   print " no "

    Because the two threads run concurrently, the order of execution depends
on the scheduler. During any given run of this program, the output might be
“yes no” or “no yes”.
    Non-determinism is one of the things that makes concurrent programs hard
to debug. A program might work correctly 1000 times in a row, and then crash
on the 1001st run, depending on the particular decisions of the scheduler.
    These kinds of bugs are almost impossible to find by testing; they can only
be avoided by careful programming.

1.5     Shared variables
Most of the time, most variables in most threads are local, meaning that they
belong to a single thread and no other threads can access them. As long as
that’s true, there tend to be few synchronization problems, because threads
just don’t interact.
    But usually some variables are shared among two or more threads; this
is one of the ways threads interact with each other. For example, one way
to communicate information between threads is for one thread to read a value
written by another thread.
    If the threads are unsynchronized, then we cannot tell by looking at the
program whether the reader will see the value the writer writes or an old value
that was already there. Thus many applications enforce the constraint that
the reader should not read until after the writer writes. This is exactly the
serialization problem in Section 1.3.
    Other ways that threads interact are concurrent writes (two or more writ-
ers) and concurrent updates (two or more threads performing a read followed
by a write). The next two sections deal with these interactions. The other
possible use of a shared variable, concurrent reads, does not generally create a
synchronization problem.

1.5.1    Concurrent writes
In the following example, x is a shared variable accessed by two writers.

               Thread A                                     Thread B
1   x = 5                                    1   x = 7
2   print x

    What value of x gets printed? What is the final value of x when all these
statements have executed? It depends on the order in which the statements are
executed, called the execution path. One possible path is a1 < a2 < b1, in
which case the output of the program is 5, but the final value is 7.
    Puzzle: What path yields output 5 and final value 5?
    Puzzle: What path yields output 7 and final value 7?
    Puzzle: Is there a path that yields output 7 and final value 5? Can you
prove it?
    Answering questions like these is an important part of concurrent program-
ming: What paths are possible and what are the possible effects? Can we prove
that a given (desirable) effect is necessary or that an (undesirable) effect is
impossible?

1.5.2    Concurrent updates
An update is an operation that reads the value of a variable, computes a new
value based on the old value, and writes the new value. The most common kind
of update is an increment, in which the new value is the old value plus one. The
following example shows a shared variable, count, being updated concurrently
by two threads.

               Thread A                                     Thread B
1   count = count + 1                        1   count = count + 1

   At first glance, it is not obvious that there is a synchronization problem here.
There are only two execution paths, and they yield the same result.
   The problem is that these operations are translated into machine language
before execution, and in machine language the update takes two steps, a read
and a write. The problem is more obvious if we rewrite the code with a tempo-
rary variable, temp.

               Thread A                                     Thread B
1   temp = count                             1   temp = count
2   count = temp + 1                         2   count = temp + 1

    Now consider the following execution path
                               a1 < b1 < b2 < a2
   Assuming that the initial value of x is 0, what is its final value? Because
both threads read the same initial value, they write the same value. The variable

    is only incremented once, which is probably not what the programmer had in
    mind.
        This kind of problem is subtle because it is not always possible to tell,
    looking at a high-level program, which operations are performed in a single step
    and which can be interrupted. In fact, some computers provide an increment
    instruction that is implemented in hardware and cannot be interrupted. An
    operation that cannot be interrupted is said to be atomic.
        So how can we write concurrent programs if we don’t know which operations
    are atomic? One possibility is to collect specific information about each opera-
    tion on each hardware platform. The drawbacks of this approach are obvious.
        The most common alternative is to make the conservative assumption that
    all updates and all writes are not atomic, and to use synchronization constraints
    to control concurrent access to shared variables.
        The most common constraint is mutual exclusion, or mutex, which I men-
    tioned in Section 1.1. Mutual exclusion guarantees that only one thread accesses
    a shared variable at a time, eliminating the kinds of synchronization errors in
    this section.
        Puzzle: Suppose that 100 threads run the following program concurrently
    (if you are not familiar with Python, the for loop runs the update 100 times.):
1   for i in range (100):
2       temp = count
3       count = temp + 1

      What is the largest possible value of count after all threads have completed?
    What is the smallest possible value?
      Hint: the first question is easy; the second is not.

    1.5.3    Mutual exclusion with messages
    Like serialization, mutual exclusion can be implemented using message passing.
    For example, imagine that you and Bob operate a nuclear reactor that you
    monitor from remote stations. Most of the time, both of you are watching for
    warning lights, but you are both allowed to take a break for lunch. It doesn’t
    matter who eats lunch first, but it is very important that you don’t eat lunch
    at the same time, leaving the reactor unwatched!
        Puzzle: Figure out a system of message passing (phone calls) that enforces
    these restraints. Assume there are no clocks, and you cannot predict when lunch
    will start or how long it will last. What is the minimum number of messages
    that is required?
