Chapter 2

Semaphores

In real life a semaphore is a system of signals used to communicate visually,
usually with flags, lights, or some other mechanism. In software, a semaphore is
a data structure that is useful for solving a variety of synchronization problems.
   Semaphores were invented by Edsger Dijkstra, a famously eccentric com-
puter scientist. Some of the details have changed since the original design, but
the basic idea is the same.

2.1      Definition
A semaphore is like an integer, with three differences:

   1. When you create the semaphore, you can initialize its value to any integer,
      but after that the only operations you are allowed to perform are increment
      (increase by one) and decrement (decrease by one). You cannot read the
      current value of the semaphore.

   2. When a thread decrements the semaphore, if the result is negative, the
      thread blocks itself and cannot continue until another thread increments
      the semaphore.

   3. When a thread increments the semaphore, if there are other threads wait-
      ing, one of the waiting threads gets unblocked.

    To say that a thread blocks itself (or simply “blocks”) is to say that it notifies
the scheduler that it cannot proceed. The scheduler will prevent the thread from
running until an event occurs that causes the thread to become unblocked. In
the tradition of mixed metaphors in computer science, unblocking is often called
“waking”.
    That’s all there is to the definition, but there are some consequences of the
definition you might want to think about.

        • In general, there is no way to know before a thread decrements a
          semaphore whether it will block or not (in specific cases you might be
          able to prove that it will or will not).
        • After a thread increments a semaphore and another thread gets woken
          up, both threads continue running concurrently. There is no way to know
          which thread, if either, will continue immediately.
        • When you signal a semaphore, you don’t necessarily know whether another
          thread is waiting, so the number of unblocked threads may be zero or one.

        Finally, you might want to think about what the value of the semaphore
    means. If the value is positive, then it represents the number of threads that
    can decrement without blocking. If it is negative, then it represents the number
    of threads that have blocked and are waiting. If the value is zero, it means there
    are no threads waiting, but if a thread tries to decrement, it will block.

    2.2     Syntax
    In most programming environments, an implementation of semaphores is avail-
    able as part of the programming language or the operating system. Different
    implementations sometimes offer slightly different capabilities, and usually re-
    quire different syntax.
         In this book I will use a simple pseudo-language to demonstrate how
    semaphores work. The syntax for creating a new semaphore and initializing
    it is

                            Semaphore initialization syntax
1   fred = Semaphore (1)

    The function Semaphore is a constructor; it creates and returns a new
    Semaphore. The initial value of the semaphore is passed as a parameter to
    the constructor.
       The semaphore operations go by different names in different environments.
    The most common alternatives are

                                 Semaphore operations
1   fred . increment ()
2   fred . decrement ()

    and

                                 Semaphore operations
1   fred . signal ()
2   fred . wait ()

    and

                                         Semaphore operations
1   fred . V ()
2   fred . P ()

    It may be surprising that there are so many names, but there is a reason.
    increment and decrement describe what the operations do. signal and wait
    describe what they are often used for. And V and P were the original names
    proposed by Dijkstra, who wisely realized that a meaningless name is better
    than a misleading name1 .
        I consider the other pairs misleading because increment and decrement
    neglect to mention the possibility of blocking and waking, and semaphores are
    often used in ways that have nothing to do with signal and wait.
        If you insist on meaningful names, then I would suggest these:

                                         Semaphore operations
1   fred . i n c r e m e n t _ a n d _ w a k e _ a _ w a i t i n g _ p r o c e s s _ i f _ a n y ()
2   fred . d e c r e m e n t _ a n d _ b l o c k _ i f _ t h e _ r e s u l t _ i s _ n e g a t i v e ()

       I don’t think the world is likely to embrace either of these names soon. In
    the meantime, I choose (more or less arbitrarily) to use signal and wait.

    2.3       Why semaphores?
    Looking at the definition of semaphores, it is not at all obvious why they are use-
    ful. It’s true that we don’t need semaphores to solve synchronization problems,
    but there are some advantages to using them:

        • Semaphores impose deliberate constraints that help programmers avoid
          errors.

        • Solutions using semaphores are often clean and organized, making it easy
          to demonstrate their correctness.

        • Semaphores can be implemented efficiently on many systems, so solutions
          that use semaphores are portable and usually efficient.

       1 If you speak Dutch, V and P aren’t completely meaningless.
