Chapter 3

Basic synchronization
patterns

This chapter presents a series of basic synchronization problems and shows ways
of using semaphores to solve them. These problems include serialization and
mutual exclusion, which we have already seen, along with others.

3.1     Signaling
Possibly the simplest use for a semaphore is signaling, which means that one
thread sends a signal to another thread to indicate that something has happened.
    Signaling makes it possible to guarantee that a section of code in one thread
will run before a section of code in another thread; in other words, it solves the
serialization problem.
    Assume that we have a semaphore named sem with initial value 0, and that
Threads A and B have shared access to it.

               Thread A                                     Thread B
1   statement a1                             1   sem . wait ()
2   sem . signal ()                          2   statement b1

    The word statement represents an arbitrary program statement. To make
the example concrete, imagine that a1 reads a line from a file, and b1 displays
the line on the screen. The semaphore in this program guarantees that Thread
A has completed a1 before Thread B begins b1.
    Here’s how it works: if thread B gets to the wait statement first, it will find
the initial value, zero, and it will block. Then when Thread A signals, Thread
B proceeds.
    Similarly, if Thread A gets to the signal first then the value of the semaphore
will be incremented, and when Thread B gets to the wait, it will proceed im-

mediately. Either way, the order of a1 and b1 is guaranteed.
    This use of semaphores is the basis of the names signal and wait, and
in this case the names are conveniently mnemonic. Unfortunately, we will see
other cases where the names are less helpful.
    Speaking of meaningful names, sem isn’t one. When possible, it is a good
idea to give a semaphore a name that indicates what it represents. In this case
a name like a1Done might be good, so that a1done.signal() means “signal
that a1 is done,” and a1done.wait() means “wait until a1 is done.”

3.2     Sync.py
TODO: write about using sync, starting with signal.py
  Why does Thread B signal initComplete?

3.3     Rendezvous
Puzzle: Generalize the signal pattern so that it works both ways. Thread A has
to wait for Thread B and vice versa. In other words, given this code

               Thread A                                  Thread B
1    statement a1                         1   statement b1
2    statement a2                         2   statement b2

we want to guarantee that a1 happens before b2 and b1 happens before a2. In
writing your solution, be sure to specify the names and initial values of your
semaphores (little hint there).
   Your solution should not enforce too many constraints. For example, we
don’t care about the order of a1 and b1. In your solution, either order should
be possible.
   This synchronization problem has a name; it’s a rendezvous. The idea is
that two threads rendezvous at a point of execution, and neither is allowed to
proceed until both have arrived.

3.3.1    Rendezvous hint
The chances are good that you were able to figure out a solution, but if not,
here is a hint. Create two semaphores, named aArrived and bArrived, and
initialize them both to zero.
    As the names suggest, aArrived indicates whether Thread A has arrived at
the rendezvous, and bArrived likewise.

3.3.2     Rendezvous solution
Here is my solution, based on the previous hint:

                Thread A                                     Thread B
1   statement a1                             1   statement b1
2   aArrived . signal ()                     2   bArrived . signal ()
3   bArrived . wait ()                       3   aArrived . wait ()
4   statement a2                             4   statement b2

    While working on the previous problem, you might have tried something like
this:

                Thread A                                     Thread B
1   statement a1                             1   statement b1
2   bArrived . wait ()                       2   bArrived . signal ()
3   aArrived . signal ()                     3   aArrived . wait ()
4   statement a2                             4   statement b2

   This solution also works, although it is probably less efficient, since it might
have to switch between A and B one time more than necessary.
   If A arrives first, it waits for B. When B arrives, it wakes A and might
proceed immediately to its wait in which case it blocks, allowing A to reach its
signal, after which both threads can proceed.
   Think about the other possible paths through this code and convince yourself
that in all cases neither thread can proceed until both have arrived.

3.3.3     Deadlock #1
Again, while working on the previous problem, you might have tried something
like this:

                Thread A                                     Thread B
1   statement a1                             1   statement b1
2   bArrived . wait ()                       2   aArrived . wait ()
3   aArrived . signal ()                     3   bArrived . signal ()
4   statement a2                             4   statement b2

    If so, I hope you rejected it quickly, because it has a serious problem. As-
suming that A arrives first, it will block at its wait. When B arrives, it will also
block, since A wasn’t able to signal aArrived. At this point, neither thread can
proceed, and never will.
    This situation is called a deadlock and, obviously, it is not a successful
solution of the synchronization problem. In this case, the error is obvious, but
often the possibility of deadlock is more subtle. We will see more examples later.

3.4      Mutex
A second common use for semaphores is to enforce mutual exclusion. We have al-
ready seen one use for mutual exclusion, controlling concurrent access to shared
variables. The mutex guarantees that only one thread accesses the shared vari-
able at a time.
    A mutex is like a token that passes from one thread to another, allowing one
thread at a time to proceed. For example, in The Lord of the Flies a group of
children use a conch as a mutex. In order to speak, you have to hold the conch.
As long as only one child holds the conch, only one can speak1 .
    Similarly, in order for a thread to access a shared variable, it has to “get”
the mutex; when it is done, it “releases” the mutex. Only one thread can hold
the mutex at a time.
    Puzzle: Add semaphores to the following example to enforce mutual exclu-
sion to the shared variable count.

                 Thread A                                          Thread B
1    count = count + 1                            1   count = count + 1

   1 Although this metaphor is helpful for now, it can also be misleading, as you will see in

Section 5.6

3.4.1    Mutual exclusion hint
Create a semaphore named mutex that is initialized to 1. A value of one means
that a thread may proceed and access the shared variable; a value of zero means
that it has to wait for another thread to release the mutex.

3.4.2     Mutual exclusion solution
Here is a solution:

                Thread A                                     Thread B
1   mutex . wait ()                          1   mutex . wait ()
2       # critical section                   2       # critical section
3       count = count + 1                    3       count = count + 1
4   mutex . signal ()                        4   mutex . signal ()

    Since mutex is initially 1, whichever thread gets to the wait first will be able
to proceed immediately. Of course, the act of waiting on the semaphore has the
effect of decrementing it, so the second thread to arrive will have to wait until
the first signals.
    I have indented the update operation to show that it is contained within the
mutex.
    In this example, both threads are running the same code. This is sometimes
called a symmetric solution. If the threads have to run different code, the solu-
tion is asymmetric. Symmetric solutions are often easier to generalize. In this
case, the mutex solution can handle any number of concurrent threads without
modification. As long as every thread waits before performing an update and
signals after, then no two threads will access count concurrently.
    Often the code that needs to be protected is called the critical section, I
suppose because it is critically important to prevent concurrent access.
    In the tradition of computer science and mixed metaphors, there are several
other ways people sometimes talk about mutexes. In the metaphor we have been
using so far, the mutex is a token that is passed from one thread to another.
    In an alternative metaphor, we think of the critical section as a room, and
only one thread is allowed to be in the room at a time. In this metaphor,
mutexes are called locks, and a thread is said to lock the mutex before entering
and unlock it while exiting. Occasionally, though, people mix the metaphors
and talk about “getting” or “releasing” a lock, which doesn’t make much sense.
    Both metaphors are potentially useful and potentially misleading. As you
work on the next problem, try out both ways of thinking and see which one
leads you to a solution.

3.5     Multiplex
Puzzle: Generalize the previous solution so that it allows multiple threads to
run in the critical section at the same time, but it enforces an upper limit on
the number of concurrent threads. In other words, no more than n threads can
run in the critical section at the same time.
   This pattern is called a multiplex. In real life, the multiplex problem occurs
at busy nightclubs where there is a maximum number of people allowed in the

building at a time, either to maintain fire safety or to create the illusion of
exclusivity.
    At such places a bouncer usually enforces the synchronization constraint by
keeping track of the number of people inside and barring arrivals when the room
is at capacity. Then, whenever one person leaves another is allowed to enter.
    Enforcing this constraint with semaphores may sound difficult, but it is
almost trivial.

    3.5.1    Multiplex solution
    To allow multiple threads to run in the critical section, just initialize the
    semaphore to n, which is the maximum number of threads that should be al-
    lowed.
       At any time, the value of the semaphore represents the number of additional
    threads that may enter. If the value is zero, then the next thread will block
    until one of the threads inside exits and signals. When all threads have exited
    the value of the semaphore is restored to n.
       Since the solution is symmetric, it’s conventional to show only one copy of the
    code, but you should imagine multiple copies of the code running concurrently
    in multiple threads.

                                   Multiplex solution
1   multiplex . wait ()
2       critical section
3   multiplex . signal ()

        What happens if the critical section is occupied and more than one thread
    arrives? Of course, what we want is for all the arrivals to wait. This solution
    does exactly that. Each time an arrival joins the queue, the semaphore is decre-
    mented, so that the value of the semaphore (negated) represents the number of
    threads in queue.
        When a thread leaves, it signals the semaphore, incrementing its value and
    allowing one of the waiting threads to proceed.
        Thinking again of metaphors, in this case I find it useful to think of the
    semaphore as a set of tokens (rather than a lock). As each thread invokes wait,
    it picks up one of the tokens; when it invokes signal it releases one. Only a
    thread that holds a token can enter the room. If no tokens are available when
    a thread arrives, it waits until another thread releases one.
        In real life, ticket windows sometimes use a system like this. They hand
    out tokens (sometimes poker chips) to customers in line. Each token allows the
    holder to buy a ticket.

    3.6     Barrier
    Consider again the Rendezvous problem from Section 3.3. A limitation of the
    solution we presented is that it does not work with more than two threads.
        Puzzle: Generalize the rendezvous solution. Every thread should run the
    following code:

                                      Barrier code
1   rendezvous
2   critical point

    The synchronization requirement is that no thread executes critical point
until after all threads have executed rendezvous.
    You can assume that there are n threads and that this value is stored in a
variable, n, that is accessible from all threads.
    When the first n − 1 threads arrive they should block until the nth thread
arrives, at which point all the threads may proceed.

    3.6.1    Barrier hint
    For many of the problems in this book I will provide hints by presenting the
    variables I used in my solution and explaining their roles.

                                      Barrier hint
1   n = the    number of threads
2   count =    0
3   mutex =    Semaphore (1)
4   barrier    = Semaphore (0)

        count keeps track of how many threads have arrived. mutex provides exclu-
    sive access to count so that threads can increment it safely.
        barrier is locked (zero or negative) until all threads arrive; then it should
    be unlocked (1 or more).

     3.6.2    Barrier non-solution
     First I will present a solution that is not quite right, because it is useful to
     examine incorrect solutions and figure out what is wrong.

                                   Barrier non-solution
 1   rendezvous
 2

 3   mutex . wait ()
 4       count = count + 1
 5   mutex . signal ()
 6

 7   if count == n : barrier . signal ()
 8

 9   barrier . wait ()
10

11   critical point

         Since count is protected by a mutex, it counts the number of threads that
     pass. The first n − 1 threads wait when they get to the barrier, which is initially
     locked. When the nth thread arrives, it unlocks the barrier.
         Puzzle: What is wrong with this solution?

3.6.3    Deadlock #2
The problem is a deadlock.
    An an example, imagine that n = 5 and that 4 threads are waiting at the
barrier. The value of the semaphore is the number of threads in queue, negated,
which is -4.
    When the 5th thread signals the barrier, one of the waiting threads is allowed
to proceed, and the semaphore is incremented to -3.
    But then no one signals the semaphore again and none of the other threads
can pass the barrier. This is a second example of a deadlock.
    Puzzle: Does this code always create a deadlock? Can you find an execution
path through this code that does not cause a deadlock?
    Puzzle: Fix the problem.

     3.6.4    Barrier solution
     Finally, here is a working barrier:

                                      Barrier solution
 1   rendezvous
 2

 3   mutex . wait ()
 4       count = count + 1
 5   mutex . signal ()
 6

 7   if count == n : barrier . signal ()
 8

 9   barrier . wait ()
10   barrier . signal ()
11

12   critical point

         The only change is another signal after waiting at the barrier. Now as each
     thread passes, it signals the semaphore so that the next thread can pass.
         This pattern, a wait and a signal in rapid succession, occurs often enough
     that it has a name; it’s called a turnstile, because it allows one thread to pass
     at a time, and it can be locked to bar all threads.
         In its initial state (zero), the turnstile is locked. The nth thread unlocks it
     and then all n threads go through.
         It might seem dangerous to read the value of count outside the mutex. In
     this case it is not a problem, but in general it is probably not a good idea.
     We will clean this up in a few pages, but in the meantime, you might want to
     consider these questions: After the nth thread, what state is the turnstile in?
     Is there any way the barrier might be signaled more than once?

     3.6.5    Deadlock #3
     Since only one thread at a time can pass through the mutex, and only one
     thread at a time can pass through the turnstile, it might seen reasonable to put
     the turnstile inside the mutex, like this:

                                   Bad barrier solution
 1   rendezvous
 2

 3   mutex . wait ()
 4       count = count + 1
 5       if count == n : barrier . signal ()
 6

 7       barrier . wait ()
 8       barrier . signal ()
 9   mutex . signal ()
10

11   critical point

         This turns out to be a bad idea because it can cause a deadlock.
         Imagine that the first thread enters the mutex and then blocks when it
     reaches the turnstile. Since the mutex is locked, no other threads can enter,
     so the condition, count==n, will never be true and no one will ever unlock the
     turnstile.
         In this case the deadlock is fairly obvious, but it demonstrates a common
     source of deadlocks: blocking on a semaphore while holding a mutex.

     3.7     Reusable barrier
     Often a set of cooperating threads will perform a series of steps in a loop and
     synchronize at a barrier after each step. For this application we need a reusable
     barrier that locks itself after all the threads have passed through.
        Puzzle: Rewrite the barrier solution so that after all the threads have passed
     through, the turnstile is locked again.

     3.7.1    Reusable barrier non-solution #1
     Once again, we will start with a simple attempt at a solution and gradually
     improve it:

                             Reusable barrier non-solution
 1   rendezvous
 2

 3   mutex . wait ()
 4       count += 1
 5   mutex . signal ()
 6

 7   if count == n : turnstile . signal ()
 8

 9   turnstile . wait ()
10   turnstile . signal ()
11

12   critical point
13

14   mutex . wait ()
15       count -= 1
16   mutex . signal ()
17

18   if count == 0: turnstile . wait ()

        Notice that the code after the turnstile is pretty much the same as the code
     before it. Again, we have to use the mutex to protect access to the shared
     variable count. Tragically, though, this code is not quite correct.
        Puzzle: What is the problem?

3.7.2     Reusable barrier problem #1
There is a problem spot at Line 7 of the previous code.
    If the n − 1th thread is interrupted at this point, and then the nth thread
comes through the mutex, both threads will find that count==n and both
threads will signal the turnstile. In fact, it is even possible that all the threads
will signal the turnstile.
    Similarly, at Line 18 it is possible for multiple threads to wait, which will
cause a deadlock.
    Puzzle: Fix the problem.

     3.7.3    Reusable barrier non-solution #2
     This attempt fixes the previous error, but a subtle problem remains.

                              Reusable barrier non-solution
 1   rendezvous
 2

 3   mutex . wait ()
 4       count += 1
 5       if count == n : turnstile . signal ()
 6   mutex . signal ()
 7

 8   turnstile . wait ()
 9   turnstile . signal ()
10

11   critical point
12

13   mutex . wait ()
14       count -= 1
15       if count == 0: turnstile . wait ()
16   mutex . signal ()

         In both cases the check is inside the mutex so that a thread cannot be
     interrupted after changing the counter and before checking it.
         Tragically, this code is still not correct. Remember that this barrier will be
     inside a loop. So, after executing the last line, each thread will go back to the
     rendezvous.
         Puzzle: Identify and fix the problem.

    3.7.4    Reusable barrier hint
    As it is currently written, this code allows a precocious thread to pass through
    the second mutex, then loop around and pass through the first mutex and the
    turnstile, effectively getting ahead of the other threads by a lap.
       To solve this problem we can use two turnstiles.

                                 Reusable barrier hint
1   turnstile = Semaphore (0)
2   turnstile2 = Semaphore (1)
3   mutex = Semaphore (1)

        Initially the first is locked and the second is open. When all the threads
    arrive at the first, we lock the second and unlock the first. When all the threads
    arrive at the second we relock the first, which makes it safe for the threads to
    loop around to the beginning, and then open the second.

     3.7.5     Reusable barrier solution

                                 Reusable barrier solution
 1   # rendezvous
 2

 3   mutex . wait ()
 4       count += 1
 5       if count == n :
 6             turnstile2 . wait ()                   # lock the second
 7             turnstile . signal ()                  # unlock the first
 8   mutex . signal ()
 9

10   turnstile . wait ()                              # first turnstile
11   turnstile . signal ()
12

13   # critical point
14

15   mutex . wait ()
16       count -= 1
17       if count == 0:
18             turnstile . wait ()                     # lock the first
19             turnstile2 . signal ()                  # unlock the second
20   mutex . signal ()
21

22   turnstile2 . wait ()                              # second turnstile
23   turnstile2 . signal ()

         This solution is sometimes called a two-phase barrier because it forces all
     the threads to wait twice: once for all the threads to arrive and again for all the
     threads to execute the critical section.
         Unfortunately, this solution is typical of most non-trivial synchronization
     code: it is difficult to be sure that a solution is correct. Often there is a subtle
     way that a particular path through the program can cause an error.
         To make matters worse, testing an implementation of a solution is not much
     help. The error might occur very rarely because the particular path that causes
     it might require a spectacularly unlucky combination of circumstances. Such
     errors are almost impossible to reproduce and debug by conventional means.
         The only alternative is to examine the code carefully and “prove” that it is
     correct. I put “prove” in quotation marks because I don’t mean, necessarily,
     that you have to write a formal proof (although there are zealots who encourage
     such lunacy).
         The kind of proof I have in mind is more informal. We can take advantage
     of the structure of the code, and the idioms we have developed, to assert, and
     then demonstrate, a number of intermediate-level claims about the program.
     For example:

     1. Only the nth thread can lock or unlock the turnstiles.

     2. Before a thread can unlock the first turnstile, it has to close the second,
        and vice versa; therefore it is impossible for one thread to get ahead of
        the others by more than one turnstile.

   By finding the right kinds of statements to assert and prove, you can some-
times find a concise way to convince yourself (or a skeptical colleague) that your
code is bulletproof.

     3.7.6     Preloaded turnstile
     One nice thing about a turnstile is that it is a versatile component you can
     use in a variety of solutions. But one drawback is that it forces threads to go
     through sequentially, which may cause more context switching than necessary.
         In the reusable barrier solution, we can simplify the solution if the thread
     that unlocks the turnstile preloads the turnstile with enough signals to let the
     right number of threads through2 .
         The syntax I am using here assumes that signal can take a parameter
     that specifies the number of signals. This is a non-standard feature, but it
     would be easy to implement with a loop. The only thing to keep in mind is
     that the multiple signals are not atomic; that is, the signaling thread might be
     interrupted in the loop. But in this case that is not a problem.

                                   Reusable barrier solution
 1   # rendezvous
 2

 3   mutex . wait ()
 4       count += 1
 5       if count == n :
 6             turnstile . signal ( n )                # unlock the first
 7   mutex . signal ()
 8

 9   turnstile . wait ()                               # first turnstile
10

11   # critical point
12

13   mutex . wait ()
14       count -= 1
15       if count == 0:
16             turnstile2 . signal ( n )               # unlock the second
17   mutex . signal ()
18

19   turnstile2 . wait ()                              # second turnstile

         When the nth thread arrives, it preloads the first turnstile with one signal
     for each thread. When the nth thread passes the turnstile, it “takes the last
     token” and leaves the turnstile locked again.
         The same thing happens at the second turnstile, which is unlocked when the
     last thread goes through the mutex.

       2 Thanks to Matt Tesch for this solution!

     3.7.7    Barrier objects
     It is natural to encapsulate a barrier in an object. I will borrow the Python
     syntax for defining a class:

                                     Barrier class
1    class Barrier :
2        def __init__ ( self , n ):
3            self . n = n
4            self . count = 0
5            self . mutex = Semaphore (1)
6            self . turnstile = Semaphore (0)
7            self . turnstile2 = Semaphore (0)
8

9         def phase1 ( self ):
10            self . mutex . wait ()
11                 self . count += 1
12                 if self . count == self . n :
13                      self . turnstile . signal ( self . n )
14            self . mutex . signal ()
15            self . turnstile . wait ()
16

17        def phase2 ( self ):
18            self . mutex . wait ()
19                 self . count -= 1
20                 if self . count == 0:
21                      self . turnstile2 . signal ( self . n )
22            self . mutex . signal ()
23            self . turnstile2 . wait ()
24

25        def wait ( self ):
26            self . phase1 ()
27            self . phase2 ()

         The init method runs when we create a new Barrier object, and ini-
     tializes the instance variables. The parameter n is the number of threads that
     have to invoke wait before the Barrier opens.
         The variable self refers to the object the method is operating on. Since
     each barrier object has its own mutex and turnstiles, self.mutex refers to the
     specific mutex of the current object.
         Here is an example that creates a Barrier object and waits on it:

                                   Barrier interface
1    barrier = Barrier ( n )                 # initialize a new barrier
2    barrier . wait ()                       # wait at a barrier

    Optionally, code that uses a barrier can call phase1 and phase2 separately,
if there is something else that should be done in between.

3.8     Queue
Semaphores can also be used to represent a queue. In this case, the initial value
is 0, and usually the code is written so that it is not possible to signal unless
there is a thread waiting, so the value of the semaphore is never positive.
    For example, imagine that threads represent ballroom dancers and that two
kinds of dancers, leaders and followers, wait in two queues before entering the
dance floor. When a leader arrives, it checks to see if there is a follower waiting.
If so, they can both proceed. Otherwise it waits.
    Similarly, when a follower arrives, it checks for a leader and either proceeds
or waits, accordingly.
    Puzzle: write code for leaders and followers that enforces these constraints.

    3.8.1    Queue hint
    Here are the variables I used in my solution:

                                      Queue hint
1   leaderQueue = Semaphore (0)
2   followerQueue = Semaphore (0)

       leaderQueue is the queue where leaders wait and followerQueue is the
    queue where followers wait.

    3.8.2    Queue solution
    Here is the code for leaders:

                                 Queue solution (leaders)
1   followerQueue . signal ()
2   leaderQueue . wait ()
3   dance ()

       And here is the code for followers:

                                Queue solution (followers)
1   leaderQueue . signal ()
2   followerQueue . wait ()
3   dance ()

        This solution is about as simple as it gets; it is just a Rendezvous. Each
    leader signals exactly one follower, and each follower signals one leader, so it
    is guaranteed that leaders and followers are allowed to proceed in pairs. But
    whether they actually proceed in pairs is not clear. It is possible for any number
    of threads to accumulate before executing dance, and so it is possible for any
    number of leaders to dance before any followers do. Depending on the semantics
    of dance, that behavior may or may not be problematic.
        To make things more interesting, let’s add the additional constraint that each
    leader can invoke dance concurrently with only one follower, and vice versa. In
    other words, you got to dance with the one that brought you3 .
        Puzzle: write a solution to this “exclusive queue” problem.

      3 Song lyric performed by Shania Twain

    3.8.3    Exclusive queue hint
    Here are the variables I used in my solution:

                                      Queue hint
1   leaders = followers = 0
2   mutex = Semaphore (1)
3   leaderQueue = Semaphore (0)
4   followerQueue = Semaphore (0)
5   rendezvous = Semaphore (0)

        leaders and followers are counters that keep track of the number of
    dancers of each kinds that are waiting. The mutex guarantees exclusive ac-
    cess to the counters.
        leaderQueue and followerQueue are the queues where dancers wait.
    rendezvous is used to check that both threads are done dancing.

     3.8.4    Exclusive queue solution
     Here is the code for leaders:

                                 Queue solution (leaders)
 1   mutex . wait ()
 2   if followers > 0:
 3        followers - -
 4        followerQueue . signal ()
 5   else :
 6        leaders ++
 7        mutex . signal ()
 8        leaderQueue . wait ()
 9

10   dance ()
11   rendezvous . wait ()
12   mutex . signal ()

         When a leader arrives, it gets the mutex that protects leaders and
     followers. If there is a follower waiting, the leader decrements followers,
     signals a follower, and then invokes dance, all before releasing mutex. That
     guarantees that there can be only one follower thread running dance concur-
     rently.
         If there are no followers waiting, the leader has to give up the mutex before
     waiting on leaderQueue.
         The code for followers is similar:

                                Queue solution (followers)
 1   mutex . wait ()
 2   if leaders > 0:
 3        leaders - -
 4        leaderQueue . signal ()
 5   else :
 6        followers ++
 7        mutex . signal ()
 8        followerQueue . wait ()
 9

10   dance ()
11   rendezvous . signal ()

         When a follower arrives, it checks for a waiting leader. If there is one, the
     follower decrements leaders, signals a leader, and executes dance, all without
     releasing mutex. Actually, in this case the follower never releases mutex; the
     leader does. We don’t have to keep track of which thread has the mutex because
     we know that one of them does, and either one of them can release it. In my
     solution it’s always the leader.

    When a semaphore is used as a queue4 , I find it useful to read “wait” as
“wait for this queue” and signal as “let someone from this queue go.”
    In this code we never signal a queue unless someone is waiting, so the values
of the queue semaphores are seldom positive. It is possible, though. See if you
can figure out how.

    4 A semaphore used as a queue is very similar to a condition variable. The primary difference

is that threads have to release the mutex explicitly before waiting, and reacquire it explicitly
afterwards (but only if they need it).
