                              PREFACE

     Most books on operating systems are strong on theory and weak on practice.
This one aims to provide a better balance between the two. It covers all the fun-
damental principles in great detail, including processes, interprocess communica-
tion, semaphores, monitors, message passing, scheduling algorithms, input/output,
deadlocks, device drivers, memory management, paging algorithms, file system
design, security, and protection mechanisms. But it also discusses one particular
system—MINIX 3—a UNIX-compatible operating system in detail, and even pro-
vides a source code listing for study. This arrangement allows the reader not only
to learn the principles, but also to see how they are applied in a real operating sys-
tem.
     When the first edition of this book appeared in 1987, it caused something of a
small revolution in the way operating systems courses were taught. Until then,
most courses just covered theory. With the appearance of MINIX, many schools
began to have laboratory courses in which students examined a real operating sys-
tem to see how it worked inside. We consider this trend highly desirable and hope
it continues.
     It its first 10 years, MINIX underwent many changes. The original code was
designed for a 256K 8088-based IBM PC with two diskette drives and no hard
disk. It was also based on UNIX Version 7 As time went on, MINIX evolved in
many ways: it supported 32-bit protected mode machines with large memories
and hard disks. It also changed from being based on Version 7, to being based on
the international POSIX standard (IEEE 1003.1 and ISO 9945-1). Finally, many
                                         xv
xvi                                  PREFACE

new features were added, perhaps too many in our view, but too few in the view
of some other people, which led to the creation of Linux. In addition, MINIX was
ported to many other platforms, including the Macintosh, Amiga, Atari, and
SPARC. A second edition of the book, covering this system, was published in
1997 and was widely used at universities.
     The popularity of MINIX has continued, as can be observed by examining the
number of hits for MINIX found by Google.
     This third edition of the book has many changes throughout. Nearly all of the
material on principles has been revised, and considerable new material has been
added. However, the main change is the discussion of the new version of the sys-
tem, called MINIX 3. and the inclusion of the new code in this book. Although
loosely based on MINIX 2, MINIX 3 is fundamentally different in many key ways.
     The design of MINIX 3 was inspired by the observation that operating systems
are becoming bloated, slow, and unreliable. They crash far more often than other
electronic devices such as televisions, cell phones, and DVD players and have so
many features and options that practically nobody can understand them fully or
manage them well. And of course, computer viruses, worms, spyware, spam, and
other forms of malware have become epidemic.
     To a large extent, many of these problems are caused by a fundamental design
flaw in current operating systems: their lack of modularity. The entire operatng
system is typically millions of lines of C/C++ code compiled into a single massive
executable program run in kernel mode. A bug in any one of those millions of
lines of code can cause the system to malfunction. Getting all this code correct is
impossible, especially when about 70% consists of device drivers, written by third
parties, and outside the purview of the people maintaining the operating system.
     With MINIX 3, we demonstrate that this monolithic design is not the only pos-
sibility. The MINIX 3 kernel is only about 4000 lines of executable code, not the
millions found in Windows, Linux, Mac OS X, or FreeBSD . The rest of the system,
including all the device drivers (except the clock driver), is a collection of small,
modular, user-mode processes, each of which is tightly restricted in what it can do
and with which other processes it may communicate.
     While MINIX 3 is a work in progress, we believe that this model of building
an operating system as a collection of highly-encapsulated user-mode processes
holds promise for building more reliable systems in the future. MINIX 3 is espe-
cially focused on smaller PCs (such as those commonly found in Third-World
countries and on embedded systems, which are always resource constrained). In
any event, this design makes it much easier for students to learn how an operating
system works than attempting to study a huge monolithic system.
     The CD-ROM that is included in this book is a live CD. You can put it in your
CD-ROM drive, reboot the computer, and MINIX 3 will give a login prompt
within a few seconds. You can log in as root and give the system a try without
first having to install it on your hard disk. Of course, it can also be installed on
the hard disk. Detailed installation instructions are given in Appendix A.
                                     PREFACE                                    xvii
     As suggested above, MINIX 3 is rapidly evolving, with new versions being
issued frequently. To download the current CD-ROM image file for burning,
please go to the official Website: www.minix3.org. This site also contains a large
amount of new software, documentation, and news about MINIX 3 development.
For discussions about MINIX 3, or to ask questions, there is a USENET news-
group: comp.os.minix. People without newsreaders can follow discussions on the
Web at http://groups.google.com/group/comp.os.minix.
     As an alternative to installing MINIX 3 on your hard disk, it is possible to run
it on any one of several PC simulators now available. Some of these are listed on
the main page of the Website.
     Instructors who are using the book as the text for a university course can get
the problem solutions from their local Prentice Hall representative. The book has
its own Website. It can be found by going to www.prenhall.com/tanenbaum and
selecting this title.
     We have been extremely fortunate in having the help of many people during
the course of this project. First and foremost, Ben Gras and Jorrit Herder have
done most of the programming of the new version. They did a great job under
tight time constraints, including responding to e-mail well after midnight on many
occasions. They also read the manuscript and made many useful comments. Our
deepest appreciation to both of them.
     Kees Bot also helped greatly with previous versions, giving us a good base to
work with. Kees wrote large chunks of code for versions up to 2.0.4, repaired
bugs, and answered numerous questions. Philip Homburg wrote most of the net-
working code as well as helping out in numerous other useful ways, especially
providing detailed feedback on the manuscript.
     People too numerous to list contributed code to the very early versions, help-
ing to get MINIX off the ground in the first place. There were so many of them
and their contributions have been so varied that we cannot even begin to list them
all here, so the best we can do is a generic thank you to all of them.
     Several people read parts of the manuscript and made suggestions. We would
like to give our special thanks to Gojko Babic, Michael Crowley, Joseph M.
Kizza, Sam Kohn Alexander Manov, and Du Zhang for their help.
     Finally, we would like to thank our families. Suzanne has been through this
16 times now. Barbara has been through it 15 times now. Marvin has been
through it 14 times now. It’s kind of getting to be routine, but the love and sup-
port is still much appreciated. (AST)
     Al’s Barbara has been through this twice now. Her support, patience, and
good humor were essential. Gordon has been a patient listener. It is still a delight
to have a son who understands and cares about the things that fascinate me.
Finally, step-grandson Zain’s first birthday coincides with the release of MINIX 3.
Some day he will appreciate this. (ASW)
                                                            Andrew S. Tanenbaum
                                                                Albert S. Woodhull
This page intentionally left blank
