                                     1
                      INTRODUCTION

     Without its software, a computer is basically a useless lump of metal. With
its software, a computer can store, process, and retrieve information; play music
and videos; send e-mail, search the Internet; and engage in many other valuable
activities to earn its keep. Computer software can be divided roughly into two
kinds: system programs, which manage the operation of the computer itself, and
application programs, which perform the actual work the user wants. The most
fundamental system program is the operating system, whose job is to control all
the computer’s resources and provide a base upon which the application programs
can be written. Operating systems are the topic of this book. In particular, an
operating system called MINIX 3 is used as a model, to illustrate design principles
and the realities of implementing a design.
     A modern computer system consists of one or more processors, some main
memory, disks, printers, a keyboard, a display, network interfaces, and other
input/output devices. All in all, a complex system. Writing programs that keep
track of all these components and use them correctly, let alone optimally, is an
extremely difficult job. If every programmer had to be concerned with how disk
drives work, and with all the dozens of things that could go wrong when reading a
disk block, it is unlikely that many programs could be written at all.
     Many years ago it became abundantly clear that some way had to be found to
shield programmers from the complexity of the hardware. The way that has
evolved gradually is to put a layer of software on top of the bare hardware, to
manage all parts of the system, and present the user with an interface or virtual

machine that is easier to understand and program. This layer of software is the
operating system.
    The placement of the operating system is shown in Fig. 1-1. At the bottom is
the hardware, which, in many cases, is itself composed of two or more levels (or
layers). The lowest level contains physical devices, consisting of integrated cir-
cuit chips, wires, power supplies, cathode ray tubes, and similar physical devices.
How these are constructed and how they work is the province of the electrical
engineer.

                  Banking        Airline           Web
                                                              Application programs
                  system       reservation       browser

                                                Command
                 Compilers       Editors        interpreter   System
                                                              programs
                            Operating system

                            Machine language

                            Microarchitecture                 Hardware

                             Physical devices

Figure 1-1. A computer system consists of hardware, system programs, and ap-
        plication programs.

     Next comes the microarchitecture level, in which the physical devices are
grouped together to form functional units. Typically this level contains some reg-
isters internal to the CPU (Central Processing Unit) and a data path containing an
arithmetic logic unit. In each clock cycle, one or two operands are fetched from
the registers and combined in the arithmetic logic unit (for example, by addition
or Boolean AND). The result is stored in one or more registers. On some ma-
chines, the operation of the data path is controlled by software, called the mi-
croprogram. On other machines, it is controlled directly by hardware circuits.
     The purpose of the data path is to execute some set of instructions. Some of
these can be carried out in one data path cycle; others may require multiple data
path cycles. These instructions may use registers or other hardware facilities.
Together, the hardware and instructions visible to an assembly language program-
mer form the ISA (Instruction Set Architecture) This level is often called
machine language.
     The machine language typically has between 50 and 300 instructions, mostly
for moving data around the machine, doing arithmetic, and comparing values. In
this level, the input/output devices are controlled by loading values into special
device registers. For example, a disk can be commanded to read by loading the
values of the disk address, main memory address, byte count, and direction (read
or write) into its registers. In practice, many more parameters are needed, and the
                                                                                    3
status returned by the drive after an operation may be complex. Furthermore, for
many I/O (Input/Output) devices, timing plays an important role in the program-
ming.
     A major function of the operating system is to hide all this complexity and
give the programmer a more convenient set of instructions to work with. For
example, read block from file is conceptually much simpler than having to worry
about the details of moving disk heads, waiting for them to settle down, and so on.
     On top of the operating system is the rest of the system software. Here we
find the command interpreter (shell), window systems, compilers, editors, and
similar application-independent programs. It is important to realize that these
programs are definitely not part of the operating system, even though they are typ-
ically supplied preinstalled by the computer manufacturer, or in a package with
the operating system if it is installed after purchase. This is a crucial, but subtle,
point. The operating system is (usually) that portion of the software that runs in
kernel mode or supervisor mode. It is protected from user tampering by the
hardware (ignoring for the moment some older or low-end microprocessors that
do not have hardware protection at all). Compilers and editors run in user mode.
If a user does not like a particular compiler, he† is free to write his own if he so
chooses; he is not free to write his own clock interrupt handler, which is part of
the operating system and is normally protected by hardware against attempts by
users to modify it.
     This distinction, however, is sometimes blurred in embedded systems (which
may not have kernel mode) or interpreted systems (such as Java-based systems
that use interpretation, not hardware, to separate the components). Still, for tradi-
tional computers, the operating system is what runs in kernel mode.
     That said, in many systems there are programs that run in user mode but
which help the operating system or perform privileged functions. For example,
there is often a program that allows users to change their passwords. This pro-
gram is not part of the operating system and does not run in kernel mode, but it
clearly carries out a sensitive function and has to be protected in a special way.
     In some systems, including MINIX 3, this idea is carried to an extreme form,
and pieces of what is traditionally considered to be the operating system (such as
the file system) run in user space. In such systems, it is difficult to draw a clear
boundary. Everything running in kernel mode is clearly part of the operating sys-
tem, but some programs running outside it are arguably also part of it, or at least
closely associated with it. For example, in MINIX 3, the file system is simply a
big C program running in user-mode.
     Finally, above the system programs come the application programs. These
programs are purchased (or written by) the users to solve their particular prob-
lems, such as word processing, spreadsheets, engineering calculations, or storing
information in a database.
                                                

† ‘‘He’’ should be read as ‘‘he or she’’ throughout the book.

1.1 WHAT IS AN OPERATING SYSTEM?
     Most computer users have had some experience with an operating system, but
it is difficult to pin down precisely what an operating system is. Part of the prob-
lem is that operating systems perform two basically unrelated functions, extending
the machine and managing resources, and depending on who is doing the talking,
you hear mostly about one function or the other. Let us now look at both.

1.1.1 The Operating System as an Extended Machine

     As mentioned earlier, the architecture (instruction set, memory organization,
I/O, and bus structure) of most computers at the machine language level is primi-
tive and awkward to program, especially for input/output. To make this point
more concrete, let us briefly look at how floppy disk I/O is done using the NEC
PD765 compatible controller chips used on many Intel-based personal computers.
(Throughout this book we will use the terms ‘‘floppy disk’’ and ‘‘diskette’’ inter-
changeably.) The PD765 has 16 commands, each specified by loading between 1
and 9 bytes into a device register. These commands are for reading and writing
data, moving the disk arm, and formatting tracks, as well as initializing, sensing,
resetting, and recalibrating the controller and the drives.
     The most basic commands are read and write, each of which requires 13
parameters, packed into 9 bytes. These parameters specify such items as the
address of the disk block to be read, the number of sectors per track, the recording
mode used on the physical medium, the intersector gap spacing, and what to do
with a deleted-data-address-mark. If you do not understand this mumbo jumbo,
do not worry; that is precisely the point—it is rather esoteric. When the operation
is completed, the controller chip returns 23 status and error fields packed into 7
bytes. As if this were not enough, the floppy disk programmer must also be con-
stantly aware of whether the motor is on or off. If the motor is off, it must be
turned on (with a long startup delay) before data can be read or written. The
motor cannot be left on too long, however, or the floppy disk will wear out. The
programmer is thus forced to deal with the trade-off between long startup delays
versus wearing out floppy disks (and losing the data on them).
     Without going into the real details, it should be clear that the average pro-
grammer probably does not want to get too intimately involved with the program-
ming of floppy disks (or hard disks, which are just as complex and quite dif-
ferent). Instead, what the programmer wants is a simple, high-level abstraction to
deal with. In the case of disks, a typical abstraction would be that the disk con-
tains a collection of named files. Each file can be opened for reading or writing,
then read or written, and finally closed. Details such as whether or not recording
should use modified frequency modulation and what the current state of the motor
is should not appear in the abstraction presented to the user.
SEC. 1.1               WHAT IS AN OPERATING SYSTEM?                               5
     The program that hides the truth about the hardware from the programmer and
presents a nice, simple view of named files that can be read and written is, of
course, the operating system. Just as the operating system shields the programmer
from the disk hardware and presents a simple file-oriented interface, it also con-
ceals a lot of unpleasant business concerning interrupts, timers, memory manage-
ment, and other low-level features. In each case, the abstraction offered by the
operating system is simpler and easier to use than that offered by the underlying
hardware.
     In this view, the function of the operating system is to present the user with
the equivalent of an extended machine or virtual machine that is easier to pro-
gram than the underlying hardware. How the operating system achieves this goal
is a long story, which we will study in detail throughout this book. To summarize
it in a nutshell, the operating system provides a variety of services that programs
can obtain using special instructions called system calls. We will examine some
of the more common system calls later in this chapter.

1.1.2 The Operating System as a Resource Manager

     The concept of the operating system as primarily providing its users with a
convenient interface is a top-down view. An alternative, bottom-up, view holds
that the operating system is there to manage all the pieces of a complex system.
Modern computers consist of processors, memories, timers, disks, mice, network
interfaces, printers, and a wide variety of other devices. In the alternative view,
the job of the operating system is to provide for an orderly and controlled alloca-
tion of the processors, memories, and I/O devices among the various programs
competing for them.
     Imagine what would happen if three programs running on some computer all
tried to print their output simultaneously on the same printer. The first few lines
of printout might be from program 1, the next few from program 2, then some
from program 3, and so forth. The result would be chaos. The operating system
can bring order to the potential chaos by buffering all the output destined for the
printer on the disk. When one program is finished, the operating system can then
copy its output from the disk file where it has been stored to the printer, while at
the same time the other program can continue generating more output, oblivious
to the fact that the output is not really going to the printer (yet).
     When a computer (or network) has multiple users, the need for managing and
protecting the memory, I/O devices, and other resources is even greater, since the
users might otherwise interfere with one another. In addition, users often need to
share not only hardware, but information (files, databases, etc.) as well. In short,
this view of the operating system holds that its primary task is to keep track of
who is using which resource, to grant resource requests, to account for usage, and
to mediate conflicting requests from different programs and users.

     Resource management includes multiplexing (sharing) resources in two ways:
in time and in space. When a resource is time multiplexed, different programs or
users take turns using it. First one of them gets to use the resource, then another,
and so on. For example, with only one CPU and multiple programs that want to
run on it, the operating system first allocates the CPU to one program, then after it
has run long enough, another one gets to use the CPU, then another, and then
eventually the first one again. Determining how the resource is time multi-
plexed—who goes next and for how long—is the task of the operating system.
Another example of time multiplexing is sharing the printer. When multiple print
jobs are queued up for printing on a single printer, a decision has to be made
about which one is to be printed next.
     The other kind of multiplexing is space multiplexing. Instead of the custo-
mers taking turns, each one gets part of the resource. For example, main memory
is normally divided up among several running programs, so each one can be
resident at the same time (for example, in order to take turns using the CPU).
Assuming there is enough memory to hold multiple programs, it is more efficient
to hold several programs in memory at once rather than give one of them all of it,
especially if it only needs a small fraction of the total. Of course, this raises
issues of fairness, protection, and so on, and it is up to the operating system to
solve them. Another resource that is space multiplexed is the (hard) disk. In
many systems a single disk can hold files from many users at the same time.
Allocating disk space and keeping track of who is using which disk blocks is a
typical operating system resource management task.

1.2 HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS
    Operating systems have been evolving through the years. In the following
sections we will briefly look at a few of the highlights. Since operating systems
have historically been closely tied to the architecture of the computers on which
they run, we will look at successive generations of computers to see what their
operating systems were like. This mapping of operating system generations to
computer generations is crude, but it does provide some structure where there
would otherwise be none.
    The first true digital computer was designed by the English mathematician
Charles Babbage (1792–1871). Although Babbage spent most of his life and for-
tune trying to build his ‘‘analytical engine,’’ he never got it working properly
because it was purely mechanical, and the technology of his day could not pro-
duce the required wheels, gears, and cogs to the high precision that he needed.
Needless to say, the analytical engine did not have an operating system.
    As an interesting historical aside, Babbage realized that he would need soft-
ware for his analytical engine, so he hired a young woman named Ada Lovelace,
who was the daughter of the famed British poet Lord Byron, as the world’s first
programmer. The programming language Ada® was named after her.
SEC. 1.2              HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS                                7

1.2.1 The First Generation (1945–55) Vacuum Tubes and Plugboards

     After Babbage’s unsuccessful efforts, little progress was made in constructing
digital computers until World War II. Around the mid-1940s, Howard Aiken at
Harvard University, John von Neumann at the Institute for Advanced Study in
Princeton, J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchley at the University of Pennsylvania,
and Konrad Zuse in Germany, among others, all succeeded in building calculating
engines. The first ones used mechanical relays but were very slow, with cycle
times measured in seconds. Relays were later replaced by vacuum tubes. These
machines were enormous, filling up entire rooms with tens of thousands of
vacuum tubes, but they were still millions of times slower than even the cheapest
personal computers available today.
     In these early days, a single group of people designed, built, programmed,
operated, and maintained each machine. All programming was done in absolute
machine language, often by wiring up plugboards to control the machine’s basic
functions. Programming languages were unknown (even assembly language was
unknown). Operating systems were unheard of. The usual mode of operation was
for the programmer to sign up for a block of time on the signup sheet on the wall,
then come down to the machine room, insert his or her plugboard into the com-
puter, and spend the next few hours hoping that none of the 20,000 or so vacuum
tubes would burn out during the run. Virtually all the problems were straightfor-
ward numerical calculations, such as grinding out tables of sines, cosines, and log-
arithms.
     By the early 1950s, the routine had improved somewhat with the introduction
of punched cards. It was now possible to write programs on cards and read them
in instead of using plugboards; otherwise, the procedure was the same.

1.2.2 The Second Generation (1955–65) Transistors and Batch Systems

     The introduction of the transistor in the mid-1950s changed the picture radi-
cally. Computers became reliable enough that they could be manufactured and
sold to paying customers with the expectation that they would continue to func-
tion long enough to get some useful work done. For the first time, there was a
clear separation between designers, builders, operators, programmers, and mainte-
nance personnel.
     These machines, now called mainframes, were locked away in specially air-
conditioned computer rooms, with staffs of specially-trained professional opera-
tors to run them. Only big corporations or major government agencies or univer-
sities could afford their multimillion dollar price tags. To run a job (i.e., a pro-
gram or set of programs), a programmer would first write the program on paper
(in FORTRAN or possibly even in assembly language), then punch it on cards.
He would then bring the card deck down to the input room and hand it to one of
the operators and go drink coffee until the output was ready.

    When the computer finished whatever job it was currently running, an opera-
tor would go over to the printer and tear off the output and carry it over to the out-
put room, so that the programmer could collect it later. Then he would take one
of the card decks that had been brought from the input room and read it in. If the
FORTRAN compiler was needed, the operator would have to get it from a file
cabinet and read it in. Much computer time was wasted while operators were
walking around the machine room.
    Given the high cost of the equipment, it is not surprising that people quickly
looked for ways to reduce the wasted time. The solution generally adopted was
the batch system. The idea behind it was to collect a tray full of jobs in the input
room and then read them onto a magnetic tape using a small (relatively) inexpen-
sive computer, such as the IBM 1401, which was very good at reading cards,
copying tapes, and printing output, but not at all good at numerical calculations.
Other, much more expensive machines, such as the IBM 7094, were used for the
real computing. This situation is shown in Fig. 1-2.

                   Tape                            System
                   drive                  Input     tape       Output
           Card                           tape                  tape
          reader                                                                                   Printer

                   1401                              7094                                1401

    (a)             (b)             (c)               (d)               (e)                  (f)

Figure 1-2. An early batch system. (a) Programmers bring cards to 1401. (b)
          1401 reads batch of jobs onto tape. (c) Operator carries input tape to 7094. (d)
          7094 does computing. (e) Operator carries output tape to 1401. (f) 1401 prints
          output.
    After about an hour of collecting a batch of jobs, the tape was rewound and
brought into the machine room, where it was mounted on a tape drive. The opera-
tor then loaded a special program (the ancestor of today’s operating system),
which read the first job from tape and ran it. The output was written onto a sec-
ond tape, instead of being printed. After each job finished, the operating system
automatically read the next job from the tape and began running it. When the
whole batch was done, the operator removed the input and output tapes, replaced
the input tape with the next batch, and brought the output tape to a 1401 for print-
ing off line (i.e., not connected to the main computer).
    The structure of a typical input job is shown in Fig. 1-3. It started out with a
$JOB card, specifying the maximum run time in minutes, the account number to
be charged, and the programmer’s name. Then came a $FORTRAN card, telling
the operating system to load the FORTRAN compiler from the system tape. It
SEC. 1.2               HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS                                9
was followed by the program to be compiled, and then a $LOAD card, directing
the operating system to load the object program just compiled. (Compiled pro-
grams were often written on scratch tapes and had to be loaded explicitly.) Next
came the $RUN card, telling the operating system to run the program with the
data following it. Finally, the $END card marked the end of the job. These prim-
itive control cards were the forerunners of modern job control languages and com-
mand interpreters.

                                                  $END

                                                  Data for program

                              $RUN

                         $LOAD

                            Fortran program

           $FORTRAN

     $JOB, 10,6610802, MARVIN TANENBAUM

Figure 1-3. Structure of a typical FMS job.

    Large second-generation computers were used mostly for scientific and en-
gineering calculations, such as solving the partial differential equations that often
occur in physics and engineering. They were largely programmed in FORTRAN
and assembly language. Typical operating systems were FMS (the Fortran Moni-
tor System) and IBSYS, IBM’s operating system for the 7094.

1.2.3 The Third Generation (1965–1980) ICs and Multiprogramming

    By the early 1960s, most computer manufacturers had two distinct, and totally
incompatible, product lines. On the one hand there were the word-oriented,
large-scale scientific computers, such as the 7094, which were used for numerical
calculations in science and engineering. On the other hand, there were the
character-oriented, commercial computers, such as the 1401, which were widely
used for tape sorting and printing by banks and insurance companies.
    Developing, maintaining, and marketing two completely different product
lines was an expensive proposition for the computer manufacturers. In addition,

many new computer customers initially needed a small machine but later outgrew
it and wanted a bigger machine that had the same architectures as their current
one so it could run all their old programs, but faster.
     IBM attempted to solve both of these problems at a single stroke by introduc-
ing the System/360. The 360 was a series of software-compatible machines rang-
ing from 1401-sized to much more powerful than the 7094. The machines dif-
fered only in price and performance (maximum memory, processor speed, number
of I/O devices permitted, and so forth). Since all the machines had the same
architecture and instruction set, programs written for one machine could run on all
the others, at least in theory. Furthermore, the 360 was designed to handle both
scientific (i.e., numerical) and commercial computing. Thus a single family of
machines could satisfy the needs of all customers. In subsequent years, IBM has
come out with compatible successors to the 360 line, using more modern technol-
ogy, known as the 370, 4300, 3080, 3090, and Z series.
     The 360 was the first major computer line to use (small-scale) Integrated Cir-
cuits (ICs), thus providing a major price/performance advantage over the second-
generation machines, which were built up from individual transistors. It was an
immediate success, and the idea of a family of compatible computers was soon
adopted by all the other major manufacturers. The descendants of these machines
are still in use at computer centers today. Nowadays they are often used for man-
aging huge databases (e.g., for airline reservation systems) or as servers for World
Wide Web sites that must process thousands of requests per second.
     The greatest strength of the ‘‘one family’’ idea was simultaneously its greatest
weakness. The intention was that all software, including the operating system,
OS/360, had to work on all models. It had to run on small systems, which often
just replaced 1401s for copying cards to tape, and on very large systems, which
often replaced 7094s for doing weather forecasting and other heavy computing. It
had to be good on systems with few peripherals and on systems with many peri-
pherals. It had to work in commercial environments and in scientific environ-
ments. Above all, it had to be efficient for all of these different uses.
     There was no way that IBM (or anybody else) could write a piece of software
to meet all those conflicting requirements. The result was an enormous and
extraordinarily complex operating system, probably two to three orders of magni-
tude larger than FMS. It consisted of millions of lines of assembly language writ-
ten by thousands of programmers, and contained thousands upon thousands of
bugs, which necessitated a continuous stream of new releases in an attempt to
correct them. Each new release fixed some bugs and introduced new ones, so the
number of bugs probably remained constant in time.
     One of the designers of OS/360, Fred Brooks, subsequently wrote a witty and
incisive book describing his experiences with OS/360 (Brooks, 1995). While it
would be impossible to summarize the book here, suffice it to say that the cover
shows a herd of prehistoric beasts stuck in a tar pit. The cover of Silberschatz et
al. (2004) makes a similar point about operating systems being dinosaurs.
SEC. 1.2               HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS                              11
     Despite its enormous size and problems, OS/360 and the similar third-
generation operating systems produced by other computer manufacturers actually
satisfied most of their customers reasonably well. They also popularized several
key techniques absent in second-generation operating systems. Probably the most
important of these was multiprogramming. On the 7094, when the current job
paused to wait for a tape or other I/O operation to complete, the CPU simply sat
idle until the I/O finished. With heavily CPU-bound scientific calculations, I/O is
infrequent, so this wasted time is not significant. With commercial data process-
ing, the I/O wait time can often be 80 or 90 percent of the total time, so something
had to be done to avoid having the (expensive) CPU be idle so much.
     The solution that evolved was to partition memory into several pieces, with a
different job in each partition, as shown in Fig. 1-4. While one job was waiting
for I/O to complete, another job could be using the CPU. If enough jobs could be
held in main memory at once, the CPU could be kept busy nearly 100 percent of
the time. Having multiple jobs safely in memory at once requires special hard-
ware to protect each job against snooping and mischief by the other ones, but the
360 and other third-generation systems were equipped with this hardware.

                                  Job 3

                                  Job 2
                                                   Memory
                                  Job 1            partitions

                                Operating
                                 system

Figure 1-4. A multiprogramming system with three jobs in memory.
     Another major feature present in third-generation operating systems was the
ability to read jobs from cards onto the disk as soon as they were brought to the
computer room. Then, whenever a running job finished, the operating system
could load a new job from the disk into the now-empty partition and run it. This
technique is called spooling (from Simultaneous Peripheral Operation On Line)
and was also used for output. With spooling, the 1401s were no longer needed,
and much carrying of tapes disappeared.
     Although third-generation operating systems were well suited for big scien-
tific calculations and massive commercial data processing runs, they were still
basically batch systems. Many programmers pined for the first-generation days
when they had the machine all to themselves for a few hours, so they could debug
their programs quickly. With third-generation systems, the time between submit-
ting a job and getting back the output was often hours, so a single misplaced
comma could cause a compilation to fail, and the programmer to waste half a day.
     This desire for quick response time paved the way for timesharing, a variant
of multiprogramming, in which each user has an online terminal. In a timesharing

system, if 20 users are logged in and 17 of them are thinking or talking or drinking
coffee, the CPU can be allocated in turn to the three jobs that want service. Since
people debugging programs usually issue short commands (e.g., compile a five-
page procedure†) rather than long ones (e.g., sort a million-record file), the com-
puter can provide fast, interactive service to a number of users and perhaps also
work on big batch jobs in the background when the CPU is otherwise idle. The
first serious timesharing system, CTSS (Compatible Time Sharing System), was
developed at M.I.T. on a specially modified 7094 (Corbató et al., 1962). How-
ever, timesharing did not really become popular until the necessary protection
hardware became widespread during the third generation.
     After the success of the CTSS system, MIT, Bell Labs, and General Electric
(then a major computer manufacturer) decided to embark on the development of a
‘‘computer utility,’’ a machine that would support hundreds of simultaneous
timesharing users. Their model was the electricity distribution system—when you
need electric power, you just stick a plug in the wall, and within reason, as much
power as you need will be there. The designers of this system, known as MUL-
TICS (MULTiplexed Information and Computing Service), envisioned one huge
machine providing computing power for everyone in the Boston area. The idea
that machines far more powerful than their GE-645 mainframe would be sold for
under a thousand dollars by the millions only 30 years later was pure science fic-
tion, like the idea of supersonic trans-Atlantic undersea trains would be now.
     MULTICS was a mixed success. It was designed to support hundreds of users
on a machine only slightly more powerful than an Intel 80386-based PC, although
it had much more I/O capacity. This is not quite as crazy as it sounds, since peo-
ple knew how to write small, efficient programs in those days, a skill that has sub-
sequently been lost. There were many reasons that MULTICS did not take over
the world, not the least of which is that it was written in PL/I, and the PL/I com-
piler was years late and barely worked at all when it finally arrived. In addition,
MULTICS was enormously ambitious for its time, much like Charles Babbage’s
analytical engine in the nineteenth century.
     MULTICS introduced many seminal ideas into the computer literature, but
turning it into a serious product and a commercial success was a lot harder than
anyone had expected. Bell Labs dropped out of the project, and General Electric
quit the computer business altogether. However, M.I.T. persisted and eventually
got MULTICS working. It was ultimately sold as a commercial product by the
company that bought GE’s computer business (Honeywell) and installed by about
80 major companies and universities worldwide. While their numbers were small,
MULTICS users were fiercely loyal. General Motors, Ford, and the U.S. National
Security Agency, for example, only shut down their MULTICS systems in the late
1990s. The last MULTICS running, at the Canadian Department of National
Defence, shut down in October 2000. Despite its lack of commercial success,
                                                

† We will use the terms ‘‘procedure,’’ ‘‘subroutine,’’ and ‘‘function’’ interchangeably in this book.
SEC. 1.2               HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS                                13
MULTICS had a huge influence on subsequent operating systems. A great deal of
information about it exists (Corbató et al., 1972; Corbató and Vyssotsky, 1965;
Daley and Dennis, 1968; Organick, 1972; and Saltzer, 1974). It also has a still-
active Web site, www.multicians.org, with a great deal of information about the
system, its designers, and its users.
     The phrase ‘‘computer utility’’ is no longer heard, but the idea has gained new
life in recent years. In its simplest form, PCs or workstations (high-end PCs) in a
business or a classroom may be connected via a LAN (Local Area Network) to a
file server on which all programs and data are stored. An administrator then has
to install and protect only one set of programs and data, and can easily reinstall
local software on a malfunctioning PC or workstation without worrying about
retrieving or preserving local data. In more heterogeneous environments, a class
of software called middleware has evolved to bridge the gap between local users
and the files, programs, and databases they use on remote servers. Middleware
makes networked computers look local to individual users’ PCs or workstations
and presents a consistent user interface even though there may be a wide variety
of different servers, PCs, and workstations in use. The World Wide Web is an
example. A web browser presents documents to a user in a uniform way, and a
document as seen on a user’s browser can consist of text from one server and
graphics from another server, presented in a format determined by a style sheet on
yet another server. Businesses and universities commonly use a web interface to
access databases and run programs on a computer in another building or even
another city. Middleware appears to be the operating system of a distributed sys-
tem, but it is not really an operating system at all, and is beyond the scope of this
book. For more on distributed systems see Tanenbaum and Van Steen (2002).
     Another major development during the third generation was the phenomenal
growth of minicomputers, starting with the Digital Equipment Company (DEC)
PDP-1 in 1961. The PDP-1 had only 4K of 18-bit words, but at $120,000 per ma-
chine (less than 5 percent of the price of a 7094), it sold like hotcakes. For certain
kinds of nonnumerical work, it was almost as fast as the 7094 and gave birth to a
whole new industry. It was quickly followed by a series of other PDPs (unlike
IBM’s family, all incompatible) culminating in the PDP-11.
     One of the computer scientists at Bell Labs who had worked on the MULTICS
project, Ken Thompson, subsequently found a small PDP-7 minicomputer that no
one was using and set out to write a stripped-down, one-user version of MULTICS .
This work later developed into the UNIX operating system, which became popular
in the academic world, with government agencies, and with many companies.
     The history of UNIX has been told elsewhere (e.g., Salus, 1994). Because the
source code was widely available, various organizations developed their own
(incompatible) versions, which led to chaos. Two major versions developed, Sys-
tem V, from AT&T, and BSD, (Berkeley Software Distribution) from the Univer-
sity of California at Berkeley. These had minor variants as well, now including
FreeBSD, OpenBSD, and NetBSD. To make it possible to write programs that

could run on any UNIX system, IEEE developed a standard for UNIX, called
POSIX, that most versions of UNIX now support. POSIX defines a minimal sys-
tem call interface that conformant UNIX systems must support. In fact, some
other operating systems now also support the POSIX interface. The information
needed to write POSIX-compliant software is available in books (IEEE, 1990;
Lewine, 1991), and online as the Open Group’s ‘‘Single UNIX Specification’’ at
www.unix.org. Later in this chapter, when we refer to UNIX, we mean all of these
systems as well, unless stated otherwise. While they differ internally, all of them
support the POSIX standard, so to the programmer they are quite similar.

1.2.4 The Fourth Generation (1980–Present) Personal Computers

    With the development of LSI (Large Scale Integration) circuits, chips contain-
ing thousands of transistors on a square centimeter of silicon, the age of the
microprocessor-based personal computer dawned. In terms of architecture, per-
sonal computers (initially called microcomputers) were not all that different
from minicomputers of the PDP-11 class, but in terms of price they certainly were
different. The minicomputer made it possible for a department in a company or
university to have its own computer. The microcomputer made it possible for an
individual to have his or her own computer.
    There were several families of microcomputers. Intel came out with the 8080,
the first general-purpose 8-bit microprocessor, in 1974. A number of companies
produced complete systems using the 8080 (or the compatible Zilog Z80) and the
CP/M (Control Program for Microcomputers) operating system from a company
called Digital Research was widely used with these. Many application programs
were written to run on CP/M, and it dominated the personal computing world for
about 5 years.
    Motorola also produced an 8-bit microprocessor, the 6800. A group of
Motorola engineers left to form MOS Technology and manufacture the 6502 CPU
after Motorola rejected their suggested improvements to the 6800. The 6502 was
the CPU of several early systems. One of these, the Apple II, became a major
competitor for CP/M systems in the home and educational markets. But CP/M was
so popular that many owners of Apple II computers purchased Z-80 coprocessor
add-on cards to run CP/M, since the 6502 CPU was not compatible with CP/M.
The CP/M cards were sold by a little company called Microsoft, which also had a
market niche supplying BASIC interpreters used by a number of microcomputers
running CP/M.
    The next generation of microprocessors were 16-bit systems. Intel came out
with the 8086, and in the early 1980s, IBM designed the IBM PC around Intel’s
8088 (an 8086 on the inside, with an 8 bit external data path). Microsoft offered
IBM a package which included Microsoft’s BASIC and an operating system, DOS
(Disk Operating System) originally developed by another company—Microsoft
bought the product and hired the original author to improve it. The revised system
SEC. 1.2              HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS                            15
was renamed MS-DOS (MicroSoft Disk Operating System) and quickly came to
dominate the IBM PC market.
     CP/M, MS-DOS , and the Apple DOS were all command-line systems: users
typed commands at the keyboard. Years earlier, Doug Engelbart at Stanford
Research Institute had invented the GUI (Graphical User Interface), pro-
nounced ‘‘gooey,’’ complete with windows, icons, menus, and mouse. Apple’s
Steve Jobs saw the possibility of a truly user-friendly personal computer (for
users who knew nothing about computers and did not want to learn), and the
Apple Macintosh was announced in early 1984. It used Motorola’s 16-bit 68000
CPU, and had 64 KB of ROM (Read Only Memory), to support the GUI. The
Macintosh has evolved over the years. Subsequent Motorola CPUs were true 32-
bit systems, and later still Apple moved to IBM PowerPC CPUs, with RISC 32-bit
(and later, 64-bit) architecture. In 2001 Apple made a major operating system
change, releasing Mac OS X, with a new version of the Macintosh GUI on top of
Berkeley UNIX. And in 2005 Apple announced that it would be switching to Intel
processors.
     To compete with the Macintosh, Microsoft invented Windows. Originally
Windows was just a graphical environment on top of 16-bit MS-DOS (i.e., it was
more like a shell than a true operating system). However, current versions of
Windows are descendants of Windows NT, a full 32-bit system, rewritten from
scratch.
     The other major contender in the personal computer world is UNIX (and its
various derivatives). UNIX is strongest on workstations and other high-end com-
puters, such as network servers. It is especially popular on machines powered by
high-performance RISC chips. On Pentium-based computers, Linux is becoming
a popular alternative to Windows for students and increasingly many corporate
users. (Throughout this book we will use the term ‘‘Pentium’’ to mean the entire
Pentium family, including the low-end Celeron, the high end Xeon, and compati-
ble AMD microprocessors).
     Although many UNIX users, especially experienced programmers, prefer a
command-based interface to a GUI, nearly all UNIX systems support a windowing
system called the X Window system developed at M.I.T. This system handles the
basic window management, allowing users to create, delete, move, and resize
windows using a mouse. Often a complete GUI, such as Motif, is available to run
on top of the X Window system giving UNIX a look and feel something like the
Macintosh or Microsoft Windows for those UNIX users who want such a thing.
     An interesting development that began taking place during the mid-1980s is
the growth of networks of personal computers running network operating sys-
tems and distributed operating systems (Tanenbaum and Van Steen, 2002). In
a network operating system, the users are aware of the existence of multiple com-
puters and can log in to remote machines and copy files from one machine to
another. Each machine runs its own local operating system and has its own local
user (or users). Basically, the machines are independent of one another.

    Network operating systems are not fundamentally different from single-
processor operating systems. They obviously need a network interface controller
and some low-level software to drive it, as well as programs to achieve remote
login and remote file access, but these additions do not change the essential struc-
ture of the operating system.
    A distributed operating system, in contrast, is one that appears to its users as a
traditional uniprocessor system, even though it is actually composed of multiple
processors. The users should not be aware of where their programs are being run
or where their files are located; that should all be handled automatically and effi-
ciently by the operating system.
    True distributed operating systems require more than just adding a little code
to a uniprocessor operating system, because distributed and centralized systems
differ in critical ways. Distributed systems, for example, often allow applications
to run on several processors at the same time, thus requiring more complex pro-
cessor scheduling algorithms in order to optimize the amount of parallelism.
    Communication delays within the network often mean that these (and other)
algorithms must run with incomplete, outdated, or even incorrect information.
This situation is radically different from a single-processor system in which the
operating system has complete information about the system state.

1.2.5 History of MINIX 3

     When UNIX was young (Version 6), the source code was widely available,
under AT&T license, and frequently studied. John Lions, of the University of
New South Wales in Australia, even wrote a little booklet describing its operation,
line by line (Lions, 1996). This booklet was used (with permission of AT&T) as a
text in many university operating system courses.
     When AT&T released Version 7, it dimly began to realize that UNIX was a
valuable commercial product, so it issued Version 7 with a license that prohibited
the source code from being studied in courses, in order to avoid endangering its
status as a trade secret. Many universities complied by simply dropping the study
of UNIX and teaching only theory.
     Unfortunately, teaching only theory leaves the student with a lopsided view of
what an operating system is really like. The theoretical topics that are usually
covered in great detail in courses and books on operating systems, such as
scheduling algorithms, are in practice not really that important. Subjects that
really are important, such as I/O and file systems, are generally neglected because
there is little theory about them.
     To remedy this situation, one of the authors of this book (Tanenbaum) decided
to write a new operating system from scratch that would be compatible with UNIX
from the user’s point of view, but completely different on the inside. By not using
even one line of AT&T code, this system avoided the licensing restrictions, so it
could be used for class or individual study. In this manner, readers could dissect a
SEC. 1.2              HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS                               17
real operating system to see what is inside, just as biology students dissect frogs.
It was called MINIX and was released in 1987 with its complete source code for
anyone to study or modify. The name MINIX stands for mini-UNIX because it is
small enough that even a nonguru can understand how it works.
     In addition to the advantage of eliminating the legal problems, MINIX had
another advantage over UNIX. It was written a decade after UNIX and was struc-
tured in a more modular way. For instance, from the very first release of MINIX
the file system and the memory manager were not part of the operating system at
all but ran as user programs. In the current release (MINIX 3) this modularization
has been extended to the I/O device drivers, which (with the exception of the
clock driver) all run as user programs. Another difference is that UNIX was
designed to be efficient; MINIX was designed to be readable (inasmuch as one can
speak of any program hundreds of pages long as being readable). The MINIX
code, for example, has thousands of comments in it.
     MINIX was originally designed for compatibility with Version 7 (V7) UNIX .
Version 7 was used as the model because of its simplicity and elegance. It is
sometimes said that Version 7 was an improvement not only over all its predeces-
sors, but also over all its successors. With the advent of POSIX, MINIX began
evolving toward the new standard, while maintaining backward compatibility with
existing programs. This kind of evolution is common in the computer industry, as
no vendor wants to introduce a new system that none of its existing customers can
use without great upheaval. The version of MINIX described in this book, MINIX
3, is based on the POSIX standard.
     Like UNIX, MINIX was written in the C programming language and was in-
tended to be easy to port to various computers. The initial implementation was
for the IBM PC. MINIX was subsequently ported to several other platforms. In
keeping with the ‘‘Small is Beautiful’’ philosophy, MINIX originally did not even
require a hard disk to run (in the mid-1980s hard disks were still an expensive
novelty). As MINIX grew in functionality and size, it eventually got to the point
that a hard disk was needed for PCs, but in keeping with the MINIX philosophy, a
200-MB partition is sufficient (for embedded applications, no hard disk is
required though). In contrast, even small Linux systems require 500-MB of disk
space, and several GB will be needed to install common applications.
     To the average user sitting at an IBM PC, running MINIX is similar to running
UNIX. All of the basic programs, such as cat, grep, ls, make, and the shell are
present and perform the same functions as their UNIX counterparts. Like the
operating system itself, all these utility programs have been rewritten completely
from scratch by the author, his students, and some other dedicated people, with no
AT&T or other proprietary code. Many other freely-distributable programs now
exist, and in many cases these have been successfully ported (recompiled) on
MINIX .
     MINIX continued to develop for a decade and MINIX 2 was released in 1997,
together with the second edition of this book, which described the new release.

The changes between versions 1 and 2 were substantial (e.g., from 16-bit real
mode on an 8088 using floppy disks to 32-bit protected mode on a 386 using a
hard disk) but evolutionary.
     Development continued slowly but systematically until 2004, when Tanen-
baum became convinced that software was getting too bloated and unreliable and
decided to pick up the slightly-dormant MINIX thread again. Together with his
students and programmers at the Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam, he produced
MINIX 3, a major redesign of the system, greatly restructuring the kernel, reducing
its size, and emphasizing modularity and reliability. The new version was in-
tended both for PCs and embedded systems, where compactness, modularity, and
reliability are crucial. While some people in the group called for a completely
new name, it was eventually decided to call it MINIX 3 since the name MINIX was
already well known. By way of analogy, when Apple abandoned it own operating
system, Mac OS 9 and replaced it with a variant of Berkeley UNIX, the name
chosen was Mac OS X rather than APPLIX or something like that. Similar funda-
mental changes have happened in the Windows family while retaining the Win-
dows name.
     The MINIX 3 kernel is well under 4000 lines of executable code, compared to
millions of executable lines of code for Windows, Linux, FreeBSD, and other
operating systems. Small kernel size is important because kernel bugs are far
more devastating than bugs in user-mode programs and more code means more
bugs. One careful study has shown that the number of detected bugs per 1000
executable lines of code varies from 6 to 16 (Basili and Perricone, 1984). The
actual number of bugs is probably much higher since the researchers could only
count reported bugs, not unreported bugs. Yet another study (Ostrand et al., 2004)
showed that even after more than a dozen releases, on the average 6% of all files
contained bugs that were later reported and after a certain point the bug level
tends to stabilize rather than go asymptotically to zero. This result is supported by
the fact that when a very simple, automated, model-checker was let loose on
stable versions of Linux and OpenBSD, it found hundreds of kernel bugs,
overwhelmingly in device drivers (Chou et al., 2001; and Engler et al., 2001).
This is the reason the device drivers were moved out of the kernel in MINIX 3;
they can do less damage in user mode.
     Throughout this book MINIX 3 will be used as an example. Most of the com-
ments about the MINIX 3 system calls, however (as opposed to comments about
the actual code), also apply to other UNIX systems. This remark should be kept in
mind when reading the text.
     A few words about Linux and its relationship to MINIX may possibly be of in-
terest to some readers. Shortly after MINIX was released, a USENET newsgroup,
comp.os.minix, was formed to discuss it. Within weeks, it had 40,000 subscribers,
most of whom wanted to add vast numbers of new features to MINIX to make it
bigger and better (well, at least bigger). Every day, several hundred of them
offered suggestions, ideas, and frequently snippets of source code. The author of
SEC. 1.2              HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS                               19
MINIX was able to successfully resist this onslaught for several years, in order to
keep MINIX clean enough for students to understand and small enough that it
could run on computers that students could afford. For people who thought little
of MS-DOS, the existence of MINIX (with source code) as an alternative was even
a reason to finally go out and buy a PC.
    One of these people was a Finnish student named Linus Torvalds. Torvalds
installed MINIX on his new PC and studied the source code carefully. Torvalds
wanted to read USENET newsgroups (such as comp.os.minix) on his own PC
rather than at his university, but some features he needed were lacking in MINIX,
so he wrote a program to do that, but soon discovered he needed a different termi-
nal driver, so he wrote that too. Then he wanted to download and save postings,
so he wrote a disk driver, and then a file system. By Aug. 1991 he had produced a
primitive kernel. On Aug. 25, 1991, he announced it on comp.os.minix. This
announcement attracted other people to help him, and on March 13, 1994 Linux
1.0 was released. Thus was Linux born.
    Linux has become one of the notable successes of the open source movement
(which MINIX helped start). Linux is challenging UNIX (and Windows) in many
environments, partly because commodity PCs which support Linux are now avail-
able with performance that rivals the proprietary RISC systems required by some
UNIX implementations. Other open source software, notably the Apache web
server and the MySQL database, work well with Linux in the commercial world.
Linux, Apache, MySQL, and the open source Perl and PHP programming lan-
guages are often used together on web servers and are sometimes referred to by
the acronym LAMP. For more on the history of Linux and open source software
see DiBona et al. (1999), Moody (2001), and Naughton (2000).

1.3 OPERATING SYSTEM CONCEPTS
    The interface between the operating system and the user programs is defined
by the set of ‘‘extended instructions’’ that the operating system provides. These
extended instructions have been traditionally known as system calls, although
they can be implemented in several ways. To really understand what operating
systems do, we must examine this interface closely. The calls available in the
interface vary from operating system to operating system (although the underlying
concepts tend to be similar).
    We are thus forced to make a choice between (1) vague generalities (‘‘operat-
ing systems have system calls for reading files’’) and (2) some specific system
(‘‘MINIX 3 has a read system call with three parameters: one to specify the file,
one to tell where the data are to be put, and one to tell how many bytes to read’’).
    We have chosen the latter approach. It’s more work that way, but it gives
more insight into what operating systems really do. In Sec. 1.4 we will look
closely at the basic system calls present in UNIX (including the various versions

of BSD), Linux, and MINIX 3. For simplicity’s sake, we will refer only to MINIX
3, but the corresponding UNIX and Linux system calls are based on POSIX in most
cases. Before we look at the actual system calls, however, it is worth taking a
bird’s-eye view of MINIX 3, to get a general feel for what an operating system is
all about. This overview applies equally well to UNIX and Linux, as mentioned
above.
     The MINIX 3 system calls fall roughly in two broad categories: those dealing
with processes and those dealing with the file system. We will now examine each
of these in turn.

1.3.1 Processes

     A key concept in MINIX 3, and in all operating systems, is the process. A
process is basically a program in execution. Associated with each process is its
address space, a list of memory locations from some minimum (usually 0) to
some maximum, which the process can read and write. The address space con-
tains the executable program, the program’s data, and its stack. Also associated
with each process is some set of registers, including the program counter, stack
pointer, and other hardware registers, and all the other information needed to run
the program.
     We will come back to the process concept in much more detail in Chap. 2, but
for the time being, the easiest way to get a good intuitive feel for a process is to
think about multiprogramming systems. Periodically, the operating system
decides to stop running one process and start running another, for example, be-
cause the first one has had more than its share of CPU time in the past second.
     When a process is suspended temporarily like this, it must later be restarted in
exactly the same state it had when it was stopped. This means that all information
about the process must be explicitly saved somewhere during the suspension. For
example, the process may have several files open for reading at once. Associated
with each of these files is a pointer giving the current position (i.e., the number of
the byte or record to be read next). When a process is temporarily suspended, all
these pointers must be saved so that a read call executed after the process is re-
started will read the proper data. In many operating systems, all the information
about each process, other than the contents of its own address space, is stored in
an operating system table called the process table, which is an array (or linked
list) of structures, one for each process currently in existence.
     Thus, a (suspended) process consists of its address space, usually called the
core image (in honor of the magnetic core memories used in days of yore), and its
process table entry, which contains its registers, among other things.
     The key process management system calls are those dealing with the creation
and termination of processes. Consider a typical example. A process called the
command interpreter or shell reads commands from a terminal. The user has
just typed a command requesting that a program be compiled. The shell must
SEC. 1.3                 OPERATING SYSTEM CONCEPTS                                    21
now create a new process that will run the compiler. When that process has fin-
ished the compilation, it executes a system call to terminate itself.
    On Windows and other operating systems that have a GUI, (double) clicking
on a desktop icon launches a program in much the same way as typing its name at
the command prompt. Although we will not discuss GUIs much, they are really
simple command interpreters.
    If a process can create one or more other processes (usually referred to as
child processes) and these processes in turn can create child processes, we
quickly arrive at the process tree structure of Fig. 1-5. Related processes that are
cooperating to get some job done often need to communicate with one another
and synchronize their activities. This communication is called interprocess com-
munication, and will be addressed in detail in Chap. 2.

                                                A

                                         B             C

                                  D      E      F

Figure 1-5. A process tree. Process A created two child processes, B and C.
        Process B created three child processes, D, E, and F.

     Other process system calls are available to request more memory (or release
unused memory), wait for a child process to terminate, and overlay its program
with a different one.
     Occasionally, there is a need to convey information to a running process that
is not sitting around waiting for it. For example, a process that is communicating
with another process on a different computer does so by sending messages to the
remote process over a network. To guard against the possibility that a message or
its reply is lost, the sender may request that its own operating system notify it af-
ter a specified number of seconds, so that it can retransmit the message if no
acknowledgement has been received yet. After setting this timer, the program
may continue doing other work.
     When the specified number of seconds has elapsed, the operating system sends
an alarm signal to the process. The signal causes the process to temporarily
suspend whatever it was doing, save its registers on the stack, and start running a
special signal handling procedure, for example, to retransmit a presumably lost
message. When the signal handler is done, the running process is restarted in the
state it was in just before the signal. Signals are the software analog of hardware
interrupts. They are generated by a variety of causes in addition to timers ex-
piring. Many traps detected by hardware, such as executing an illegal instruction
or using an invalid address, are also converted into signals to the guilty process.

    Each person authorized to use a MINIX 3 system is assigned a UID (User
IDentification) by the system administrator. Every process started has the UID of
the person who started it. A child process has the same UID as its parent. Users
can be members of groups, each of which has a GID (Group IDentification).
    One UID, called the superuser (in UNIX), has special power and may violate
many of the protection rules. In large installations, only the system administrator
knows the password needed to become superuser, but many of the ordinary users
(especially students) devote considerable effort to trying to find flaws in the sys-
tem that allow them to become superuser without the password.
    We will study processes, interprocess communication, and related issues in
Chap. 2.

1.3.2 Files

     The other broad category of system calls relates to the file system. As noted
before, a major function of the operating system is to hide the peculiarities of the
disks and other I/O devices and present the programmer with a nice, clean abstract
model of device-independent files. System calls are obviously needed to create
files, remove files, read files, and write files. Before a file can be read, it must be
opened, and after it has been read it should be closed, so calls are provided to do
these things.
     To provide a place to keep files, MINIX 3 has the concept of a directory as a
way of grouping files together. A student, for example, might have one directory
for each course he is taking (for the programs needed for that course), another
directory for his electronic mail, and still another directory for his World Wide
Web home page. System calls are then needed to create and remove directories.
Calls are also provided to put an existing file into a directory, and to remove a file
from a directory. Directory entries may be either files or other directories. This
model also gives rise to a hierarchy—the file system—as shown in Fig. 1-6.
     The process and file hierarchies both are organized as trees, but the similarity
stops there. Process hierarchies usually are not very deep (more than three levels
is unusual), whereas file hierarchies are commonly four, five, or even more levels
deep. Process hierarchies are typically short-lived, generally a few minutes at
most, whereas the directory hierarchy may exist for years. Ownership and protec-
tion also differ for processes and files. Typically, only a parent process may con-
trol or even access a child process, but mechanisms nearly always exist to allow
files and directories to be read by a wider group than just the owner.
     Every file within the directory hierarchy can be specified by giving its path
name from the top of the directory hierarchy, the root directory. Such absolute
path names consist of the list of directories that must be traversed from the root
directory to get to the file, with slashes separating the components. In Fig. 1-6,
the path for file CS101 is /Faculty/Prof.Brown/Courses/CS101. The leading slash
indicates that the path is absolute, that is, starting at the root directory. As an
SEC. 1.3                    OPERATING SYSTEM CONCEPTS                                        23

                                          Root directory

              Students                                                   Faculty

Robbert     Matty        Leo                  Prof.Brown         Prof.Green                  Prof.White

                            Courses                Papers     Grants      Committees

                    CS101      CS105                                    SOSP       COST-11
                                                     Files

Figure 1-6. A file system for a university department.

aside, in Windows, the backslash (\) character is used as the separator instead of
the slash (/) character, so the file path given above would be written as
\Faculty\Prof.Brown\Courses\CS101. Throughout this book we will use the UNIX
convention for paths.
    At every instant, each process has a current working directory, in which path
names not beginning with a slash are looked for. As an example, in Fig. 1-6, if
/Faculty/Prof.Brown were the working directory, then use of the path name
Courses/CS101 would yield the same file as the absolute path name given above.
Processes can change their working directory by issuing a system call specifying
the new working directory.
    Files and directories in MINIX 3 are protected by assigning each one an 11-bit
binary protection code. The protection code consists of three 3-bit fields: one for
the owner, one for other members of the owner’s group (users are divided into
groups by the system administrator), one for everyone else, and 2 bits we will dis-
cuss later. Each field has a bit for read access, a bit for write access, and a bit for
execute access. These 3 bits are known as the rwx bits. For example, the protec-
tion code rwxr-x--x means that the owner can read, write, or execute the file, other
group members can read or execute (but not write) the file, and everyone else can
execute (but not read or write) the file. For a directory (as opposed to a file), x

indicates search permission. A dash means that the corresponding permission is
absent (the bit is zero).
    Before a file can be read or written, it must be opened, at which time the per-
missions are checked. If access is permitted, the system returns a small integer
called a file descriptor to use in subsequent operations. If the access is prohi-
bited, an error code (−1) is returned.
    Another important concept in MINIX 3 is the mounted file system. Nearly all
personal computers have one or more CD-ROM drives into which CD-ROMs can
be inserted and removed. To provide a clean way to deal with removable media
(CD-ROMs, DVDs, floppies, Zip drives, etc.), MINIX 3 allows the file system on
a CD-ROM to be attached to the main tree. Consider the situation of Fig. 1-7(a).
Before the mount call, the root file system, on the hard disk, and a second file
system, on a CD-ROM, are separate and unrelated.
               Root                 Floppy                                Root

           a          b         x            y                        a          b

       c          d                                        c      d          x       y

                          (a)                                          (b)

Figure 1-7. (a) Before mounting, the files on drive 0 are not accessible. (b)
        After mounting, they are part of the file hierarchy.

    However, the file system on the CD-ROM cannot be used, because there is no
way to specify path names on it. MINIX 3 does not allow path names to be pre-
fixed by a drive name or number; that is precisely the kind of device dependence
that operating systems ought to eliminate. Instead, the mount system call allows
the file system on the CD-ROM to be attached to the root file system wherever the
program wants it to be. In Fig. 1-7(b) the file system on drive 0 has been mounted
on directory b, thus allowing access to files /b/x and /b/y. If directory b had origi-
nally contained any files they would not be accessible while the CD-ROM was
mounted, since /b would refer to the root directory of drive 0. (Not being able to
access these files is not as serious as it at first seems: file systems are nearly
always mounted on empty directories.) If a system contains multiple hard disks,
they can all be mounted into a single tree as well.
    Another important concept in MINIX 3 is the special file. Special files are
provided in order to make I/O devices look like files. That way, they can be read
and written using the same system calls as are used for reading and writing files.
Two kinds of special files exist: block special files and character special files.
Block special files are normally used to model devices that consist of a collection
SEC. 1.3                 OPERATING SYSTEM CONCEPTS                                  25
of randomly addressable blocks, such as disks. By opening a block special file
and reading, say, block 4, a program can directly access the fourth block on the
device, without regard to the structure of the file system contained on it. Simi-
larly, character special files are used to model printers, modems, and other
devices that accept or output a character stream. By convention, the special files
are kept in the /dev directory. For example, /dev/lp might be the line printer.
     The last feature we will discuss in this overview is one that relates to both
processes and files: pipes. A pipe is a sort of pseudofile that can be used to con-
nect two processes, as shown in Fig. 1-8. If processes A and B wish to talk using
a pipe, they must set it up in advance. When process A wants to send data to
process B, it writes on the pipe as though it were an output file. Process B can
read the data by reading from the pipe as though it were an input file. Thus, com-
munication between processes in MINIX 3 looks very much like ordinary file
reads and writes. Stronger yet, the only way a process can discover that the out-
put file it is writing on is not really a file, but a pipe, is by making a special sys-
tem call.
                               Process             Process
                                          Pipe
                                  A                   B

Figure 1-8. Two processes connected by a pipe.

1.3.3 The Shell

    The operating system is the code that carries out the system calls. Editors,
compilers, assemblers, linkers, and command interpreters definitely are not part of
the operating system, even though they are important and useful. At the risk of
confusing things somewhat, in this section we will look briefly at the MINIX 3
command interpreter, called the shell. Although it is not part of the operating sys-
tem, it makes heavy use of many operating system features and thus serves as a
good example of how the system calls can be used. It is also the primary interface
between a user sitting at his terminal and the operating system, unless the user is
using a graphical user interface. Many shells exist, including csh, ksh, zsh, and
bash. All of them support the functionality described below, which derives from
the original shell (sh).
    When any user logs in, a shell is started up. The shell has the terminal as
standard input and standard output. It starts out by typing the prompt, a character
such as a dollar sign, which tells the user that the shell is waiting to accept a com-
mand. If the user now types
    date

for example, the shell creates a child process and runs the date program as the
child. While the child process is running, the shell waits for it to terminate.
When the child finishes, the shell types the prompt again and tries to read the next
input line.
    The user can specify that standard output be redirected to a file, for example,
     date >file
Similarly, standard input can be redirected, as in
     sort <file1 >file2
which invokes the sort program with input taken from file1 and output sent to
file2.
     The output of one program can be used as the input for another program by
connecting them with a pipe. Thus
     cat file1 file2 file3 | sort >/dev/lp
invokes the cat program to concatenate three files and send the output to sort to
arrange all the lines in alphabetical order. The output of sort is redirected to the
file /dev/lp, typically the printer.
     If a user puts an ampersand after a command, the shell does not wait for it to
complete. Instead it just gives a prompt immediately. Consequently,
     cat file1 file2 file3 | sort >/dev/lp &
starts up the sort as a background job, allowing the user to continue working nor-
mally while the sort is going on. The shell has a number of other interesting fea-
tures, which we do not have space to discuss here. Most books for UNIX
beginners are useful for MINIX 3 users who want to learn more about using the
system. Examples are Ray and Ray (2003) and Herborth (2005).

1.4 SYSTEM CALLS
     Armed with our general knowledge of how MINIX 3 deals with processes and
files, we can now begin to look at the interface between the operating system and
its application programs, that is, the set of system calls. Although this discussion
specifically refers to POSIX (International Standard 9945-1), hence also to MINIX
3, UNIX, and Linux, most other modern operating systems have system calls that
perform the same functions, even if the details differ. Since the actual mechanics
of issuing a system call are highly machine dependent, and often must be ex-
pressed in assembly code, a procedure library is provided to make it possible to
make system calls from C programs.
     It is useful to keep the following in mind: any single-CPU computer can exe-
cute only one instruction at a time. If a process is running a user program in user
SEC. 1.4                          SYSTEM CALLS                                     27
mode and needs a system service, such as reading data from a file, it has to exe-
cute a trap or system call instruction to transfer control to the operating system.
The operating system then figures out what the calling process wants by inspect-
ing the parameters. Then it carries out the system call and returns control to the
instruction following the system call. In a sense, making a system call is like
making a special kind of procedure call, only system calls enter the kernel or other
privileged operating system components and procedure calls do not.
     To make the system call mechanism clearer, let us take a quick look at read.
It has three parameters: the first one specifying the file, the second one specifying
the buffer, and the third one specifying the number of bytes to read. A call to
read from a C program might look like this:
    count = read(fd, buffer, nbytes);
The system call (and the library procedure) return the number of bytes actually
read in count. This value is normally the same as nbytes, but may be smaller, if,
for example, end-of-file is encountered while reading.
     If the system call cannot be carried out, either due to an invalid parameter or a
disk error, count is set to −1, and the error number is put in a global variable,
errno. Programs should always check the results of a system call to see if an error
occurred.
     MINIX 3 has a total of 53 main system calls. These are listed in Fig. 1-9,
grouped for convenience in six categories. A few other calls exist, but they have
very specialized uses so we will omit them here. In the following sections we will
briefly examine each of the calls of Fig. 1-9 to see what it does. To a large extent,
the services offered by these calls determine most of what the operating system
has to do, since the resource management on personal computers is minimal (at
least compared to big machines with many users).
     This is a good place to point out that the mapping of POSIX procedure calls
onto system calls is not necessarily one-to-one. The POSIX standard specifies a
number of procedures that a conformant system must supply, but it does not
specify whether they are system calls, library calls, or something else. In some
cases, the POSIX procedures are supported as library routines in MINIX 3. In oth-
ers, several required procedures are only minor variations of one another, and one
system call handles all of them.

1.4.1 System Calls for Process Management

     The first group of calls in Fig. 1-9 deals with process management. Fork is a
good place to start the discussion. Fork is the only way to create a new process in
MINIX 3. It creates an exact duplicate of the original process, including all the
file descriptors, registers—everything. After the fork, the original process and the
copy (the parent and child) go their separate ways. All the variables have identi-
cal values at the time of the fork, but since the parent’s data are copied to create

                                                                                                   
    Process management                                                                                                                                  pid = fork()                             Create a child process identical to the parent          ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
      
                                                                                                                                                        pid =  waitpid(pid,    &statloc, opts)   Wait  for  a child   to terminate                           ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = wait(&status)                        Old version of waitpid                                        ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = execve(name, argv, envp)             Replace a process core image                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                        exit(status)                             Terminate process execution and return status                     ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                
                                                                                                                                                        size = brk(addr)                         Set the  size  of  the  data segment                                  ?
                                                                                                                                                        pid = getpid()                           Return the caller’s process id                                          ?
                                                                                                                                                        pid = getpgrp()                          Return the id of the caller’s process group                               ?
                                                                                                                                                        pid = setsid()                           Create a new session and return its proc. group id ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                        l = ptrace(req, pid, addr, data)         Used for debugging
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                           Signals                                                                                                                      s = sigaction(sig, &act, &oldact)        Define action to take on signals                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = sigreturn(&context)                  Return from a signal                                                              ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                               
                                                                                                                                                        s = sigprocmask(how,         &set, &old) Examine     or  change   the  signal   mask                                           ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = sigpending(set)                      Get the set of blocked signals                                                          ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = sigsuspend(sigmask)                  Replace the signal mask and suspend the process ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = kill(pid, sig)                       Send a signal to a process                                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                         
                                                                                                                                                        residual =  alarm(seconds)               Set the  alarm    clock                                                                       ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = pause()                              Suspend the caller until the next signal                                                        ?
                                            File Management                                                                                             fd = creat(name, mode)                   Obsolete way to create a new file                                                                 ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                        fd = mknod(name, mode, addr)             Create a regular, special, or directory i-node
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        fd = open(file, how, ...)                Open a file for reading, writing or both                                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = close(fd)                            Close an open file                                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                                        n = read(fd, buffer, nbytes)             Read data from a file into a buffer                                                                         ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        n =  write(fd,  buffer,  nbytes)         Write  data  from    a  buffer  into a  file                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                        pos = lseek(fd, offset, whence)          Move the file pointer                                                                                             ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = stat(name, &buf)                     Get a file’s status information                                                                                     ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = fstat(fd, &buf)                      Get a file’s status information                                                                                       ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                        fd =  dup(fd)                            Allocate   a new    file descriptor    for an open file                                                                   ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = pipe(&fd[0])                         Create a pipe                                                                                                               ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = ioctl(fd, request, argp)             Perform special operations on a file                                                                                          ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = access(name, amode)                  Check a file’s accessibility                                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                        s = rename(old,     new)                 Give  a file  a  new   name                                                                                                         ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = fcntl(fd,  cmd,  ...)                File locking    and   other  operations
                                                                               Dir. & File System Mgt.                                                  s = mkdir(name, mode)                    Create a new directory                                                                                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                        s = rmdir(name)                          Remove     an  empty    directory                                                                                                         ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = link(name1,    name2)                Create  a  new    entry, name2,     pointing  to name1                                                                                      ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = unlink(name)                         Remove a directory entry                                                                                                                      ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = mount(special, name, flag)           Mount a file system                                                                                                                             ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                        s = umount(special)                      Unmount     a  file system                                                                                                                          ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = sync()                               Flush  all cached     blocks  to  the  disk                                                                                                           ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = chdir(dirname)                       Change the working directory                                                                                                                            ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = chroot(dirname)                                                                                                                                                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Change the root directory
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                 Protection             s = chmod(name,       mode)              Change    a file’s  protection    bits                                                                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                                        uid = getuid()                           Get the caller’s uid                                                                                                                                            ?
                                                                                                                                                        gid = getgid()                           Get the caller’s gid                                                                                                                                              ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                        s = setuid(uid)                          Set the  caller’s   uid                                                                                                                                               ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = setgid(gid)                          Set the  caller’s   gid                                                                                                                                                 ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = chown(name, owner, group)            Change a file’s owner and group                                                                                                                                           ?
                                                                                                                                                        oldmask = umask(complmode)                                                                                                                                                                                           ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Change the mode mask
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                 Time Management        seconds  =  time(&seconds)               Get  the elapsed    time  since   Jan.  1, 1970                                                                                                                                 ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = stime(tp)                            Set the elapsed time since Jan. 1, 1970                                                                                                                                           ?
                                                                                                                                                        s = utime(file, timep)                   Set a file’s "last access" time                                                                                                                                                     ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        s = times(buffer)                        Get the user and system times used so far
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Figure 1-9. The main MINIX system calls. fd is a file descriptor; n is a byte count.
SEC. 1.4                           SYSTEM CALLS                                     29
the child, subsequent changes in one of them do not affect the other one. (The
program text, which is unchangeable, is shared between parent and child.) The
fork call returns a value, which is zero in the child and equal to the child’s process
identifier or PID in the parent. Using the returned PID, the two processes can see
which one is the parent process and which one is the child process.
     In most cases, after a fork, the child will need to execute different code from
the parent. Consider the shell. It reads a command from the terminal, forks off a
child process, waits for the child to execute the command, and then reads the next
command when the child terminates. To wait for the child to finish, the parent
executes a waitpid system call, which just waits until the child terminates (any
child if more than one exists). Waitpid can wait for a specific child, or for any old
child by setting the first parameter to −1. When waitpid completes, the address
pointed to by the second parameter, statloc, will be set to the child’s exit status
(normal or abnormal termination and exit value). Various options are also provi-
ded, specified by the third parameter. The waitpid call replaces the previous wait
call, which is now obsolete but is provided for reasons of backward compatibility.
     Now consider how fork is used by the shell. When a command is typed, the
shell forks off a new process. This child process must execute the user command.
It does this by using the execve system call, which causes its entire core image to
be replaced by the file named in its first parameter. (Actually, the system call
itself is exec, but several different library procedures call it with different parame-
ters and slightly different names. We will treat these as system calls here.) A
highly simplified shell illustrating the use of fork, waitpid , and execve is shown in
Fig. 1-10.

#define TRUE 1

while (TRUE) {                                      /* repeat forever */
     type ? prompt( );                              /* display prompt on the screen */
     read ? command(command, parameters);           /* read input from terminal */

     if (fork( ) != 0) {                            /* fork off child process */
           /* Parent code. */
           waitpid(−1, &status, 0);                 /* wait for child to exit */
     } else {
           /* Child code. */
           execve(command, parameters, 0);          /* execute command */
     }
}

Figure 1-10. A stripped-down shell. Throughout this book, TRUE is assumed
        to be defined as 1.

    In the most general case, execve has three parameters: the name of the file to
be executed, a pointer to the argument array, and a pointer to the environment

array. These will be described shortly. Various library routines, including execl,
execv, execle, and execve, are provided to allow the parameters to be omitted or
specified in various ways. Throughout this book we will use the name exec to
represent the system call invoked by all of these.
    Let us consider the case of a command such as
     cp file1 file2
used to copy file1 to file2. After the shell has forked, the child process locates and
executes the file cp and passes to it the names of the source and target files.
    The main program of cp (and main program of most other C programs) con-
tains the declaration
     main(argc, argv, envp)
where argc is a count of the number of items on the command line, including the
program name. For the example above, argc is 3.
     The second parameter, argv, is a pointer to an array. Element i of that array is
a pointer to the i-th string on the command line. In our example, argv[0] would
point to the string ‘‘cp’’, argv[1] would point to the string ‘‘file1’’, and argv[2]
would point to the string ‘‘file2’’.
     The third parameter of main, envp, is a pointer to the environment, an array of
strings containing assignments of the form name=value used to pass information
such as the terminal type and home directory name to a program. In Fig. 1-10, no
environment is passed to the child, so the third parameter of execve is a zero.
     If exec seems complicated, do not despair; it is (semantically) the most com-
plex of all the POSIX system calls. All the other ones are much simpler. As an
example of a simple one, consider exit, which processes should use when they are
finished executing. It has one parameter, the exit status (0 to 255), which is
returned to the parent via statloc in the waitpid system call. The low-order byte of
status contains the termination status, with 0 being normal termination and the
other values being various error conditions. The high-order byte contains the
child’s exit status (0 to 255). For example, if a parent process executes the state-
ment
     n = waitpid(−1, &statloc, options);
it will be suspended until some child process terminates. If the child exits with,
say, 4 as the parameter to exit, the parent will be awakened with n set to the
child’s PID and statloc set to 0x0400 (the C convention of prefixing hexadecimal
constants with 0x will be used throughout this book).
    Processes in MINIX 3 have their memory divided up into three segments: the
text segment (i.e., the program code), the data segment (i.e., the variables), and
the stack segment. The data segment grows upward and the stack grows down-
ward, as shown in Fig. 1-11. Between them is a gap of unused address space.
The stack grows into the gap automatically, as needed, but expansion of the data
SEC. 1.4                               SYSTEM CALLS                                           31
segment is done explicitly by using a system call, brk, which specifies the new
address where the data segment is to end. This address may be more than the
current value (data segment is growing) or less than the current value (data seg-
ment is shrinking). The parameter must, of course, be less than the stack pointer
or the data and stack segments would overlap, which is forbidden.
                                                  Address (hex)
                                                  FFFF
                                       Stack
                                       Gap

                                       Data
                                       Text

        also supported.
                                                  0000

Figure 1-11. Processes have three segments: text, data, and stack. In this exam-
        ple, all three are in one address space, but separate instruction and data space is

    As a convenience for programmers, a library routine sbrk is provided that also
changes the size of the data segment, only its parameter is the number of bytes to
add to the data segment (negative parameters make the data segment smaller). It
works by keeping track of the current size of the data segment, which is the value
returned by brk, computing the new size, and making a call asking for that number
of bytes. The brk and sbrk calls, however, are not defined by the POSIX standard.
Programmers are encouraged to use the malloc library procedure for dynamically
allocating storage, and the underlying implementation of malloc was not thought
to be a suitable subject for standardization since few programmers use it directly.
    The next process system call is also the simplest, getpid. It just returns the
caller’s PID. Remember that in fork, only the parent was given the child’s PID. If
the child wants to find out its own PID, it must use getpid. The getpgrp call
returns the PID of the caller’s process group. setsid creates a new session and
sets the process group’s PID to the caller’s. Sessions are related to an optional
feature of POSIX, job control, which is not supported by MINIX 3 and which will
not concern us further.
    The last process management system call, ptrace, is used by debugging pro-
grams to control the program being debugged. It allows the debugger to read and
write the controlled process’ memory and manage it in other ways.

1.4.2 System Calls for Signaling

    Although most forms of interprocess communication are planned, situations
exist in which unexpected communication is needed. For example, if a user ac-
cidently tells a text editor to list the entire contents of a very long file, and then

realizes the error, some way is needed to interrupt the editor. In MINIX 3, the user
can hit the CTRL-C key on the keyboard, which sends a signal to the editor. The
editor catches the signal and stops the print-out. Signals can also be used to report
certain traps detected by the hardware, such as illegal instruction or floating point
overflow. Timeouts are also implemented as signals.
     When a signal is sent to a process that has not announced its willingness to
accept that signal, the process is simply killed without further ado. To avoid this
fate, a process can use the sigaction system call to announce that it is prepared to
accept some signal type, and to provide the address of the signal handling pro-
cedure and a place to store the address of the current one. After a sigaction call, if
a signal of the relevant type is generated (e.g., by pressing CTRL-C), the state of
the process is pushed onto its own stack, and then the signal handler is called. It
may run for as long as it wants to and perform any system calls it wants to. In
practice, though, signal handlers are usually fairly short. When the signal han-
dling procedure is done, it calls sigreturn to continue where it left off before the
signal. The sigaction call replaces the older signal call, which is now provided as
a library procedure, however, for backward compatibility.
     Signals can be blocked in MINIX 3. A blocked signal is held pending until it
is unblocked. It is not delivered, but also not lost. The sigprocmask call allows a
process to define the set of blocked signals by presenting the kernel with a bitmap.
It is also possible for a process to ask for the set of signals currently pending but
not allowed to be delivered due to their being blocked. The sigpending call
returns this set as a bitmap. Finally, the sigsuspend call allows a process to atom-
ically set the bitmap of blocked signals and suspend itself.
     Instead of providing a function to catch a signal, the program may also specify
the constant SIG ? IGN to have all subsequent signals of the specified type
ignored, or SIG ? DFL to restore the default action of the signal when it occurs.
The default action is either to kill the process or ignore the signal, depending upon
the signal. As an example of how SIG ? IGN is used, consider what happens when
the shell forks off a background process as a result of
      command &
It would be undesirable for a SIGINT signal (generated by pressing CTRL-C) to
affect the background process, so after the fork but before the exec, the shell does
      sigaction(SIGINT, SIG ? IGN, NULL);
and
      sigaction(SIGQUIT, SIG ? IGN, NULL);
to disable the SIGINT and SIGQUIT signals. (SIGQUIT is generated by CTRL-\;
it is the same as SIGINT generated by CTRL-C except that if it is not caught or
ignored it makes a core dump of the process killed.) For foreground processes (no
ampersand), these signals are not ignored.
SEC. 1.4                          SYSTEM CALLS                                     33
     Hitting CTRL-C is not the only way to send a signal. The kill system call
allows a process to signal another process (provided they have the same UID—
unrelated processes cannot signal each other). Getting back to the example of
background processes used above, suppose a background process is started up, but
later it is decided that the process should be terminated. SIGINT and SIGQUIT
have been disabled, so something else is needed. The solution is to use the kill
program, which uses the kill system call to send a signal to any process. By send-
ing signal 9 (SIGKILL), to a background process, that process can be killed. SIG-
KILL cannot be caught or ignored.
     For many real-time applications, a process needs to be interrupted after a spe-
cific time interval to do something, such as to retransmit a potentially lost packet
over an unreliable communication line. To handle this situation, the alarm system
call has been provided. The parameter specifies an interval, in seconds, after
which a SIGALRM signal is sent to the process. A process may only have one
alarm outstanding at any instant. If an alarm call is made with a parameter of 10
seconds, and then 3 seconds later another alarm call is made with a parameter of
20 seconds, only one signal will be generated, 20 seconds after the second call.
The first signal is canceled by the second call to alarm. If the parameter to alarm
is zero, any pending alarm signal is canceled. If an alarm signal is not caught, the
default action is taken and the signaled process is killed.
     It sometimes occurs that a process has nothing to do until a signal arrives. For
example, consider a computer-aided-instruction program that is testing reading
speed and comprehension. It displays some text on the screen and then calls
alarm to signal it after 30 seconds. While the student is reading the text, the pro-
gram has nothing to do. It could sit in a tight loop doing nothing, but that would
waste CPU time that another process or user might need. A better idea is to use
pause, which tells MINIX 3 to suspend the process until the next signal.

1.4.3 System Calls for File Management

    Many system calls relate to the file system. In this section we will look at
calls that operate on individual files; in the next one we will examine those that
involve directories or the file system as a whole. To create a new file, the creat
call is used (why the call is creat and not create has been lost in the mists of
time). Its parameters provide the name of the file and the protection mode. Thus
    fd = creat(′′abc′′, 0751);
creates a file called abc with mode 0751 octal (in C, a leading zero means that a
constant is in octal). The low-order 9 bits of 0751 specify the rwx bits for the
owner (7 means read-write-execute permission), his group (5 means read-
execute), and others (1 means execute only).
    Creat not only creates a new file but also opens it for writing, regardless of
the file’s mode. The file descriptor returned, fd, can be used to write the file. If a

creat is done on an existing file, that file is truncated to length 0, provided, of
course, that the permissions are all right. The creat call is obsolete, as open can
now create new files, but it has been included for backward compatibility.
   Special files are created using mknod rather than creat. A typical call is
     fd = mknod(′′/dev/ttyc2′′, 020744, 0x0402);
which creates a file named /dev/ttyc2 (the usual name for console 2) and gives it
mode 020744 octal (a character special file with protection bits rwxr--r--). The
third parameter contains the major device (4) in the high-order byte and the minor
device (2) in the low-order byte. The major device could have been anything, but
a file named /dev/ttyc2 ought to be minor device 2. Calls to mknod fail unless the
caller is the superuser.
     To read or write an existing file, the file must first be opened using open.
This call specifies the file name to be opened, either as an absolute path name or
relative to the working directory, and a code of O ? RDONLY, O ? WRONLY, or
O ? RDWR, meaning open for reading, writing, or both. The file descriptor
returned can then be used for reading or writing. Afterward, the file can be closed
by close, which makes the file descriptor available for reuse on a subsequent creat
or open.
     The most heavily used calls are undoubtedly read and write. We saw read
earlier; write has the same parameters.
     Although most programs read and write files sequentially, for some applica-
tions programs need to be able to access any part of a file at random. Associated
with each file is a pointer that indicates the current position in the file. When
reading (writing) sequentially, it normally points to the next byte to be read (writ-
ten). The lseek call changes the value of the position pointer, so that subsequent
calls to read or write can begin anywhere in the file, or even beyond the end.
     lseek has three parameters: the first is the file descriptor for the file, the
second is a file position, and the third tells whether the file position is relative to
the beginning of the file, the current position, or the end of the file. The value
returned by lseek is the absolute position in the file after changing the pointer.
     For each file, MINIX 3 keeps track of the file mode (regular file, special file,
directory, and so on), size, time of last modification, and other information. Pro-
grams can ask to see this information via the stat and fstat system calls. These
differ only in that the former specifies the file by name, whereas the latter takes a
file descriptor, making it useful for open files, especially standard input and stan-
dard output, whose names may not be known. Both calls provide as the second
parameter a pointer to a structure where the information is to be put. The struc-
ture is shown in Fig. 1-12.
     When manipulating file descriptors, the dup call is occasionally helpful. Con-
sider, for example, a program that needs to close standard output (file descriptor
1), substitute another file as standard output, call a function that writes some out-
put onto standard output, and then restore the original situation. Just closing file
SEC. 1.4                              SYSTEM CALLS                                          35
struct stat {
   short st ? dev;                             /* device where i-node belongs */
   unsigned short st ? ino;                    /* i-node number */
   unsigned short st ? mode;                   /* mode word */
   short st ? nlink;                           /* number of links */
   short st ? uid;                             /* user id */
   short st ? gid;                             /* group id */
   short st ? rdev;                            /* major/minor device for special files */
   long st ? size;                             /* file size */
   long st ? atime;                            /* time of last access */
   long st ? mtime;                            /* time of last modification */
   long st ? ctime;                            /* time of last change to i-node */
};

Figure 1-12. The structure used to return information for the stat and fstat sys-
        tem calls. In the actual code, symbolic names are used for some of the types.

descriptor 1 and then opening a new file will make the new file standard output
(assuming standard input, file descriptor 0, is in use), but it will be impossible to
restore the original situation later.
    The solution is first to execute the statement
    fd = dup(1);
which uses the dup system call to allocate a new file descriptor, fd, and arrange
for it to correspond to the same file as standard output. Then standard output can
be closed and a new file opened and used. When it is time to restore the original
situation, file descriptor 1 can be closed, and then
    n = dup(fd);
executed to assign the lowest file descriptor, namely, 1, to the same file as fd.
Finally, fd can be closed and we are back where we started.
    The dup call has a variant that allows an arbitrary unassigned file descriptor to
be made to refer to a given open file. It is called by
    dup2(fd, fd2);
where fd refers to an open file and fd2 is the unassigned file descriptor that is to be
made to refer to the same file as fd. Thus if fd refers to standard input (file
descriptor 0) and fd2 is 4, after the call, file descriptors 0 and 4 will both refer to
standard input.
    Interprocess communication in MINIX 3 uses pipes, as described earlier.
When a user types
    cat file1 file2 | sort
the shell creates a pipe and arranges for standard output of the first process to
write to the pipe, so standard input of the second process can read from it. The

pipe system call creates a pipe and returns two file descriptors, one for writing and
one for reading. The call is
     pipe(&fd[0]);
where fd is an array of two integers and fd[0] is the file descriptor for reading and
fd[1] is the one for writing. Typically, a fork comes next, and the parent closes
the file descriptor for reading and the child closes the file descriptor for writing
(or vice versa), so when they are done, one process can read the pipe and the other
can write on it.
     Figure 1-13 depicts a skeleton procedure that creates two processes, with the
output of the first one piped into the second one. (A more realistic example would
do error checking and handle arguments.) First a pipe is created, and then the pro-
cedure forks, with the parent eventually becoming the first process in the pipeline
and the child process becoming the second one. Since the files to be executed,
process1 and process2, do not know that they are part of a pipeline, it is essential
that the file descriptors be manipulated so that the first process’ standard output be
the pipe and the second one’s standard input be the pipe. The parent first closes
off the file descriptor for reading from the pipe. Then it closes standard output
and does a DUP call that allows file descriptor 1 to write on the pipe. It is impor-
tant to realize that dup always returns the lowest available file descriptor, in this
case, 1. Then the program closes the other pipe file descriptor.
     After the exec call, the process started will have file descriptors 0 and 2 be
unchanged, and file descriptor 1 for writing on the pipe. The child code is analo-
gous. The parameter to execl is repeated because the first one is the file to be exe-
cuted and the second one is the first parameter, which most programs expect to be
the file name.
     The next system call, ioctl, is potentially applicable to all special files. It is,
for instance, used by block device drivers like the SCSI driver to control tape and
CD-ROM devices. Its main use, however, is with special character files, primarily
terminals. POSIX defines a number of functions which the library translates into
ioctl calls. The tcgetattr and tcsetattr library functions use ioctl to change the
characters used for correcting typing errors on the terminal, changing the termi-
nal mode, and so forth.
     Traditionally, there are three terminal modes, cooked, raw, and cbreak.
Cooked mode is the normal terminal mode, in which the erase and kill characters
work normally, CTRL-S and CTRL-Q can be used for stopping and starting termi-
nal output, CTRL-D means end of file, CTRL-C generates an interrupt signal, and
CTRL-\ generates a quit signal to force a core dump.
     In raw mode, all of these functions are disabled; consequently, every charac-
ter is passed directly to the program with no special processing. Furthermore, in
raw mode, a read from the terminal will give the program any characters that have
been typed, even a partial line, rather than waiting for a complete line to be typed,
as in cooked mode. Screen editors often use this mode.
SEC. 1.4                              SYSTEM CALLS                                          37
#define STD ? INPUT 0                           /* file descriptor for standard input */
#define STD ? OUTPUT 1                          /* file descriptor for standard output */
pipeline(process1, process2)
char *process1, *process2;                      /* pointers to program names */
{
  int fd[2];

    pipe(&fd[0]);                            /* create a pipe */
    if (fork() != 0) {
          /* The parent process executes these statements. */
          close(fd[0]);                      /* process 1 does not need to read from pipe */
          close(STD ? OUTPUT);               /* prepare for new standard output */
          dup(fd[1]);                        /* set standard output to fd[1] */
          close(fd[1]);                      /* this file descriptor not needed any more */
          execl(process1, process1, 0);
    } else {
          /* The child process executes these statements. */
          close(fd[1]);                      /* process 2 does not need to write to pipe */
          close(STD ? INPUT);                /* prepare for new standard input */
          dup(fd[0]);                        /* set standard input to fd[0] */
          close(fd[0]);                      /* this file descriptor not needed any more */
          execl(process2, process2, 0);
    }
}
Figure 1-13. A skeleton for setting up a two-process pipeline.

     Cbreak mode is in between. The erase and kill characters for editing are dis-
abled, as is CTRL-D, but CTRL-S, CTRL-Q, CTRL-C, and CTRL-\ are enabled.
Like raw mode, partial lines can be returned to programs (if intraline editing is
turned off there is no need to wait until a whole line has been received—the user
cannot change his mind and delete it, as he can in cooked mode).
     POSIX does not use the terms cooked, raw, and cbreak. In POSIX terminology
canonical mode corresponds to cooked mode. In this mode there are eleven spe-
cial characters defined, and input is by lines. In noncanonical mode a minimum
number of characters to accept and a time, specified in units of 1/10th of a second,
determine how a read will be satisfied. Under POSIX there is a great deal of flexi-
bility, and various flags can be set to make noncanonical mode behave like either
cbreak or raw mode. The older terms are more descriptive, and we will continue
to use them informally.
     Ioctl has three parameters, for example a call to tcsetattr to set terminal
parameters will result in
      ioctl(fd, TCSETS, &termios);
The first parameter specifies a file, the second one specifies an operation, and the
third one is the address of the POSIX structure that contains flags and the array of
control characters. Other operation codes instruct the system to postpone the

changes until all output has been sent, cause unread input to be discarded, and re-
turn the current values.
    The access system call is used to determine whether a certain file access is
permitted by the protection system. It is needed because some programs can run
using a different user’s UID. This SETUID mechanism will be described later.
    The rename system call is used to give a file a new name. The parameters
specify the old and new names.
    Finally, the fcntl call is used to control files, somewhat analogous to ioctl (i.e.,
both of them are horrible hacks). It has several options, the most important of
which is for advisory file locking. Using fcntl, it is possible for a process to lock
and unlock parts of files and test part of a file to see if it is locked. The call does
not enforce any lock semantics. Programs must do this themselves.

1.4.4 System Calls for Directory Management

    In this section we will look at some system calls that relate more to directories
or the file system as a whole, rather than just to one specific file as in the previous
section. The first two calls, mkdir and rmdir, create and remove empty directories,
respectively. The next call is link. Its purpose is to allow the same file to appear
under two or more names, often in different directories. A typical use is to allow
several members of the same programming team to share a common file, with
each of them having the file appear in his own directory, possibly under different
names. Sharing a file is not the same as giving every team member a private
copy, because having a shared file means that changes that any member of the
team makes are instantly visible to the other members—there is only one file.
When copies are made of a file, subsequent changes made to one copy do not
affect the other ones.
    To see how link works, consider the situation of Fig. 1-14(a). Here are two
users, ast and jim, each having their own directories with some files. If ast now
executes a program containing the system call
     link(′′/usr/jim/memo′′, ′′/usr/ast/note′′);
the file memo in jim’s directory is now entered into ast’s directory under the name
note. Thereafter, /usr/jim/memo and /usr/ast/note refer to the same file.
    Understanding how link works will probably make it clearer what it does.
Every file in UNIX has a unique number, its i-number, that identifies it. This i-
number is an index into a table of i-nodes, one per file, telling who owns the file,
where its disk blocks are, and so on. A directory is simply a file containing a set
of (i-number, ASCII name) pairs. In the first versions of UNIX, each directory
entry was 16 bytes—2 bytes for the i-number and 14 bytes for the name. A more
complicated structure is needed to support long file names, but conceptually a
directory is still a set of (i-number, ASCII name) pairs. In Fig. 1-14, mail has i-
number 16, and so on. What link does is simply create a new directory entry with
SEC. 1.4                                      SYSTEM CALLS                                     39

              /usr/ast           /usr/jim                      /usr/ast           /usr/jim
           16 mail              31   bin                     16   mail           31   bin
           81 games             70   memo                    81   games          70   memo
           40 test              59   f.c.                    40   test           59   f.c.
                                38   prog1                   70   note           38   prog1

                          (a)                                              (b)

Figure 1-14. (a) Two directories before linking /usr/jim/memo to ast’s directory.
        (b) The same directories after linking.

a (possibly new) name, using the i-number of an existing file. In Fig. 1-14(b), two
entries have the same i-number (70) and thus refer to the same file. If either one
is later removed, using the unlink system call, the other one remains. If both are
removed, UNIX sees that no entries to the file exist (a field in the i-node keeps
track of the number of directory entries pointing to the file), so the file is removed
from the disk.
     As we have mentioned earlier, the mount system call allows two file systems
to be merged into one. A common situation is to have the root file system con-
taining the binary (executable) versions of the common commands and other
heavily used files, on a hard disk. The user can then insert a CD-ROM with files
to be read into the CD-ROM drive.
     By executing the mount system call, the CD-ROM file system can be attached
to the root file system, as shown in Fig. 1-15. A typical statement in C to perform
the mount is
    mount(′′/dev/cdrom0′′, ′′/mnt′′, 0);
where the first parameter is the name of a block special file for CD-ROM drive 0,
the second parameter is the place in the tree where it is to be mounted, and the
third one tells whether the file system is to be mounted read-write or read-only.

        bin     dev      lib    mnt     usr              bin      dev     lib            usr

                         (a)                                               (b)

Figure 1-15. (a) File system before the mount. (b) File system after the mount.

     After the mount call, a file on CD-ROM drive 0 can be accessed by just using
its path from the root directory or the working directory, without regard to which
drive it is on. In fact, second, third, and fourth drives can also be mounted

anywhere in the tree. The mount call makes it possible to integrate removable
media into a single integrated file hierarchy, without having to worry about which
device a file is on. Although this example involves CD-ROMs, hard disks or por-
tions of hard disks (often called partitions or minor devices) can also be
mounted this way. When a file system is no longer needed, it can be unmounted
with the umount system call.
     MINIX 3 maintains a block cache cache of recently used blocks in main
memory to avoid having to read them from the disk if they are used again quickly.
If a block in the cache is modified (by a write on a file) and the system crashes
before the modified block is written out to disk, the file system will be damaged.
To limit the potential damage, it is important to flush the cache periodically, so
that the amount of data lost by a crash will be small. The system call sync tells
MINIX 3 to write out all the cache blocks that have been modified since being read
in. When MINIX 3 is started up, a program called update is started as a back-
ground process to do a sync every 30 seconds, to keep flushing the cache.
     Two other calls that relate to directories are chdir and chroot. The former
changes the working directory and the latter changes the root directory. After the
call
     chdir(′′/usr/ast/test′′);
an open on the file xyz will open /usr/ast/test/xyz. chroot works in an analogous
way. Once a process has told the system to change its root directory, all absolute
path names (path names beginning with a ‘‘/’’) will start at the new root. Why
would you want to do that? For security—server programs for protocols such as
FTP (File Transfer Protocol) and HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol) do this so
remote users of these services can access only the portions of a file system below
the new root. Only superusers may execute chroot, and even superusers do not do
it very often.

1.4.5 System Calls for Protection

     In MINIX 3 every file has an 11-bit mode used for protection. Nine of these
bits are the read-write-execute bits for the owner, group, and others. The chmod
system call makes it possible to change the mode of a file. For example, to make
a file read-only by everyone except the owner, one could execute
     chmod(′′file′′, 0644);
    The other two protection bits, 02000 and 04000, are the SETGID (set-group-
id) and SETUID (set-user-id) bits, respectively. When any user executes a pro-
gram with the SETUID bit on, for the duration of that process the user’s effective
UID is changed to that of the file’s owner. This feature is heavily used to allow
users to execute programs that perform superuser only functions, such as creating
SEC. 1.4                          SYSTEM CALLS                                     41
directories. Creating a directory uses mknod, which is for the superuser only. By
arranging for the mkdir program to be owned by the superuser and have mode
04755, ordinary users can be given the power to execute mknod but in a highly
restricted way.
     When a process executes a file that has the SETUID or SETGID bit on in its
mode, it acquires an effective UID or GID different from its real UID or GID. It
is sometimes important for a process to find out what its real and effective UID or
GID is. The system calls getuid and getgid have been provided to supply this
information. Each call returns both the real and effective UID or GID, so four
library routines are needed to extract the proper information: getuid, getgid,
geteuid, and getegid. The first two get the real UID/GID, and the last two the
effective ones.
     Ordinary users cannot change their UID, except by executing programs with
the SETUID bit on, but the superuser has another possibility: the setuid system
call, which sets both the effective and real UIDs. setgid sets both GIDs. The
superuser can also change the owner of a file with the chown system call. In
short, the superuser has plenty of opportunity for violating all the protection rules,
which explains why so many students devote so much of their time to trying to
become superuser.
     The last two system calls in this category can be executed by ordinary user
processes. The first one, umask, sets an internal bit mask within the system,
which is used to mask off mode bits when a file is created. After the call
    umask(022);
the mode supplied by creat and mknod will have the 022 bits masked off before
being used. Thus the call
    creat(′′file′′, 0777);
will set the mode to 0755 rather than 0777. Since the bit mask is inherited by
child processes, if the shell does a umask just after login, none of the user’s
processes in that session will accidently create files that other people can write on.
     When a program owned by the root has the SETUID bit on, it can access any
file, because its effective UID is the superuser. Frequently it is useful for the pro-
gram to know if the person who called the program has permission to access a
given file. If the program just tries the access, it will always succeed, and thus
learn nothing.
     What is needed is a way to see if the access is permitted for the real UID.
The access system call provides a way to find out. The mode parameter is 4 to
check for read access, 2 for write access, and 1 for execute access. Combinations
of these values are also allowed. For example, with mode equal to 6, the call
returns 0 if both read and write access are allowed for the real ID; otherwise −1 is
returned. With mode equal to 0, a check is made to see if the file exists and the
directories leading up to it can be searched.

     Although the protection mechanisms of all UNIX-like operating systems are
generally similar, there are some differences and inconsistencies that lead to secu-
rity vulnerabilities. See Chen et al. (2002) for a discussion.

1.4.6 System Calls for Time Management

     MINIX 3 has four system calls that involve the time-of-day clock. Time just
returns the current time in seconds, with 0 corresponding to Jan. 1, 1970 at mid-
night (just as the day was starting, not ending). Of course, the system clock must
be set at some point in order to allow it to be read later, so stime has been pro-
vided to let the clock be set (by the superuser). The third time call is utime, which
allows the owner of a file (or the superuser) to change the time stored in a file’s
i-node. Application of this system call is fairly limited, but a few programs need
it, for example, touch, which sets the file’s time to the current time.
     Finally, we have times, which returns the accounting information to a process,
so it can see how much CPU time it has used directly, and how much CPU time
the system itself has expended on its behalf (handling its system calls). The total
user and system times used by all of its children combined are also returned.

1.5 OPERATING SYSTEM STRUCTURE

    Now that we have seen what operating systems look like on the outside (i.e,
the programmer’s interface), it is time to take a look inside. In the following sec-
tions, we will examine five different structures that have been tried, in order to get
some idea of the spectrum of possibilities. These are by no means exhaustive, but
they give an idea of some designs that have been tried in practice. The five de-
signs are monolithic systems, layered systems, virtual machines, exokernels, and
client-server systems.

1.5.1 Monolithic Systems

    By far the most common organization, this approach might well be subtitled
‘‘The Big Mess.’’ The structure is that there is no structure. The operating system
is written as a collection of procedures, each of which can call any of the other
ones whenever it needs to. When this technique is used, each procedure in the
system has a well-defined interface in terms of parameters and results, and each
one is free to call any other one, if the latter provides some useful computation
that the former needs.
     To construct the actual object program of the operating system when this
approach is used, one first compiles all the individual procedures, or files contain-
ing the procedures, and then binds them all together into a single object file using
SEC. 1.5                     OPERATING SYSTEM STRUCTURE                                         43
the system linker. In terms of information hiding, there is essentially none—every
procedure is visible to every other procedure (as opposed to a structure containing
modules or packages, in which much of the information is hidden away inside
modules, and only the officially designated entry points can be called from out-
side the module).
    Even in monolithic systems, however, it is possible to have at least a little
structure. The services (system calls) provided by the operating system are
requested by putting the parameters in well-defined places, such as in registers or
on the stack, and then executing a special trap instruction known as a kernel call
or supervisor call.
    This instruction switches the machine from user mode to kernel mode and
transfers control to the operating system. (Most CPUs have two modes: kernel
mode, for the operating system, in which all instructions are allowed; and user
mode, for user programs, in which I/O and certain other instructions are not
allowed.)
               Address
           0xFFFFFFFF

                                      Return to caller
                                                                                 Library
                                      Trap to the kernel                         procedure
                                    5 Put code for read in register              read

                                                                  10
                                    4

            User space
                                      Increment SP       11
                                      Call read
                                    3 Push fd                                    User program
                                    2 Push &buffer                               calling read
                                    1 Push nbytes

                               6                                         9

         Kernel space                       7             8   Sys call
                                Dispatch
    (Operating system)                                        handler

                         0

Figure 1-16. The 11 steps in making the system call read(fd, buffer, nbytes).

    This is a good time to look at how system calls are performed. Recall that the
read call is used like this:
    count = read(fd, buffer, nbytes);

In preparation for calling the read library procedure, which actually makes the
read system call, the calling program first pushes the parameters onto the stack, as
shown in steps 1–3 in Fig. 1-16. C and C++ compilers push the parameters onto
the stack in reverse order for historical reasons (having to do with making the first
parameter to printf, the format string, appear on top of the stack). The first and
third parameters are called by value, but the second parameter is passed by refer-
ence, meaning that the address of the buffer (indicated by &) is passed, not the
contents of the buffer. Then comes the actual call to the library procedure (step
4). This instruction is the normal procedure call instruction used to call all pro-
cedures.
     The library procedure, possibly written in assembly language, typically puts
the system call number in a place where the operating system expects it, such as a
register (step 5). Then it executes a TRAP instruction to switch from user mode to
kernel mode and start execution at a fixed address within the kernel (step 6). The
kernel code that starts examines the system call number and then dispatches to the
correct system call handler, usually via a table of pointers to system call handlers
indexed on system call number (step 7). At that point the system call handler runs
(step 8). Once the system call handler has completed its work, control may be
returned to the user-space library procedure at the instruction following the TRAP
instruction (step 9). This procedure then returns to the user program in the usual
way procedure calls return (step 10).
     To finish the job, the user program has to clean up the stack, as it does after
any procedure call (step 11). Assuming the stack grows downward, as it often
does, the compiled code increments the stack pointer exactly enough to remove
the parameters pushed before the call to read. The program is now free to do
whatever it wants to do next.
     In step 9 above, we said ‘‘may be returned to the user-space library pro-
cedure’’ for good reason. The system call may block the caller, preventing it from
continuing. For example, if it is trying to read from the keyboard and nothing has
been typed yet, the caller has to be blocked. In this case, the operating system
will look around to see if some other process can be run next. Later, when the
desired input is available, this process will get the attention of the system and
steps 9–11 will occur.
     This organization suggests a basic structure for the operating system:
     1. A main program that invokes the requested service procedure.
     2. A set of service procedures that carry out the system calls.
     3. A set of utility procedures that help the service procedures.
In this model, for each system call there is one service procedure that takes care
of it. The utility procedures do things that are needed by several service pro-
cedures, such as fetching data from user programs. This division of the proce-
dures into three layers is shown in Fig. 1-17.
SEC. 1.5                      OPERATING SYSTEM STRUCTURE                                                                                 45

                                                                                                                                Main
                                                                                                                             procedure

                                                                                                                           Service
                                                                                                                         procedures

                                                                                                                            Utility
                                                                                                                         procedures

Figure 1-17. A simple structuring model for a monolithic system.

1.5.2 Layered Systems

    A generalization of the approach of Fig. 1-17 is to organize the operating sys-
tem as a hierarchy of layers, each one constructed upon the one below it. The first
system constructed in this way was the THE system built at the Technische
Hogeschool Eindhoven in the Netherlands by E. W. Dijkstra (1968) and his stu-
dents. The THE system was a simple batch system for a Dutch computer, the
Electrologica X8, which had 32K of 27-bit words (bits were expensive back then).
    The system had 6 layers, as shown in Fig. 1-18. Layer 0 dealt with allocation
of the processor, switching between processes when interrupts occurred or timers
expired. Above layer 0, the system consisted of sequential processes, each of
which could be programmed without having to worry about the fact that multiple
processes were running on a single processor. In other words, layer 0 provided
the basic multiprogramming of the CPU.
                                                                  
                                                                                                        
                   Layer                                                   Function
                                                                                  
                                                                                                          
                                                                    
                                    5        ? The operator                                                ?
                                    4         ? User programs                                                ?
                                                                     
                                                                                                                
                                    3            ? Input/output management
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                    
                                    2                      Operator-process  communication
                                                                              
                                                                                                                      
                                    1                 ? Memory and drum management
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                          
                                    0                    ? Processor allocation and multiprogramming ?
                                                                                  

Figure 1-18. Structure of the THE operating system.
    Layer 1 did the memory management. It allocated space for processes in
main memory and on a 512K word drum used for holding parts of processes
(pages) for which there was no room in main memory. Above layer 1, processes
did not have to worry about whether they were in memory or on the drum; the

layer 1 software took care of making sure pages were brought into memory when-
ever they were needed.
    Layer 2 handled communication between each process and the operator con-
sole. Above this layer each process effectively had its own operator console.
Layer 3 took care of managing the I/O devices and buffering the information
streams to and from them. Above layer 3 each process could deal with abstract
I/O devices with nice properties, instead of real devices with many peculiarities.
Layer 4 was where the user programs were found. They did not have to worry
about process, memory, console, or I/O management. The system operator proc-
ess was located in layer 5.
    A further generalization of the layering concept was present in the MULTICS
system. Instead of layers, MULTICS was organized as a series of concentric rings,
with the inner ones being more privileged than the outer ones. When a procedure
in an outer ring wanted to call a procedure in an inner ring, it had to make the
equivalent of a system call, that is, a TRAP instruction whose parameters were
carefully checked for validity before allowing the call to proceed. Although the
entire operating system was part of the address space of each user process in
MULTICS , the hardware made it possible to designate individual procedures
(memory segments, actually) as protected against reading, writing, or executing.
    Whereas the THE layering scheme was really only a design aid, because all
the parts of the system were ultimately linked together into a single object pro-
gram, in MULTICS , the ring mechanism was very much present at run time and
enforced by the hardware. The advantage of the ring mechanism is that it can
easily be extended to structure user subsystems. For example, a professor could
write a program to test and grade student programs and run this program in ring n,
with the student programs running in ring n + 1 so that they could not change their
grades. The Pentium hardware supports the MULTICS ring structure, but no major
operating system uses it at present.

1.5.3 Virtual Machines

    The initial releases of OS/360 were strictly batch systems. Nevertheless, many
360 users wanted to have timesharing, so various groups, both inside and outside
IBM decided to write timesharing systems for it. The official IBM timesharing
system, TSS/360, was delivered late, and when it finally arrived it was so big and
slow that few sites converted over to it. It was eventually abandoned after its
development had consumed some $50 million (Graham, 1970). But a group at
IBM’s Scientific Center in Cambridge, Massachusetts, produced a radically dif-
ferent system that IBM eventually accepted as a product, and which is now widely
used on its mainframes.
    This system, originally called CP/CMS and later renamed VM/370 (Seawright
and MacKinnon, 1979), was based on a very astute observation: a timesharing
system provides (1) multiprogramming and (2) an extended machine with a more
SEC. 1.5                      OPERATING SYSTEM STRUCTURE                                         47
convenient interface than the bare hardware. The essence of VM/370 is to com-
pletely separate these two functions.
     The heart of the system, known as the virtual machine monitor, runs on the
bare hardware and does the multiprogramming, providing not one, but several vir-
tual machines to the next layer up, as shown in Fig. 1-19. However, unlike all
other operating systems, these virtual machines are not extended machines, with
files and other nice features. Instead, they are exact copies of the bare hardware,
including kernel/user mode, I/O, interrupts, and everything else the real machine
has.
                                               Virtual 370s

                                                                             System calls here
    I/O instructions here          CMS            CMS            CMS         Trap here
              Trap here                          VM/370
                                           370 Bare hardware

Figure 1-19. The structure of VM/370 with CMS.
    Because each virtual machine is identical to the true hardware, each one can
run any operating system that will run directly on the bare hardware. Different
virtual machines can, and frequently do, run different operating systems. Some
run one of the descendants of OS/360 for batch or transaction processing, while
others run a single-user, interactive system called CMS (Conversational Monitor
System) for timesharing users.
    When a CMS program executes a system call, the call is trapped to the operat-
ing system in its own virtual machine, not to VM/370, just as it would if it were
running on a real machine instead of a virtual one. CMS then issues the normal
hardware I/O instructions for reading its virtual disk or whatever is needed to
carry out the call. These I/O instructions are trapped by VM/370, which then per-
forms them as part of its simulation of the real hardware. By making a complete
separation of the functions of multiprogramming and providing an extended
machine, each of the pieces can be much simpler, more flexible, and easier to
maintain.
    The idea of a virtual machine is used nowadays in a different context: running
old MS-DOS programs on a Pentium. When designing the Pentium and its
software, both Intel and Microsoft realized that there would be a big demand for
running old software on new hardware. For this reason, Intel provided a virtual
8086 mode on the Pentium. In this mode, the machine acts like an 8086 (which is
identical to an 8088 from a software point of view), including 16-bit addressing
with a 1-MB limit.
    This mode is used by Windows, and other operating systems for running old
MS-DOS programs. These programs are started up in virtual 8086 mode. As long

as they execute normal instructions, they run on the bare hardware. However,
when a program tries to trap to the operating system to make a system call, or tries
to do protected I/O directly, a trap to the virtual machine monitor occurs.
     Two variants on this design are possible. In the first one, MS-DOS itself is
loaded into the virtual 8086’s address space, so the virtual machine monitor just
reflects the trap back to MS-DOS, just as would happen on a real 8086. When
MS-DOS later tries to do the I/O itself, that operation is caught and carried out by
the virtual machine monitor.
     In the other variant, the virtual machine monitor just catches the first trap and
does the I/O itself, since it knows what all the MS-DOS system calls are and thus
knows what each trap is supposed to do. This variant is less pure than the first
one, since it emulates only MS-DOS correctly, and not other operating systems, as
the first one does. On the other hand, it is much faster, since it saves the trouble
of starting up MS-DOS to do the I/O. A further disadvantage of actually running
MS-DOS in virtual 8086 mode is that MS-DOS fiddles around with the interrupt
enable/disable bit quite a lot, all of which must be emulated at considerable cost.
     It is worth noting that neither of these approaches are really the same as
VM/370, since the machine being emulated is not a full Pentium, but only an 8086.
With the VM/370 system, it is possible to run VM/370, itself, in the virtual
machine. Even the earliest versions of Windows require at least a 286 and cannot
be run on a virtual 8086.
     Several virtual machine implementations are marketed commercially. For
companies that provide web-hosting services, it can be more economical to run
multiple virtual machines on a single fast server (perhaps one with multiple
CPUs) than to run many small computers, each hosting a single Web site.
VMWare and Microsoft’s Virtual PC are marketed for such installations. These
programs use large files on a host system as simulated disks for their guest sys-
tems. To achieve efficiency they analyze guest system program binaries and
allow safe code to run directly on the host hardware, trapping instructions that
make operating system calls. Such systems are also useful in education. For
instance, students working on MINIX 3 lab assignments can work using MINIX 3
as a guest operating system on VMWare on a Windows, Linux or UNIX host with
no risk of damaging other software installed on the same PC. Most professors
teaching other subjects would be very nervous about sharing laboratory computers
with an operating systems course where student mistakes could corrupt or erase
disk data.
     Another area where virtual machines are used, but in a somewhat different
way, is for running Java programs. When Sun Microsystems invented the Java
programming language, it also invented a virtual machine (i.e., a computer archi-
tecture) called the JVM (Java Virtual Machine). The Java compiler produces
code for JVM, which then typically is executed by a software JVM interpreter.
The advantage of this approach is that the JVM code can be shipped over the
Internet to any computer that has a JVM interpreter and run there. If the compiler
SEC. 1.5               OPERATING SYSTEM STRUCTURE                                49
had produced SPARC or Pentium binary programs, for example, they could not
have been shipped and run anywhere as easily. (Of course, Sun could have pro-
duced a compiler that produced SPARC binaries and then distributed a SPARC
interpreter, but JVM is a much simpler architecture to interpret.) Another advan-
tage of using JVM is that if the interpreter is implemented properly, which is not
completely trivial, incoming JVM programs can be checked for safety and then
executed in a protected environment so they cannot steal data or do any damage.

1.5.4 Exokernels

    With VM/370, each user process gets an exact copy of the actual computer.
With virtual 8086 mode on the Pentium, each user process gets an exact copy of a
different computer. Going one step further, researchers at M.I.T. built a system
that gives each user a clone of the actual computer, but with a subset of the re-
sources (Engler et al., 1995; and Leschke, 2004). Thus one virtual machine might
get disk blocks 0 to 1023, the next one might get blocks 1024 to 2047, and so on.
    At the bottom layer, running in kernel mode, is a program called the exoker-
nel. Its job is to allocate resources to virtual machines and then check attempts to
use them to make sure no machine is trying to use somebody else’s resources.
Each user-level virtual machine can run its own operating system, as on VM/370
and the Pentium virtual 8086s, except that each one is restricted to using only the
resources it has asked for and been allocated.
    The advantage of the exokernel scheme is that it saves a layer of mapping. In
the other designs, each virtual machine thinks it has its own disk, with blocks run-
ning from 0 to some maximum, so the virtual machine monitor must maintain
tables to remap disk addresses (and all other resources). With the exokernel, this
remapping is not needed. The exokernel need only keep track of which virtual
machine has been assigned which resource. This method still has the advantage
of separating the multiprogramming (in the exokernel) from the user operating
system code (in user space), but with less overhead, since all the exokernel has to
do is keep the virtual machines out of each other’s hair.

1.5.5 Client-Server Model

    VM/370 gains much in simplicity by moving a large part of the traditional
operating system code (implementing the extended machine) into a higher layer,
CMS. Nevertheless, VM/370 itself is still a complex program because simulating a
number of virtual 370s is not that simple (especially if you want to do it reason-
ably efficiently).
    A trend in modern operating systems is to take this idea of moving code up
into higher layers even further and remove as much as possible from the operating
system, leaving a minimal kernel. The usual approach is to implement most of
the operating system functions in user processes. To request a service, such as

reading a block of a file, a user process (now known as the client process) sends
the request to a server process, which then does the work and sends back the
answer.

   Client       Client     Process      Terminal                 File        Memory
                                                                                           User mode
  process      process      server       server                 server       server

                                                                                           Kernel mode
                                         Microkernel

                                                                  Client obtains
                                                                  service by
                                                                  sending messages
                                                                  to server processes

Figure 1-20. The client-server model.

     In this model, shown in Fig. 1-20, all the kernel does is handle the communi-
cation between clients and servers. By splitting the operating system up into
parts, each of which only handles one facet of the system, such as file service,
process service, terminal service, or memory service, each part becomes small
and manageable. Furthermore, because all the servers run as user-mode proc-
esses, and not in kernel mode, they do not have direct access to the hardware. As
a consequence, if a bug in the file server is triggered, the file service may crash,
but this will not usually bring the whole machine down.
     Another advantage of the client-server model is its adaptability to use in dis-
tributed systems (see Fig. 1-21). If a client communicates with a server by send-
ing it messages, the client need not know whether the message is handled locally
in its own machine, or whether it was sent across a network to a server on a
remote machine. As far as the client is concerned, the same thing happens in both
cases: a request was sent and a reply came back.
        Machine 1                  Machine 2               Machine 3                  Machine 4
            Client                 File server           Process server             Terminal server
            Kernel                   Kernel                  Kernel                     Kernel

                                                                          Network
                           Message from
                           client to server

Figure 1-21. The client-server model in a distributed system.
     The picture painted above of a kernel that handles only the transport of mes-
sages from clients to servers and back is not completely realistic. Some operating
system functions (such as loading commands into the physical I/O device regis-
ters) are difficult, if not impossible, to do from user-space programs. There are
SEC. 1.5               OPERATING SYSTEM STRUCTURE                                 51
two ways of dealing with this problem. One way is to have some critical server
processes (e.g., I/O device drivers) actually run in kernel mode, with complete
access to all the hardware, but still communicate with other processes using the
normal message mechanism. A variant of this mechanism was used in earlier ver-
sions of MINIX where drivers were compiled into the kernel but ran as separate
processes.
     The other way is to build a minimal amount of mechanism into the kernel but
leave the policy decisions up to servers in user space. For example, the kernel
might recognize that a message sent to a certain special address means to take the
contents of that message and load it into the I/O device registers for some disk, to
start a disk read. In this example, the kernel would not even inspect the bytes in
the message to see if they were valid or meaningful; it would just blindly copy
them into the disk’s device registers. (Obviously, some scheme for limiting such
messages to authorized processes only must be used.) This is how MINIX 3
works, drivers are in user space and use special kernel calls to request reads and
writes of I/O registers or to access kernel information. The split between mechan-
ism and policy is an important concept; it occurs again and again in operating sys-
tems in various contexts.

1.6 OUTLINE OF THE REST OF THIS BOOK
    Operating systems typically have four major components: process manage-
ment, I/O device management, memory management, and file management.
MINIX 3 is also divided into these four parts. The next four chapters deal with
these four topics, one topic per chapter. Chapter 6 is a list of suggested readings
and a bibliography.
    The chapters on processes, I/O, memory management, and file systems have
the same general structure. First the general principles of the subject are laid out.
Then comes an overview of the corresponding area of MINIX 3 (which also
applies to UNIX). Finally, the MINIX 3 implementation is discussed in detail. The
implementation section may be skimmed or skipped without loss of continuity by
readers just interested in the principles of operating systems and not interested in
the MINIX 3 code. Readers who are interested in finding out how a real operating
system (MINIX 3) works should read all the sections.

1.7 SUMMARY
     Operating systems can be viewed from two viewpoints: resource managers
and extended machines. In the resource manager view, the operating system’s job
is to efficiently manage the different parts of the system. In the extended machine
view, the job of the system is to provide the users with a virtual machine that is
more convenient to use than the actual machine.

    Operating systems have a long history, starting from the days when they
replaced the operator, to modern multiprogramming systems.
    The heart of any operating system is the set of system calls that it can handle.
These tell what the operating system really does. For MINIX 3, these calls can be
divided into six groups. The first group of system calls relates to process creation
and termination. The second group handles signals. The third group is for read-
ing and writing files. A fourth group is for directory management. The fifth
group protects information, and the sixth group is about keeping track of time.
    Operating systems can be structured in several ways. The most common ones
are as a monolithic system, as a hierarchy of layers, as a virtual machine system,
using an exokernel, and using the client-server model.

                                        PROBLEMS

 1. What are the two main functions of an operating system?
 2. What is the difference between kernel mode and user mode? Why is the difference
    important to an operating system?
 3. What is multiprogramming?
 4. What is spooling? Do you think that advanced personal computers will have spooling
    as a standard feature in the future?
 5. On early computers, every byte of data read or written was directly handled by the
    CPU (i.e., there was no DMA—Direct Memory Access). What implications does this
    organization have for multiprogramming?
 6. Why was timesharing not widespread on second-generation computers?
 7. Which of the following instructions should be allowed only in kernel mode?
     (a) Disable all interrupts.
     (b) Read the time-of-day clock.
     (c) Set the time-of-day clock.
     (d) Change the memory map.
 8. List some differences between personal computer operating systems and mainframe
    operating systems.
 9. Give one reason why a closed-source proprietary operating system like Windows
    should have better quality than an open-source operating system like Linux. Now give
    one reason why an open-source operating system like Linux should have better quality
    than a closed-source proprietary operating system like Windows.
10. A MINIX file whose owner has UID = 12 and GID = 1 has mode rwxr-x---. Another
    user with UID = 6, GID = 1 tries to execute the file. What will happen?
CHAP. 1                                 PROBLEMS                                          53
11. In view of the fact that the mere existence of a superuser can lead to all kinds of security
    problems, why does such a concept exist?
12. All versions of UNIX support file naming using both absolute paths (relative to the root)
    and relative paths (relative to the working directory). Would it be possible to dispose of
    one of these and just use the other? If so, which would you suggest keeping?
13. Why is the process table needed in a timesharing system? Is it also needed in personal
    computer systems in which only one process exists, that process taking over the entire
    machine until it is finished?
14. What is the essential difference between a block special file and a character special file?
15. In MINIX 3 if user 2 links to a file owned by user 1, then user 1 removes the file, what hap-
    pens when user 2 tries to read the file?
16. Are pipes an essential facility? Would major functionality be lost if they were not avail-
    able?
17. Modern consumer appliances such as stereos and digital cameras often have a display
    where commands can be entered and the results of entering those commands can be
    viewed. These devices often have a primitive operating system inside. To what part of a
    personal computer software is the command processing via the stereo or camera’s display
    similar to?
18. Windows does not have a fork system call, yet it is able to create new processes. Make an
    educated guess about the semantics of the system call Windows uses to create new
    processes.
19. Why is the chroot system call limited to the superuser? (Hint: Think about protection prob-
    lems.)
20. Examine the list of system calls in Fig. 1-9. Which call do you think is likely to execute
    most quickly. Explain your answer.
21. Suppose that a computer can execute 1 billion instructions/sec and that a system call takes
    1000 instructions, including the trap and all the context switching. How many system calls
    can the computer execute per second and still have half the CPU capacity for running
    application code?
22. There is a mknod system call in Fig. 1-16 but there is no rmnod call. Does this mean that
    you have to be very, very careful about making nodes this way because there is no way to
    every remove them?
23. Why does MINIX 3 have the program update running in the background all the time?
24. Does it ever make any sense to ignore the SIGALRM signal?
25. The client-server model is popular in distributed systems. Can it also be used in a single-
    computer system?
26. The initial versions of the Pentium could not support a virtual machine monitor. What
    essential characteristic is needed to allow a machine to be virtualizable?
27. Write a program (or series of programs) to test all the MINIX 3 system calls. For each call,
    try various sets of parameters, including some incorrect ones, to see if they are detected.

28. Write a shell that is similar to Fig. 1-10 but contains enough code that it actually works so
    you can test it. You might also add some features such as redirection of input and output,
    pipes, and background jobs.
