                                      2
                          PROCESSES

     We are now about to embark on a detailed study of how operating systems, in
general, and MINIX 3, in particular, are designed and constructed. The most cen-
tral concept in any operating system is the process: an abstraction of a running
program. Everything else hinges on this concept, and it is important that the
operating system designer (and student) understand this concept well.

2.1 INTRODUCTION TO PROCESSES
     All modern computers can do several things at the same time. While running
a user program, a computer can also be reading from a disk and outputting text to
a screen or printer. In a multiprogramming system, the CPU also switches from
program to program, running each for tens or hundreds of milliseconds. While,
strictly speaking, at any instant of time, the CPU is running only one program, in
the course of 1 second, it may work on several programs, thus giving the users the
illusion of parallelism. Sometimes people speak of pseudoparallelism in this
context, to contrast it with the true hardware parallelism of multiprocessor sys-
tems (which have two or more CPUs sharing the same physical memory). Keep-
ing track of multiple, parallel activities is hard for people to do. Therefore, oper-
ating system designers over the years have evolved a conceptual model (sequen-
tial processes) that makes parallelism easier to deal with. That model, its uses,
and some of its consequences form the subject of this chapter.

2.1.1 The Process Model

     In this model, all the runnable software on the computer, sometimes including
the operating system, is organized into a number of sequential processes, or just
processes for short. A process is just an executing program, including the current
values of the program counter, registers, and variables. Conceptually, each proc-
ess has its own virtual CPU. In reality, of course, the real CPU switches back and
forth from process to process, but to understand the system, it is much easier to
think about a collection of processes running in (pseudo) parallel, than to try to
keep track of how the CPU switches from program to program. This rapid
switching back and forth is called multiprogramming, as we saw in Chap. 1.
     In Fig. 2-1(a) we see a computer multiprogramming four programs in mem-
ory. In Fig. 2-1(b) we see four processes, each with its own flow of control (i.e.,
its own program counter), and each one running independently of the other ones.
Of course, there is only one physical program counter, so when each process runs,
its logical program counter is loaded into the real program counter. When it is
finished for the time being, the physical program counter is saved in the process’
logical program counter in memory. In Fig. 2-1(c) we see that viewed over a long
enough time interval, all the processes have made progress, but at any given
instant only one process is actually running.
One program counter
                             Four program counters
              Process
          A
              switch
                                                                        D
                                                              Process

          B
                                                                        C

          C             A        B          C        D                  B
                                                                        A
          D                                                                  Time

       (a)                            (b)                                       (c)

Figure 2-1. (a) Multiprogramming of four programs. (b) Conceptual model of
        four independent, sequential processes. (c) Only one program is active at any
        instant.

    With the CPU switching back and forth among the processes, the rate at
which a process performs its computation will not be uniform, and probably not
even reproducible if the same processes are run again. Thus, processes must not
be programmed with built-in assumptions about timing. Consider, for example,
an I/O process that starts a streamer tape to restore backed up files, executes an
idle loop 10,000 times to let it get up to speed, and then issues a command to read
the first record. If the CPU decides to switch to another process during the idle
loop, the tape process might not run again until after the first record was already
SEC. 2.1                 INTRODUCTION TO PROCESSES                                  57
past the read head. When a process has critical real-time requirements like this,
that is, particular events must occur within a specified number of milliseconds,
special measures must be taken to ensure that they do occur. Normally, however,
most processes are not affected by the underlying multiprogramming of the CPU
or the relative speeds of different processes.
     The difference between a process and a program is subtle, but crucial. An
analogy may help make this point clearer. Consider a culinary-minded computer
scientist who is baking a birthday cake for his daughter. He has a birthday cake
recipe and a kitchen well stocked with the necessary input: flour, eggs, sugar,
extract of vanilla, and so on. In this analogy, the recipe is the program (i.e., an al-
gorithm expressed in some suitable notation), the computer scientist is the proces-
sor (CPU), and the cake ingredients are the input data. The process is the activity
consisting of our baker reading the recipe, fetching the ingredients, and baking the
cake.
     Now imagine that the computer scientist’s son comes running in crying, say-
ing that he has been stung by a bee. The computer scientist records where he was
in the recipe (the state of the current process is saved), gets out a first aid book,
and begins following the directions in it. Here we see the processor being switch-
ed from one process (baking) to a higher priority process (administering medical
care), each having a different program (recipe vs. first aid book). When the bee
sting has been taken care of, the computer scientist goes back to his cake, continu-
ing at the point where he left off.
     The key idea here is that a process is an activity of some kind. It has a pro-
gram, input, output, and a state. A single processor may be shared among several
processes, with some scheduling algorithm being used to determine when to stop
work on one process and service a different one.

2.1.2 Process Creation

    Operating systems need some way to make sure all the necessary processes
exist. In very simple systems, or in systems designed for running only a single
application (e.g., controlling a device in real time), it may be possible to have all
the processes that will ever be needed be present when the system comes up. In
general-purpose systems, however, some way is needed to create and terminate
processes as needed during operation. We will now look at some of the issues.
    There are four principal events that cause processes to be created:

     1. System initialization.
     2. Execution of a process creation system call by a running process.
     3. A user request to create a new process.
     4. Initiation of a batch job.

When an operating system is booted, often several processes are created. Some of
these are foreground processes, that is, processes that interact with (human) users
and perform work for them. Others are background processes, which are not as-
sociated with particular users, but instead have some specific function. For ex-
ample, a background process may be designed to accept incoming requests for
web pages hosted on that machine, waking up when a request arrives to service
the request. Processes that stay in the background to handle some activity such as
web pages, printing, and so on are called daemons. Large systems commonly
have dozens of them. In MINIX 3, the ps program can be used to list the running
processes.
     In addition to the processes created at boot time, new processes can be created
afterward as well. Often a running process will issue system calls to create one or
more new processes to help it do its job. Creating new processes is particularly
useful when the work to be done can easily be formulated in terms of several
related, but otherwise independent interacting processes. For example, when
compiling a large program, the make program invokes the C compiler to convert
source files to object code, and then it invokes the install program to copy the pro-
gram to its destination, set ownership and permissions, etc. In MINIX 3, the C
compiler itself is actually several different programs, which work together. These
include a preprocessor, a C language parser, an assembly language code genera-
tor, an assembler, and a linker.
     In interactive systems, users can start a program by typing a command. In
MINIX 3, virtual consoles allow a user to start a program, say a compiler, and then
switch to an alternate console and start another program, perhaps to edit documen-
tation while the compiler is running.
     The last situation in which processes are created applies only to the batch sys-
tems found on large mainframes. Here users can submit batch jobs to the system
(possibly remotely). When the operating system decides that it has the resources
to run another job, it creates a new process and runs the next job from the input
queue in it.
     Technically, in all these cases, a new process is created by having an existing
process execute a process creation system call. That process may be a running
user process, a system process invoked from the keyboard or mouse, or a batch
manager process. What that process does is execute a system call to create the
new process. This system call tells the operating system to create a new process
and indicates, directly or indirectly, which program to run in it.
     In MINIX 3, there is only one system call to create a new process: fork. This
call creates an exact clone of the calling process. After the fork, the two proc-
esses, the parent and the child, have the same memory image, the same environ-
ment strings, and the same open files. That is all there is. Usually, the child proc-
ess then executes execve or a similar system call to change its memory image and
run a new program. For example, when a user types a command, say, sort, to the
shell, the shell forks off a child process and the child executes sort. The reason
SEC. 2.1                 INTRODUCTION TO PROCESSES                                  59
for this two-step process is to allow the child to manipulate its file descriptors
after the fork but before the execve to accomplish redirection of standard input,
standard output, and standard error.
    In both MINIX 3 and UNIX, after a process is created both the parent and child
have their own distinct address spaces. If either process changes a word in its
address space, the change is not visible to the other process. The child’s initial
address space is a copy of the parent’s, but there are two distinct address spaces
involved; no writable memory is shared (like some UNIX implementations, MINIX
3 can share the program text between the two since that cannot be modified). It is,
however, possible for a newly created process to share some of its creator’s other
resources, such as open files.

2.1.3 Process Termination

    After a process has been created, it starts running and does whatever its job is.
However, nothing lasts forever, not even processes. Sooner or later the new proc-
ess will terminate, usually due to one of the following conditions:
     1. Normal exit (voluntary).
     2. Error exit (voluntary).
     3. Fatal error (involuntary).
     4. Killed by another process (involuntary).

     Most processes terminate because they have done their work. When a com-
piler has compiled the program given to it, the compiler executes a system call to
tell the operating system that it is finished. This call is exit in MINIX 3. Screen-
oriented programs also support voluntary termination. For instance, editors
always have a key combination that the user can invoke to tell the process to save
the working file, remove any temporary files that are open and terminate.
     The second reason for termination is that the process discovers a fatal error.
For example, if a user types the command
    cc foo.c
to compile the program foo.c and no such file exists, the compiler simply exits.
     The third reason for termination is an error caused by the process, perhaps due
to a program bug. Examples include executing an illegal instruction, referencing
nonexistent memory, or dividing by zero. In MINIX 3, a process can tell the oper-
ating system that it wishes to handle certain errors itself, in which case the process
is signaled (interrupted) instead of terminated when one of the errors occurs.
     The fourth reason a process might terminate is that one process executes a
system call telling the operating system to kill some other process. In MINIX 3,
this call is kill. Of course, the killer must have the necessary authorization to do in

the killee. In some systems, when a process terminates, either voluntarily or oth-
erwise, all processes it created are immediately killed as well. MINIX 3 does not
work this way, however.
2.1.4 Process Hierarchies
    In some systems, when a process creates another process, the parent and child
continue to be associated in certain ways. The child can itself create more proc-
esses, forming a process hierarchy. Unlike plants and animals that use sexual
reproduction, a process has only one parent (but zero, one, two, or more children).
    In MINIX 3, a process, its children, and further descendants together may form
a process group. When a user sends a signal from the keyboard, the signal may be
delivered to all members of the process group currently associated with the key-
board (usually all processes that were created in the current window). This is
signal-dependent. If a signal is sent to a group, each process can catch the signal,
ignore the signal, or take the default action, which is to be killed by the signal.
    As a simple example of how process trees are used, let us look at how MINIX
3 initializes itself. Two special processes, the reincarnation server and init are
present in the boot image. The reincarnation server’s job is to (re)start drivers and
servers. It begins by blocking, waiting for a message telling it what to create.
    In contrast, init executes the /etc/rc script that causes it to issue commands to
the reincarnation server to start the drivers and servers not present in the boot
image. This procedure makes the drivers and servers so started children of the
reincarnation server, so if any of them ever terminate, the reincarnation server will
be informed and can restart (i.e., reincarnate) them again. This mechanism is
intended to allow MINIX 3 to tolerate a driver or server crash because a new one
will be started automatically. In practice, replacing a driver is much easier than
replacing a server, however, since there fewer repercussions elsewhere in the sys-
tem. (And, we do not say this always works perfectly; it is still work in progress.)
    When init has finished this, it reads a configuration file /etc/ttytab) to see
which terminals and virtual terminals exist. Init forks a getty process for each one,
displays a login prompt on it, and then waits for input. When a name is typed,
getty execs a login process with the name as its argument. If the user succeeds in
logging in, login will exec the user’s shell. So the shell is a child of init. User
commands create children of the shell, which are grandchildren of init. This se-
quence of events is an example of how process trees are used. As an aside, the
code for the reincarnation server and init is not listed in this book; neither is the
shell. The line had to be drawn somewhere. But now you have the basic idea.

2.1.5 Process States
    Although each process is an independent entity, with its own program counter
registers, stack, open files, alarms, and other internal state, processes often need to
interact, communicate, and synchronize with other processes. One process may
SEC. 2.1                  INTRODUCTION TO PROCESSES                                     61
generate some output that another process uses as input, for example. In that case,
the data needs to be moved between processes. In the shell command
    cat chapter1 chapter2 chapter3 | grep tree
the first process, running cat, concatenates and outputs three files. The second
process, running grep, selects all lines containing the word ‘‘tree.’’ Depending on
the relative speeds of the two processes (which depends on both the relative com-
plexity of the programs and how much CPU time each one has had), it may hap-
pen that grep is ready to run, but there is no input waiting for it. It must then
block until some input is available.
    When a process blocks, it does so because logically it cannot continue, typi-
cally because it is waiting for input that is not yet available. It is also possible for
a process that is conceptually ready and able to run to be stopped because the
operating system has decided to allocate the CPU to another process for a while.
These two conditions are completely different. In the first case, the suspension is
inherent in the problem (you cannot process the user’s command line until it has
been typed). In the second case, it is a technicality of the system (not enough
CPUs to give each process its own private processor). In Fig. 2-2 we see a state
diagram showing the three states a process may be in:
     1. Running (actually using the CPU at that instant).
     2. Ready (runnable; temporarily stopped to let another process run).
     3. Blocked (unable to run until some external event happens).
Logically, the first two states are similar. In both cases the process is willing to
run, only in the second one, there is temporarily no CPU available for it. The
third state is different from the first two in that the process cannot run, even if the
CPU has nothing else to do.

                        Running
                                                  1. Process blocks for input
                1         3          2            2. Scheduler picks another process
                                                  3. Scheduler picks this process
                                                  4. Input becomes available
             Blocked                Ready
                              4

Figure 2-2. A process can be in running, blocked, or ready state. Transitions
        between these states are as shown.
    Four transitions are possible among these three states, as shown. Transition 1
occurs when a process discovers that it cannot continue. In some systems the
process must execute a system call, block or pause to get into blocked state. In
other systems, including MINIX 3, when a process reads from a pipe or special file
(e.g., a terminal) and there is no input available, the process is automatically
moved from the running state to the blocked state.

     Transitions 2 and 3 are caused by the process scheduler, a part of the operat-
ing system, without the process even knowing about them. Transition 2 occurs
when the scheduler decides that the running process has run long enough, and it is
time to let another process have some CPU time. Transition 3 occurs when all the
other processes have had their fair share and it is time for the first process to get
the CPU to run again. The subject of scheduling—deciding which process should
run when and for how long—is an important one. Many algorithms have been
devised to try to balance the competing demands of efficiency for the system as a
whole and fairness to individual processes. We will look at scheduling and study
some of these algorithms later in this chapter.
     Transition 4 occurs when the external event for which a process was waiting
(e.g., the arrival of some input) happens. If no other process is running then, tran-
sition 3 will be triggered immediately, and the process will start running. Other-
wise it may have to wait in ready state for a little while until the CPU is available.
     Using the process model, it becomes much easier to think about what is going
on inside the system. Some of the processes run programs that carry out com-
mands typed in by a user. Other processes are part of the system and handle tasks
such as carrying out requests for file services or managing the details of running a
disk or a tape drive. When a disk interrupt occurs, the system may make a deci-
sion to stop running the current process and run the disk process, which was
blocked waiting for that interrupt. We say ‘‘may’’ because it depends upon rela-
tive priorities of the running process and the disk driver process. But the point is
that instead of thinking about interrupts, we can think about user processes, disk
processes, terminal processes, and so on, which block when they are waiting for
something to happen. When the disk block has been read or the character typed,
the process waiting for it is unblocked and is eligible to run again.
     This view gives rise to the model shown in Fig. 2-3. Here the lowest level of
the operating system is the scheduler, with a variety of processes on top of it. All
the interrupt handling and details of actually starting and stopping processes are
hidden away in the scheduler, which is actually quite small. The rest of the
operating system is nicely structured in process form. The model of Fig. 2-3 is
used in MINIX 3. Of course, the ‘‘scheduler’’ is not the only thing in the lowest
layer, there is also support for interrupt handling and interprocess communication.
Nevertheless, to a first approximation, it does show the basic structure.

2.1.6 Implementation of Processes

    To implement the process model, the operating system maintains a table (an
array of structures), called the process table, with one entry per process. (Some
authors call these entries process control blocks.) This entry contains informa-
tion about the process’ state, its program counter, stack pointer, memory alloca-
tion, the status of its open files, its accounting and scheduling information, alarms
and other signals, and everything else about the process that must be saved when
SEC. 2.1                                                     INTRODUCTION TO PROCESSES                                                                                                                             63

                                                                                                Processes
                                                                     0             1                                        n–2 n–1

                                                                                                Scheduler

Figure 2-3. The lowest layer of a process-structured operating system handles
                  interrupts and scheduling. Above that layer are sequential processes.
the process is switched from running to ready state so that it can be restarted later
as if it had never been stopped.
     In MINIX 3, interprocess communication, memory management, and file man-
agement are each handled by separate modules within the system, so the process
table is partitioned, with each module maintaining the fields that it needs. Figure
2-4 shows some of the more important fields. The fields in the first column are
the only ones relevant to this chapter. The other two columns are provided just to
give an idea of what information is needed elsewhere in the system.

                                                                                
   Kernel                                                         ? Process management ? File management                                                             ?
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                          
        Registers                                                      ? Pointer to text segment ? UMASK mask                                                              ?
         Program counter                                                ? Pointer to data segment ? Root directory                                                           ?
          Program status word                                            ? Pointer to bss segment ? Working directory                                                          ?
                                                                                                                                                                                  
             Stack pointer                                                  ? Exit status                                       ? File descriptors                                 ?
              Process state                                                  ? Signal status                                     ? Real id                                           ?
               Current scheduling priority                                    ? Process ID                                        ? Effective UID                                      ?
                                                                                                                                                                                          
                  Maximum scheduling priority ? Parent process                                                                       ? Real GID                                            ?
                   Scheduling ticks left                                         ? Process group                                      ? Effective GID                                        ?
                    Quantum size                                                  ? Children’s CPU time                                ? Controlling tty                                       ?
                     CPU time used                                                 ? Real UID                                           ? Save area for read/write ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                        Message queue pointers                                        ? Effective UID                                      ? System call parameters                                ?
                         Pending signal bits                                           ? Real GID                                           ? Various flag bits                                      ?
                          Various flag bits                                             ? Effective GID                                      ?                                                         ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                             Process name                                                  ? File info for sharing text ?                                                                                  ?
                                                                                              Bitmaps for signals                                ?                                                           ?
                                                                                               Various flag bits                                   ?                                                           ?
                                                                                                Process name                                         ?                                                           ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Figure 2-4. Some of the fields of the MINIX 3 process table. The fields are dis-
                  tributed over the kernel, the process manager, and the file system.

     Now that we have looked at the process table, it is possible to explain a little
more about how the illusion of multiple sequential processes is maintained on a
machine with one CPU and many I/O devices. What follows is technically a
description of how the ‘‘scheduler’’ of Fig. 2-3 works in MINIX 3 but most modern
operating systems work essentially the same way. Associated with each I/O
device class (e.g., floppy disks, hard disks, timers, terminals) is a data structure in
a table called the interrupt descriptor table. The most important part of each
entry in this table is called the interrupt vector. It contains the address of the
interrupt service procedure. Suppose that user process 23 is running when a disk
interrupt occurs. The program counter, program status word, and possibly one or
more registers are pushed onto the (current) stack by the interrupt hardware. The
computer then jumps to the address specified in the disk interrupt vector. That is
all the hardware does. From here on, it is up to the software.
     The interrupt service procedure starts out by saving all the registers in the
process table entry for the current process. The current process number and a
pointer to its entry are kept in global variables so they can be found quickly. Then
the information deposited by the interrupt is removed from the stack, and the stack
pointer is set to a temporary stack used by the process handler. Actions such as
saving the registers and setting the stack pointer cannot even be expressed in
high-level languages such as C, so they are performed by a small assembly lan-
guage routine. When this routine is finished, it calls a C procedure to do the rest
of the work for this specific interrupt type.
     Interprocess communication in MINIX 3 is via messages, so the next step is to
build a message to be sent to the disk process, which will be blocked waiting for
it. The message says that an interrupt occurred, to distinguish it from messages
from user processes requesting disk blocks to be read and things like that. The
state of the disk process is now changed from blocked to ready and the scheduler
is called. In MINIX 3, different processes have different priorities, to give better
service to I/O device handlers than to user processes, for example. If the disk
process is now the highest priority runnable process, it will be scheduled to run. If
the process that was interrupted is just as important or more so, then it will be
scheduled to run again, and the disk process will have to wait a little while.
     Either way, the C procedure called by the assembly language interrupt code
now returns, and the assembly language code loads up the registers and memory
map for the now-current process and starts it running. Interrupt handling and
scheduling are summarized in Fig. 2-5. It is worth noting that the details vary
slightly from system to system.

2.1.7 Threads

     In traditional operating systems, each process has an address space and a sin-
gle thread of control. In fact, that is almost the definition of a process. Neverthe-
less, there are often situations in which it is desirable to have multiple threads of
SEC. 2.1                         INTRODUCTION TO PROCESSES                                                        65

                                                                        
             1. Hardware stacks program counter, etc.                                     ?
                                                                                             
                2. Hardware loads new program counter from interrupt vector.                  ?
                 3. Assembly language procedure saves registers.                                ?
                  4. Assembly language procedure sets up new stack.                               ?
                   5. C interrupt service constructs and sends message.                             ?
                                                                                                       
                      6. Message passing code marks waiting message recipient ready. ?
                       7. Scheduler decides which process is to run next.                               ?
                        8. C procedure returns to the assembly code.                                      ?
                                                                                                             
                            9. Assembly language procedure starts up new current process.
                                                                                                               

Figure 2-5. Skeleton of what the lowest level of the operating system does
        when an interrupt occurs.

control in the same address space running in quasi-parallel, as though they were
separate processes (except for the shared address space). These threads of control
are usually just called threads, although some people call them lightweight proc-
esses.
     One way of looking at a process is that it is a way to group related resources
together. A process has an address space containing program text and data, as well
as other resources. These resources may include open files, child processes, pend-
ing alarms, signal handlers, accounting information, and more. By putting them
together in the form of a process, they can be managed more easily.
     The other concept a process has is a thread of execution, usually shortened to
just thread. The thread has a program counter that keeps track of which instruc-
tion to execute next. It has registers, which hold its current working variables. It
has a stack, which contains the execution history, with one frame for each pro-
cedure called but not yet returned from. Although a thread must execute in some
process, the thread and its process are different concepts and can be treated sep-
arately. Processes are used to group resources together; threads are the entities
scheduled for execution on the CPU.
     What threads add to the process model is to allow multiple executions to take
place in the same process environment, to a large degree independent of one
another. In Fig. 2-6(a) we see three traditional processes. Each process has its own
address space and a single thread of control. In contrast, in Fig. 2-6(b) we see a
single process with three threads of control. Although in both cases we have three
threads, in Fig. 2-6(a) each of them operates in a different address space, whereas
in Fig. 2-6(b) all three of them share the same address space.
     As an example of where multiple threads might be used, consider a web
browser process. Many web pages contain multiple small images. For each im-
age on a web page, the browser must set up a separate connection to the page’s
home site and request the image. A great deal of time is spent establishing and
releasing all these connections. By having multiple threads within the browser,
many images can be requested at the same time, greatly speeding up performance

           Process 1           Process 1       Process 1                                  Process

  User
 space

                          Thread                                                           Thread

Kernel
space                              Kernel                                                  Kernel

                                     (a)                                                     (b)

Figure 2-6. (a) Three processes each with one thread. (b) One process with
           three threads.

in most cases since with small images, the set-up time is the limiting factor, not
the speed of the transmission line.
     When multiple threads are present in the same address space, a few of the
fields of Fig. 2-4 are not per process, but per thread, so a separate thread table is
needed, with one entry per thread. Among the per-thread items are the program
counter, registers, and state. The program counter is needed because threads, like
processes, can be suspended and resumed. The registers are needed because when
threads are suspended, their registers must be saved. Finally, threads, like proc-
esses, can be in running, ready, or blocked state. Fig. 2-7 lists some per-process
and per-thread items.
                                                                                
       Per process items                                 ? Per thread items                    ?
                                                                                                  
          Address space                                     ? Program counter                      ?
           Global variables                                  ? Registers                             ?
            Open files                                        ? Stack                                  ?
             Child processes                                   ? State                                   ?
                                                                                                            
                    Pending alarms                                ?                                          ?
                  Signals and signal handlers                       ?                                          ?
                   Accounting information                             ?                                          ?
                                                                                              
                                                                                                                    

Figure 2-7. The first column lists some items shared by all threads in a process.
           The second one lists some items private to each thread.

    In some systems, the operating system is not aware of the threads. In other
words, they are managed entirely in user space. When a thread is about to block,
for example, it chooses and starts its successor before stopping. Several user-
level threads packages are in common use, including the POSIX P-threads and
Mach C-threads packages.
SEC. 2.1                 INTRODUCTION TO PROCESSES                                67
     In other systems, the operating system is aware of the existence of multiple
threads per process, so when a thread blocks, the operating system chooses the
next one to run, either from the same process or a different one. To do schedul-
ing, the kernel must have a thread table that lists all the threads in the system,
analogous to the process table.
     Although these two alternatives may seem equivalent, they differ consider-
ably in performance. Switching threads is much faster when thread management
is done in user space than when a system call is needed. This fact argues strongly
for doing thread management in user space. On the other hand, when threads are
managed entirely in user space and one thread blocks (e.g., waiting for I/O or a
page fault to be handled), the kernel blocks the entire process, since it is not even
aware that other threads exist. This fact as well as others argue for doing thread
management in the kernel (Boehm, 2005). As a consequence, both systems are in
use, and various hybrid schemes have been proposed as well (Anderson et al.,
1992).
     No matter whether threads are managed by the kernel or in user space, they
introduce a raft of problems that must be solved and which change the program-
ming model appreciably. To start with, consider the effects of the fork system
call. If the parent process has multiple threads, should the child also have them?
If not, the process may not function properly, since all of them may be essential.
     However, if the child process gets as many threads as the parent, what hap-
pens if a thread was blocked on a read call, say, from the keyboard? Are two
threads now blocked on the keyboard? When a line is typed, do both threads get a
copy of it? Only the parent? Only the child? The same problem exists with open
network connections.
     Another class of problems is related to the fact that threads share many data
structures. What happens if one thread closes a file while another one is still read-
ing from it? Suppose that one thread notices that there is too little memory and
starts allocating more memory. Then, part way through, a thread switch occurs,
and the new thread also notices that there is too little memory and also starts allo-
cating more memory. Does the allocation happen once or twice? In nearly all
systems that were not designed with threads in mind, the libraries (such as the
memory allocation procedure) are not reentrant, and will crash if a second call is
made while the first one is still active.
     Another problem relates to error reporting. In UNIX, after a system call, the
status of the call is put into a global variable, errno. What happens if a thread
makes a system call, and before it is able to read errno, another thread makes a
system call, wiping out the original value?
     Next, consider signals. Some signals are logically thread specific; others are
not. For example, if a thread calls alarm, it makes sense for the resulting signal to
go to the thread that made the call. When the kernel is aware of threads, it can us-
ually make sure the right thread gets the signal. When the kernel is not aware of
threads, the threads package must keep track of alarms by itself. An additional

complication for user-level threads exists when (as in UNIX) a process may only
have one alarm at a time pending and several threads call alarm independently.
    Other signals, such as a keyboard-initiated SIGINT, are not thread specific.
Who should catch them? One designated thread? All the threads? A newly
created thread? Each of these solutions has problems. Furthermore, what hap-
pens if one thread changes the signal handlers without telling other threads?
    One last problem introduced by threads is stack management. In many sys-
tems, when stack overflow occurs, the kernel just provides more stack, automati-
cally. When a process has multiple threads, it must also have multiple stacks. If
the kernel is not aware of all these stacks, it cannot grow them automatically upon
stack fault. In fact, it may not even realize that a memory fault is related to stack
growth.
    These problems are certainly not insurmountable, but they do show that just
introducing threads into an existing system without a fairly substantial system
redesign is not going to work at all. The semantics of system calls have to be
redefined and libraries have to be rewritten, at the very least. And all of these
things must be done in such a way as to remain backward compatible with exist-
ing programs for the limiting case of a process with only one thread. For addi-
tional information about threads, see Hauser et al. (1993) and Marsh et al. (1991).

2.2 INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATION

     Processes frequently need to communicate with other processes. For exam-
ple, in a shell pipeline, the output of the first process must be passed to the second
process, and so on down the line. Thus there is a need for communication be-
tween processes, preferably in a well-structured way not using interrupts. In the
following sections we will look at some of the issues related to this InterProcess
Communication or IPC.
     There are three issues here. The first was alluded to above: how one process
can pass information to another. The second has to do with making sure two or
more processes do not get into each other’s way when engaging in critical activi-
ties (suppose two processes each try to grab the last 1 MB of memory). The third
concerns proper sequencing when dependencies are present: if process A produces
data and process B prints it, B has to wait until A has produced some data before
starting to print. We will examine all three of these issues in some detail in this
section.
     It is also important to mention that two of these issues apply equally well to
threads. The first one—passing information—is easy for threads since they share
a common address space (threads in different address spaces that need to com-
municate fall under the heading of communicating processes). However, the
other two—keeping out of each other’s hair and proper sequencing—apply as well
SEC. 2.2                                             INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATION                         69
to threads. The same problems exist and the same solutions apply. Below we will
discuss the problem in the context of processes, but please keep in mind that the
same problems and solutions also apply to threads.

2.2.1 Race Conditions

     In some operating systems, processes that are working together may share
some common storage that each one can read and write. The shared storage may
be in main memory (possibly in a kernel data structure) or it may be a shared file;
the location of the shared memory does not change the nature of the communica-
tion or the problems that arise. To see how interprocess communication works in
practice, let us consider a simple but common example, a print spooler. When a
process wants to print a file, it enters the file name in a special spooler directory.
Another process, the printer daemon, periodically checks to see if so are any
files to be printed, and if so removes their names from the directory.
     Imagine that our spooler directory has a large number of slots, numbered 0, 1,
2, ..., each one capable of holding a file name. Also imagine that there are two
shared variables, out, which points to the next file to be printed, and in, which
points to the next free slot in the directory. These two variables might well be
kept in a two-word file available to all processes. At a certain instant, slots 0 to 3
are empty (the files have already been printed) and slots 4 to 6 are full (with the
names of files to be printed). More or less simultaneously, processes A and B
decide they want to queue a file for printing. This situation is shown in Fig. 2-8.
                                                                   Spooler
                                                                   directory

                                                               4     abc         out = 4
                                                               5   prog. c
                                                   Process A
                                                               6   prog. n
                                                               7                 in = 7

                                                   Process B

Figure 2-8. Two processes want to access shared memory at the same time.

    In jurisdictions where Murphy’s law† is applicable, the following might well
happen. Process A reads in and stores the value, 7, in a local variable called
next ? free ? slot. Just then a clock interrupt occurs and the CPU decides that
                                                

† If something can go wrong, it will.

process A has run long enough, so it switches to process B. Process B also reads
in, and also gets a 7, so it stores the name of its file in slot 7 and updates in to be
an 8. Then it goes off and does other things.
     Eventually, process A runs again, starting from the place it left off last time.
It looks at next ? free ? slot, finds a 7 there, and writes its file name in slot 7, eras-
ing the name that process B just put there. Then it computes next ? free ? slot + 1,
which is 8, and sets in to 8. The spooler directory is now internally consistent, so
the printer daemon will not notice anything wrong, but process B will never
receive any output. User B will hang around the printer room for years, wistfully
hoping for output that never comes. Situations like this, where two or more proc-
esses are reading or writing some shared data and the final result depends on who
runs precisely when, are called race conditions. Debugging programs containing
race conditions is no fun at all. The results of most test runs are fine, but once in a
blue moon something weird and unexplained happens.

2.2.2 Critical Sections

    How do we avoid race conditions? The key to preventing trouble here and in
many other situations involving shared memory, shared files, and shared every-
thing else is to find some way to prohibit more than one process from reading and
writing the shared data at the same time. Put in other words, what we need is
mutual exclusion —some way of making sure that if one process is using a
shared variable or file, the other processes will be excluded from doing the same
thing. The difficulty above occurred because process B started using one of the
shared variables before process A was finished with it. The choice of appropriate
primitive operations for achieving mutual exclusion is a major design issue in any
operating system, and a subject that we will now examine in great detail.
    The problem of avoiding race conditions can also be formulated in an abstract
way. Part of the time, a process is busy doing internal computations and other
things that do not lead to race conditions. However, sometimes a process may be
accessing shared memory or files. That part of the program where the shared
memory is accessed is called the critical region or critical section. If we could
arrange matters such that no two processes were ever in their critical regions at
the same time, we could avoid race conditions.
    Although this requirement avoids race conditions, this is not sufficient for
having parallel processes cooperate correctly and efficiently using shared data.
We need four conditions to hold to have a good solution:

     1. No two processes may be simultaneously inside their critical regions.
     2. No assumptions may be made about speeds or the number of CPUs.
     3. No process running outside its critical region may block other processes.
     4. No process should have to wait forever to enter its critical region.
SEC. 2.2                INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATION                                                       71
     The behavior that we want is shown in Fig. 2-9. Here process A enters its
critical region at time T 1 . A little later, at time T 2 process B attempts to enter its
critical region but fails because another process is already in its critical region and
we allow only one at a time. Consequently, B is temporarily suspended until time
T 3 when A leaves its critical region, allowing B to enter immediately. Eventually
B leaves (at T 4 ) and we are back to the original situation with no processes in
their critical regions.
                             A enters critical region
                                                                 A leaves critical region

Process A

                                          B attempts to            B enters               B leaves
                                          enter critical        critical region        critical region
                                             region

Process B

                                            B blocked
                        T1          T2                     T3                     T4

                                         Time

Figure 2-9. Mutual exclusion using critical regions.

2.2.3 Mutual Exclusion with Busy Waiting

    In this section we will examine various proposals for achieving mutual exclu-
sion, so that while one process is busy updating shared memory in its critical
region, no other process will enter its critical region and cause trouble.

Disabling Interrupts

    The simplest solution is to have each process disable all interrupts just after
entering its critical region and reenable them just before leaving it. With inter-
rupts disabled, no clock interrupts can occur. The CPU is only switched from
process to process as a result of clock or other interrupts, after all, and with inter-
rupts turned off the CPU will not be switched to another process. Thus, once a
process has disabled interrupts, it can examine and update the shared memory
without fear that any other process will intervene.
    This approach is generally unattractive because it is unwise to give user proc-
esses the power to turn off interrupts. Suppose that one of them did, and then
never turned them on again? That could be the end of the system. Furthermore, if

the system is a multiprocessor, with two or more CPUs, disabling interrupts af-
fects only the CPU that executed the disable instruction. The other ones will con-
tinue running and can access the shared memory.
     On the other hand, it is frequently convenient for the kernel itself to disable
interrupts for a few instructions while it is updating variables or lists. If an inter-
rupt occurred while the list of ready processes, for example, was in an inconsistent
state, race conditions could occur. The conclusion is: disabling interrupts is often
a useful technique within the operating system itself but is not appropriate as a
general mutual exclusion mechanism for user processes.

Lock Variables

     As a second attempt, let us look for a software solution. Consider having a
single, shared, (lock) variable, initially 0. When a process wants to enter its criti-
cal region, it first tests the lock. If the lock is 0, the process sets it to 1 and enters
the critical region. If the lock is already 1, the process just waits until it becomes
0. Thus, a 0 means that no process is in its critical region, and a 1 means that
some process is in its critical region.
     Unfortunately, this idea contains exactly the same fatal flaw that we saw in
the spooler directory. Suppose that one process reads the lock and sees that it is 0.
Before it can set the lock to 1, another process is scheduled, runs, and sets the lock
to 1. When the first process runs again, it will also set the lock to 1, and two proc-
esses will be in their critical regions at the same time.
     Now you might think that we could get around this problem by first reading
out the lock value, then checking it again just before storing into it, but that really
does not help. The race now occurs if the second process modifies the lock just
after the first process has finished its second check.

Strict Alternation

     A third approach to the mutual exclusion problem is shown in Fig. 2-10. This
program fragment, like most others in this book, is written in C. C was chosen
here because real operating systems are commonly written in C (or occasionally
C++), but hardly ever in languages like Java. C is powerful, efficient, and
predictable, characteristics critical for writing operating systems. Java, for exam-
ple, is not predictable because it might run out of storage at a critical moment and
need to invoke the garbage collector at a most inopportune time. This cannot hap-
pen in C because there is no garbage collection in C. A quantitative comparison
of C, C++, Java, and four other languages is given by Prechelt (2000).
     In Fig. 2-10, the integer variable turn, initially 0, keeps track of whose turn it
is to enter the critical region and examine or update the shared memory. Initially,
process 0 inspects turn, finds it to be 0, and enters its critical region. Process 1
also finds it to be 0 and therefore sits in a tight loop continually testing turn to see
SEC. 2.2                   INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATION                                          73

while (TRUE) {                                     while (TRUE) {
    while (turn != 0)        /* loop */ ;              while (turn != 1)        /* loop */ ;
    critical ? region( );                              critical ? region( );
    turn = 1;                                          turn = 0;
    noncritical ? region( );                           noncritical ? region( );
}                                                  }

                 (a)                                                 (b)

Figure 2-10. A proposed solution to the critical region problem. (a) Process 0.
         (b) Process 1. In both cases, be sure to note the semicolons terminating the while
         statements.
when it becomes 1. Continuously testing a variable until some value appears is
called busy waiting. It should usually be avoided, since it wastes CPU time.
Only when there is a reasonable expectation that the wait will be short is busy
waiting used. A lock that uses busy waiting is called a spin lock.
     When process 0 leaves the critical region, it sets turn to 1, to allow process 1
to enter its critical region. Suppose that process 1 finishes its critical region
quickly, so both processes are in their noncritical regions, with turn set to 0. Now
process 0 executes its whole loop quickly, exiting its critical region and setting
turn to 1. At this point turn is 1 and both processes are executing in their noncriti-
cal regions.
     Suddenly, process 0 finishes its noncritical region and goes back to the top of
its loop. Unfortunately, it is not permitted to enter its critical region now, because
turn is 1 and process 1 is busy with its noncritical region. It hangs in its while
loop until process 1 sets turn to 0. Put differently, taking turns is not a good idea
when one of the processes is much slower than the other.
     This situation violates condition 3 set out above: process 0 is being blocked by
a process not in its critical region. Going back to the spooler directory discussed
above, if we now associate the critical region with reading and writing the spooler
directory, process 0 would not be allowed to print another file because process 1
was doing something else.
     In fact, this solution requires that the two processes strictly alternate in enter-
ing their critical regions, for example, in spooling files. Neither one would be
permitted to spool two in a row. While this algorithm does avoid all races, it is
not really a serious candidate as a solution because it violates condition 3.

Peterson’s Solution

     By combining the idea of taking turns with the idea of lock variables and
warning variables, a Dutch mathematician, T. Dekker, was the first one to devise
a software solution to the mutual exclusion problem that does not require strict
alternation. For a discussion of Dekker’s algorithm, see Dijkstra (1965).

    In 1981, G.L. Peterson discovered a much simpler way to achieve mutual ex-
clusion, thus rendering Dekker’s solution obsolete. Peterson’s algorithm is shown
in Fig. 2-11. This algorithm consists of two procedures written in ANSI C, which
means that function prototypes should be supplied for all the functions defined
and used. However, to save space, we will not show the prototypes in this or sub-
sequent examples.

#define FALSE 0
#define TRUE 1
#define N     2                           /* number of processes */

int turn;                                 /* whose turn is it? */
int interested[N];                        /* all values initially 0 (FALSE) */

void enter ? region(int process)          /* process is 0 or 1 */
{
     int other;                           /* number of the other process */

     other = 1 − process;            /* the opposite of process */
     interested[process] = TRUE;     /* show that you are interested */
     turn = process;                 /* set flag */
     while (turn == process && interested[other] == TRUE) /* null statement */ ;
}

void leave ? region(int process)          /* process: who is leaving */
{
     interested[process] = FALSE;         /* indicate departure from critical region */
}

Figure 2-11. Peterson’s solution for achieving mutual exclusion.

     Before using the shared variables (i.e., before entering its critical region),
each process calls enter ? region with its own process number, 0 or 1, as the
parameter. This call will cause it to wait, if need be, until it is safe to enter. After
it has finished with the shared variables, the process calls leave ? region to indicate
that it is done and to allow the other process to enter, if it so desires.
     Let us see how this solution works. Initially, neither process is in its critical
region. Now process 0 calls enter ? region. It indicates its interest by setting its
array element and sets turn to 0. Since process 1 is not interested, enter ? region
returns immediately. If process 1 now calls enter ? region, it will hang there until
interested [0] goes to FALSE, an event that only happens when process 0 calls
leave ? region to exit the critical region.
     Now consider the case that both processes call enter ? region almost simul-
taneously. Both will store their process number in turn. Whichever store is done
last is the one that counts; the first one is lost. Suppose that process 1 stores last,
SEC. 2.2                   INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATION                                       75
so turn is 1. When both processes come to the while statement, process 0 executes
it zero times and enters its critical region. Process 1 loops and does not enter its
critical region.

The TSL Instruction

   Now let us look at a proposal that requires a little help from the hardware.
Many computers, especially those designed with multiple processors in mind,
have an instruction
    TSL RX,LOCK
(Test and Set Lock) that works as follows: it reads the contents of the memory
word LOCK into register RX and then stores a nonzero value at the memory
address LOCK. The operations of reading the word and storing into it are
guaranteed to be indivisible—no other processor can access the memory word
until the instruction is finished. The CPU executing the TSL instruction locks the
memory bus to prohibit other CPUs from accessing memory until it is done.
    To use the TSL instruction, we will use a shared variable, LOCK, to coordinate
access to shared memory. When LOCK is 0, any process may set it to 1 using the
TSL instruction and then read or write the shared memory. When it is done, the
process sets LOCK back to 0 using an ordinary move instruction.
    How can this instruction be used to prevent two processes from simultane-
ously entering their critical regions? The solution is given in Fig. 2-12. There a
four-instruction subroutine in a fictitious (but typical) assembly language is
shown. The first instruction copies the old value of LOCK to the register and then
sets LOCK to 1. Then the old value is compared with 0. If it is nonzero, the lock
was already set, so the program just goes back to the beginning and tests it again.
Sooner or later it will become 0 (when the process currently in its critical region is
done with its critical region), and the subroutine returns, with the lock set. Clear-
ing the lock is simple. The program just stores a 0 in LOCK. No special instruc-
tions are needed.

enter ? region:
          TSL REGISTER,LOCK                      | copy LOCK to register and set LOCK to 1
          CMP REGISTER,#0                        | was LOCK zero?
          JNE ENTER ? REGION                     | if it was non zero, LOCK was set, so loop
          RET                                    | return to caller; critical region entered

leave ? region:
         MOVE LOCK,#0                            | store a 0 in LOCK
         RET                                     | return to caller

Figure 2-12. Entering and leaving a critical region using the TSL instruction.

     One solution to the critical region problem is now straightforward. Before en-
tering its critical region, a process calls enter ? region, which does busy waiting
until the lock is free; then it acquires the lock and returns. After the critical region
the process calls leave ? region, which stores a 0 in LOCK. As with all solutions
based on critical regions, the processes must call enter ? region and leave ? region
at the correct times for the method to work. If a process cheats, the mutual exclu-
sion will fail.
2.2.4 Sleep and Wakeup
    Both Peterson’s solution and the solution using TSL are correct, but both have
the defect of requiring busy waiting. In essence, what these solutions do is this:
when a process wants to enter its critical region, it checks to see if the entry is
allowed. If it is not, the process just sits in a tight loop waiting until it is.
    Not only does this approach waste CPU time, but it can also have unexpected
effects. Consider a computer with two processes, H, with high priority and L,
with low priority, which share a critical region. The scheduling rules are such that
H is run whenever it is in ready state. At a certain moment, with L in its critical
region, H becomes ready to run (e.g., an I/O operation completes). H now begins
busy waiting, but since L is never scheduled while H is running, L never gets the
chance to leave its critical region, so H loops forever. This situation is sometimes
referred to as the priority inversion problem.
    Now let us look at some interprocess communication primitives that block
instead of wasting CPU time when they are not allowed to enter their critical
regions. One of the simplest is the pair sleep and wakeup. sleep is a system call
that causes the caller to block, that is, be suspended until another process wakes it
up. The wakeup call has one parameter, the process to be awakened. Alterna-
tively, both sleep and wakeup each have one parameter, a memory address used
to match up sleeps with wakeups.

The Producer-Consumer Problem

     As an example of how these primitives can be used in practice, let us consider
the producer-consumer problem (also known as the bounded buffer problem).
Two processes share a common, fixed-size buffer. One of them, the producer,
puts information into the buffer, and the other one, the consumer, takes it out. (It
is also possible to generalize the problem to have m producers and n consumers,
but we will only consider the case of one producer and one consumer because this
assumption simplifies the solutions).
     Trouble arises when the producer wants to put a new item in the buffer, but it
is already full. The solution is for the producer to go to sleep, to be awakened
when the consumer has removed one or more items. Similarly, if the consumer
wants to remove an item from the buffer and sees that the buffer is empty, it goes
to sleep until the producer puts something in the buffer and wakes it up.
SEC. 2.2                 INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATION                                    77
     This approach sounds simple enough, but it leads to the same kinds of race
conditions we saw earlier with the spooler directory. To keep track of the number
of items in the buffer, we will need a variable, count. If the maximum number of
items the buffer can hold is N, the producer’s code will first test to see if count is
N. If it is, the producer will go to sleep; if it is not, the producer will add an item
and increment count.
     The consumer’s code is similar: first test count to see if it is 0. If it is, go to
sleep; if it is nonzero, remove an item and decrement the counter. Each of the
processes also tests to see if the other should be sleeping, and if not, wakes it up.
The code for both producer and consumer is shown in Fig. 2-13.

#define N 100                                          /* number of slots in the buffer */
int count = 0;                                         /* number of items in the buffer */

void producer(void)
{
     int item;

     while (TRUE) {                                    /* repeat forever */
          item = produce ? item( );                    /* generate next item */
          if (count == N) sleep( );                    /* if buffer is full, go to sleep */
          insert ? item(item);                         /* put item in buffer */
          count = count + 1;                           /* increment count of items in buffer */
          if (count == 1) wakeup(consumer);            /* was buffer empty? */
     }
}

void consumer(void)
{
     int item;

     while (TRUE) {                              /* repeat forever */
          if (count == 0) sleep( );              /* if buffer is empty, got to sleep */
          item = remove ? item( );               /* take item out of buffer */
          count = count − 1;                     /* decrement count of items in buffer */
          if (count == N − 1) wakeup(producer); /* was buffer full? */
          consume ? item(item);                  /* print item */
     }
}

Figure 2-13. The producer-consumer problem with a fatal race condition.

    To express system calls such as sleep and wakeup in C, we will show them as
calls to library routines. They are not part of the standard C library but presum-
ably would be available on any system that actually had these system calls. The

procedures enter ? item and remove ? item, which are not shown, handle the book-
keeping of putting items into the buffer and taking items out of the buffer.
     Now let us get back to the race condition. It can occur because access to
count is unconstrained. The following situation could possibly occur. The buffer
is empty and the consumer has just read count to see if it is 0. At that instant, the
scheduler decides to stop running the consumer temporarily and start running the
producer. The producer enters an item in the buffer, increments count, and no-
tices that it is now 1. Reasoning that count was just 0, and thus the consumer
must be sleeping, the producer calls wakeup to wake the consumer up.
     Unfortunately, the consumer is not yet logically asleep, so the wakeup signal
is lost. When the consumer next runs, it will test the value of count it previously
read, find it to be 0, and go to sleep. Sooner or later the producer will fill up the
buffer and also go to sleep. Both will sleep forever.
     The essence of the problem here is that a wakeup sent to a process that is not
(yet) sleeping is lost. If it were not lost, everything would work. A quick fix is to
modify the rules to add a wakeup waiting bit to the picture. When a wakeup is
sent to a process that is still awake, this bit is set. Later, when the process tries to
go to sleep, if the wakeup waiting bit is on, it will be turned off, but the process
will stay awake. The wakeup waiting bit is a piggy bank for wakeup signals.
     While the wakeup waiting bit saves the day in this simple example, it is easy
to construct examples with three or more processes in which one wakeup waiting
bit is insufficient. We could make another patch, and add a second wakeup wait-
ing bit, or maybe 8 or 32 of them, but in principle the problem is still there.

2.2.5 Semaphores

    This was the situation until E. W. Dijkstra (1965) suggested using an integer
variable to count the number of wakeups saved for future use. In his proposal, a
new variable type, called a semaphore, was introduced. A semaphore could have
the value 0, indicating that no wakeups were saved, or some positive value if one
or more wakeups were pending.
    Dijkstra proposed having two operations, down and up (which are generaliza-
tions of sleep and wakeup, respectively). The down operation on a semaphore
checks to see if the value is greater than 0. If so, it decrements the value (i.e.,
uses up one stored wakeup) and just continues. If the value is 0, the process is put
to sleep without completing the down for the moment. Checking the value,
changing it, and possibly going to sleep is all done as a single, indivisible, atomic
action. It is guaranteed that once a semaphore operation has started, no other
process can access the semaphore until the operation has completed or blocked.
This atomicity is absolutely essential to solving synchronization problems and
avoiding race conditions.
    The up operation increments the value of the semaphore addressed. If one or
more processes were sleeping on that semaphore, unable to complete an earlier
SEC. 2.2                INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATION                                  79
down operation, one of them is chosen by the system (e.g., at random) and is al-
lowed to complete its down. Thus, after an up on a semaphore with processes
sleeping on it, the semaphore will still be 0, but there will be one fewer process
sleeping on it. The operation of incrementing the semaphore and waking up one
process is also indivisible. No process ever blocks doing an up, just as no process
ever blocks doing a wakeup in the earlier model.
    As an aside, in Dijkstra’s original paper, he used the names p and v instead of
down and up, respectively, but since these have no mnemonic significance to peo-
ple who do not speak Dutch (and only marginal significance to those who do), we
will use the terms down and up instead. These were first introduced in Algol 68.

Solving the Producer-Consumer Problem using Semaphores

     Semaphores solve the lost-wakeup problem, as shown in Fig. 2-14. It is es-
sential that they be implemented in an indivisible way. The normal way is to
implement up and down as system calls, with the operating system briefly disa-
bling all interrupts while it is testing the semaphore, updating it, and putting the
process to sleep, if necessary. As all of these actions take only a few instructions,
no harm is done in disabling interrupts. If multiple CPUs are being used, each
semaphore should be protected by a lock variable, with the TSL instruction used
to make sure that only one CPU at a time examines the semaphore. Be sure you
understand that using TSL to prevent several CPUs from accessing the semaphore
at the same time is quite different from busy waiting by the producer or consumer
waiting for the other to empty or fill the buffer. The semaphore operation will
only take a few microseconds, whereas the producer or consumer might take arbi-
trarily long.
     This solution uses three semaphores: one called full for counting the number
of slots that are full, one called empty for counting the number of slots that are
empty, and one called mutex to make sure the producer and consumer do not
access the buffer at the same time. Full is initially 0, empty is initially equal to
the number of slots in the buffer, and mutex is initially 1. Semaphores that are ini-
tialized to 1 and used by two or more processes to ensure that only one of them
can enter its critical region at the same time are called binary semaphores. If
each process does a down just before entering its critical region and an up just
after leaving it, mutual exclusion is guaranteed.
     Now that we have a good interprocess communication primitive at our dispo-
sal, let us go back and look at the interrupt sequence of Fig. 2-5 again. In a sys-
tem using semaphores, the natural way to hide interrupts is to have a semaphore,
initially set to 0, associated with each I/O device. Just after starting an I/O device,
the managing process does a down on the associated semaphore, thus blocking
immediately. When the interrupt comes in, the interrupt handler then does an up
on the associated semaphore, which makes the relevant process ready to run
again. In this model, step 6 in Fig. 2-5 consists of doing an up on the device’s

#define N 100                                 /* number of slots in the buffer */
typedef int semaphore;                        /* semaphores are a special kind of int */
semaphore mutex = 1;                          /* controls access to critical region */
semaphore empty = N;                          /* counts empty buffer slots */
semaphore full = 0;                           /* counts full buffer slots */

void producer(void)
{
     int item;

     while (TRUE) {                           /* TRUE is the constant 1 */
          item = produce ? item( );           /* generate something to put in buffer */
          down(&empty);                       /* decrement empty count */
          down(&mutex);                       /* enter critical region */
          insert ? item(item);                /* put new item in buffer */
          up(&mutex);                         /* leave critical region */
          up(&full);                          /* increment count of full slots */
     }
}

void consumer(void)
{
     int item;

     while (TRUE) {                           /* infinite loop */
          down(&full);                        /* decrement full count */
          down(&mutex);                       /* enter critical region */
          item = remove ? item( );            /* take item from buffer */
          up(&mutex);                         /* leave critical region */
          up(&empty);                         /* increment count of empty slots */
          consume ? item(item);               /* do something with the item */
     }
}

Figure 2-14. The producer-consumer problem using semaphores.

semaphore, so that in step 7 the scheduler will be able to run the device manager.
Of course, if several processes are now ready, the scheduler may choose to run an
even more important process next. We will look at how scheduling is done later
in this chapter.
     In the example of Fig. 2-14, we have actually used semaphores in two dif-
ferent ways. This difference is important enough to make explicit. The mutex
semaphore is used for mutual exclusion. It is designed to guarantee that only one
process at a time will be reading or writing the buffer and the associated variables.
SEC. 2.2               INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATION                                  81
This mutual exclusion is required to prevent chaos. We will study mutual exclu-
sion and how to achieve it more in the next section.
    The other use of semaphores is for synchronization. The full and empty sem-
aphores are needed to guarantee that certain event sequences do or do not occur.
In this case, they ensure that the producer stops running when the buffer is full,
and the consumer stops running when it is empty. This use is different from
mutual exclusion.

2.2.6 Mutexes

     When the semaphore’s ability to count is not needed, a simplified version of
the semaphore, called a mutex, is sometimes used. Mutexes are good only for
managing mutual exclusion to some shared resource or piece of code. They are
easy and efficient to implement, which makes them especially useful in thread
packages that are implemented entirely in user space.
     A mutex is a variable that can be in one of two states: unlocked or locked.
Consequently, only 1 bit is required to represent it, but in practice an integer often
is used, with 0 meaning unlocked and all other values meaning locked. Two pro-
cedures are used with mutexes. When a process (or thread) needs access to a crit-
ical region, it calls mutex ? lock. If the mutex is currently unlocked (meaning that
the critical region is available), the call succeeds and the calling thread is free to
enter the critical region.
     On the other hand, if the mutex is already locked, the caller is blocked until
the process in the critical region is finished and calls mutex ? unlock. If multiple
processes are blocked on the mutex, one of them is chosen at random and allowed
to acquire the lock.

2.2.7 Monitors

     With semaphores interprocess communication looks easy, right? Forget it.
Look closely at the order of the downs before entering or removing items from the
buffer in Fig. 2-14. Suppose that the two downs in the producer’s code were
reversed in order, so mutex was decremented before empty instead of after it. If
the buffer were completely full, the producer would block, with mutex set to 0.
Consequently, the next time the consumer tried to access the buffer, it would do a
down on mutex, now 0, and block too. Both processes would stay blocked forever
and no more work would ever be done. This unfortunate situation is called a
deadlock. We will study deadlocks in detail in Chap. 3.
     This problem is pointed out to show how careful you must be when using
semaphores. One subtle error and everything comes to a grinding halt. It is like
programming in assembly language, only worse, because the errors are race con-
ditions, deadlocks, and other forms of unpredictable and irreproducible behavior.

     To make it easier to write correct programs, Brinch Hansen (1973) and Hoare
(1974) proposed a higher level synchronization primitive called a monitor. Their
proposals differed slightly, as described below. A monitor is a collection of pro-
cedures, variables, and data structures that are all grouped together in a special
kind of module or package. Processes may call the procedures in a monitor when-
ever they want to, but they cannot directly access the monitor’s internal data
structures from procedures declared outside the monitor. This rule, which is com-
mon in modern object-oriented languages such as Java, was relatively unusual for
its time, although objects can be traced back to Simula 67. Figure 2-15 illustrates
a monitor written in an imaginary language, Pidgin Pascal.

monitor example
 integer i;
 condition c;

 procedure producer(x);
 .
 .
 .
 end;

  procedure consumer(x);
  .
  .
  .
  end;
end monitor;

Figure 2-15. A monitor.

     Monitors have a key property that makes them useful for achieving mutual ex-
clusion: only one process can be active in a monitor at any instant. Monitors are a
programming language construct, so the compiler knows they are special and can
handle calls to monitor procedures differently from other procedure calls. Typi-
cally, when a process calls a monitor procedure, the first few instructions of the
procedure will check to see if any other process is currently active within the
monitor. If so, the calling process will be suspended until the other process has
left the monitor. If no other process is using the monitor, the calling process may
enter.
     It is up to the compiler to implement the mutual exclusion on monitor entries,
but a common way is to use a mutex or binary semaphore. Because the compiler,
not the programmer, arranges for the mutual exclusion, it is much less likely that
something will go wrong. In any event, the person writing the monitor does not
have to be aware of how the compiler arranges for mutual exclusion. It is suffi-
cient to know that by turning all the critical regions into monitor procedures, no
two processes will ever execute their critical regions at the same time.
SEC. 2.2               INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATION                                  83
     Although monitors provide an easy way to achieve mutual exclusion, as we
have seen above, that is not enough. We also need a way for processes to block
when they cannot proceed. In the producer-consumer problem, it is easy enough
to put all the tests for buffer-full and buffer-empty in monitor procedures, but how
should the producer block when it finds the buffer full?
     The solution lies in the introduction of condition variables, along with two
operations on them, wait and signal. When a monitor procedure discovers that it
cannot continue (e.g., the producer finds the buffer full), it does a wait on some
condition variable, say, full. This action causes the calling process to block. It
also allows another process that had been previously prohibited from entering the
monitor to enter now.
     This other process, for example, the consumer, can wake up its sleeping part-
ner by doing a signal on the condition variable that its partner is waiting on. To
avoid having two active processes in the monitor at the same time, we need a rule
telling what happens after a signal. Hoare proposed letting the newly awakened
process run, suspending the other one. Brinch Hansen proposed finessing the
problem by requiring that a process doing a signal must exit the monitor im-
mediately. In other words, a signal statement may appear only as the final state-
ment in a monitor procedure. We will use Brinch Hansen’s proposal because it is
conceptually simpler and is also easier to implement. If a signal is done on a con-
dition variable on which several processes are waiting, only one of them, deter-
mined by the system scheduler, is revived.
     There is also a third solution, not proposed by either Hoare or Brinch Hansen.
This is to let the signaler continue to run and allow the waiting process to start
running only after the signaler has exited the monitor.
     Condition variables are not counters. They do not accumulate signals for later
use the way semaphores do. Thus if a condition variable is signaled with no one
waiting on it, the signal is lost. In other words, the wait must come before the sig-
nal. This rule makes the implementation much simpler. In practice it is not a
problem because it is easy to keep track of the state of each process with vari-
ables, if need be. A process that might otherwise do a signal can see that this
operation is not necessary by looking at the variables.
     A skeleton of the producer-consumer problem with monitors is given in
Fig. 2-16 in Pidgin Pascal. The advantage of using Pidgin Pascal here is that it is
pure and simple and follows the Hoare/Brinch Hansen model exactly.
     You may be thinking that the operations wait and signal look similar to sleep
and wakeup, which we saw earlier had fatal race conditions. They are very simi-
lar, but with one crucial difference: sleep and wakeup failed because while one
process was trying to go to sleep, the other one was trying to wake it up. With
monitors, that cannot happen. The automatic mutual exclusion on monitor pro-
cedures guarantees that if, say, the producer inside a monitor procedure discovers
that the buffer is full, it will be able to complete the wait operation without having
to worry about the possibility that the scheduler may switch to the consumer just

monitor ProducerConsumer
     condition full, empty;
     integer count;
     procedure insert(item: integer);
     begin
           if count = N then wait(full);
           insert ? item(item);
           count := count + 1;
           if count = 1 then signal(empty)
     end;
     function remove: integer;
     begin
           if count = 0 then wait(empty);
           remove = remove ? item;
           count := count − 1;
           if count = N − 1 then signal(full)
     end;
     count := 0;
end monitor;

procedure producer;
begin
      while true do
      begin
            item = produce ? item;
            ProducerConsumer.insert(item)
      end
end;
procedure consumer;
begin
      while true do
      begin
            item = ProducerConsumer.remove;
            consume ? item(item)
      end
end;

Figure 2-16. An outline of the producer-consumer problem with monitors.
        Only one monitor procedure at a time is active. The buffer has N slots.

before the wait completes. The consumer will not even be let into the monitor at
all until the wait is finished and the producer is marked as no longer runnable.
     Although Pidgin Pascal is an imaginary language, some real programming
languages also support monitors, although not always in the form designed by
SEC. 2.2               INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATION                                 85
Hoare and Brinch Hansen. One such language is Java. Java is an object-oriented
language that supports user-level threads and also allows methods (procedures) to
be grouped together into classes. By adding the keyword synchronized to a
method declaration, Java guarantees that once any thread has started executing
that method, no other thread will be allowed to start executing any other syn-
chronized method in that class.
     Synchronized methods in Java differ from classical monitors in an essential
way: Java does not have condition variables. Instead, it offers two procedures,
wait and notify that are the equivalent of sleep and wakeup except that when they
are used inside synchronized methods, they are not subject to race conditions.
     By making the mutual exclusion of critical regions automatic, monitors make
parallel programming much less error-prone than with semaphores. Still, they too
have some drawbacks. It is not for nothing that Fig. 2-16 is written in Pidgin Pas-
cal rather than in C, as are the other examples in this book. As we said earlier,
monitors are a programming language concept. The compiler must recognize
them and arrange for the mutual exclusion somehow. C, Pascal, and most other
languages do not have monitors, so it is unreasonable to expect their compilers to
enforce any mutual exclusion rules. In fact, how could the compiler even know
which procedures were in monitors and which were not?
     These same languages do not have semaphores either, but adding semaphores
is easy: all you need to do is add two short assembly code routines to the library to
issue the up and down system calls. The compilers do not even have to know that
they exist. Of course, the operating systems have to know about the semaphores,
but at least if you have a semaphore-based operating system, you can still write
the user programs for it in C or C++ (or even FORTRAN if you are masochistic
enough). With monitors, you need a language that has them built in.
     Another problem with monitors, and also with semaphores, is that they were
designed for solving the mutual exclusion problem on one or more CPUs that all
have access to a common memory. By putting the semaphores in the shared
memory and protecting them with TSL instructions, we can avoid races. When
we go to a distributed system consisting of multiple CPUs, each with its own
private memory, connected by a local area network, these primitives become in-
applicable. The conclusion is that semaphores are too low level and monitors are
not usable except in a few programming languages. Also, none of the primitives
provide for information exchange between machines. Something else is needed.

2.2.8 Message Passing

    That something else is message passing. This method of interprocess com-
munication uses two primitives, send and receive, which, like semaphores and
unlike monitors, are system calls rather than language constructs. As such, they
can easily be put into library procedures, such as

      send(destination, &message);
and
      receive(source, &message);
The former call sends a message to a given destination and the latter one receives
a message from a given source (or from ANY, if the receiver does not care). If no
message is available, the receiver could block until one arrives. Alternatively, it
could return immediately with an error code.

Design Issues for Message Passing Systems

     Message passing systems have many challenging problems and design issues
that do not arise with semaphores or monitors, especially if the communicating
processes are on different machines connected by a network. For example, mes-
sages can be lost by the network. To guard against lost messages, the sender and
receiver can agree that as soon as a message has been received, the receiver will
send back a special acknowledgement message. If the sender has not received
the acknowledgement within a certain time interval, it retransmits the message.
     Now consider what happens if the message itself is received correctly, but the
acknowledgement is lost. The sender will retransmit the message, so the receiver
will get it twice. It is essential that the receiver can distinguish a new message
from the retransmission of an old one. Usually, this problem is solved by putting
consecutive sequence numbers in each original message. If the receiver gets a
message bearing the same sequence number as the previous message, it knows
that the message is a duplicate that can be ignored.
     Message systems also have to deal with the question of how processes are
named, so that the process specified in a send or receive call is unambiguous.
Authentication is also an issue in message systems: how can the client tell that he
is communicating with the real file server, and not with an imposter?
     At the other end of the spectrum, there are also design issues that are impor-
tant when the sender and receiver are on the same machine. One of these is per-
formance. Copying messages from one process to another is always slower than
doing a semaphore operation or entering a monitor. Much work has gone into
making message passing efficient. Cheriton (1984), for example, has suggested
limiting message size to what will fit in the machine’s registers, and then doing
message passing using the registers.

The Producer-Consumer Problem with Message Passing

    Now let us see how the producer-consumer problem can be solved with mes-
sage passing and no shared memory. A solution is given in Fig. 2-17. We assume
that all messages are the same size and that messages sent but not yet received are
buffered automatically by the operating system. In this solution, a total of N mes-
SEC. 2.2                 INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATION                                   87
sages is used, analogous to the N slots in a shared memory buffer. The consumer
starts out by sending N empty messages to the producer. Whenever the producer
has an item to give to the consumer, it takes an empty message and sends back a
full one. In this way, the total number of messages in the system remains constant
in time, so they can be stored in a given amount of memory known in advance.
     If the producer works faster than the consumer, all the messages will end up
full, waiting for the consumer; the producer will be blocked, waiting for an empty
to come back. If the consumer works faster, then the reverse happens: all the
messages will be empties waiting for the producer to fill them up; the consumer
will be blocked, waiting for a full message.

#define N 100                                   /* number of slots in the buffer */

void producer(void)
{
     int item;
     message m;                                 /* message buffer */

    while (TRUE) {
         item = produce ? item( );              /* generate something to put in buffer */
         receive(consumer, &m);                 /* wait for an empty to arrive */
         build ? message(&m, item);             /* construct a message to send */
         send(consumer, &m);                    /* send item to consumer */
    }
}

void consumer(void)
{
     int item, i;
     message m;

    for (i = 0; i < N; i++) send(producer, &m); /* send N empties */
    while (TRUE) {
          receive(producer, &m);             /* get message containing item */
          item = extract ? item(&m);         /* extract item from message */
          send(producer, &m);                /* send back empty reply */
          consume ? item(item);              /* do some1thing with the item */
    }
}

Figure 2-17. The producer-consumer problem with N messages.

    Many variants are possible with message passing. For starters, let us look at
how messages are addressed. One way is to assign each process a unique address
and have messages be addressed to processes. A different way is to invent a new
data structure, called a mailbox. A mailbox is a place to buffer a certain number

of messages, typically specified when the mailbox is created. When mailboxes
are used, the address parameters in the send and receive calls are mailboxes, not
processes. When a process tries to send to a mailbox that is full, it is suspended
until a message is removed from that mailbox, making room for a new one.
     For the producer-consumer problem, both the producer and consumer would
create mailboxes large enough to hold N messages. The producer would send
messages containing data to the consumer’s mailbox, and the consumer would
send empty messages to the producer’s mailbox. When mailboxes are used, the
buffering mechanism is clear: the destination mailbox holds messages that have
been sent to the destination process but have not yet been accepted.
     The other extreme from having mailboxes is to eliminate all buffering. When
this approach is followed, if the send is done before the receive, the sending proc-
ess is blocked until the receive happens, at which time the message can be copied
directly from the sender to the receiver, with no intermediate buffering. Simi-
larly, if the receive is done first, the receiver is blocked until a send happens.
This strategy is often known as a rendezvous. It is easier to implement than a
buffered message scheme but is less flexible since the sender and receiver are for-
ced to run in lockstep.
     The processes that make up the MINIX 3 operating system itself use the ren-
dezvous method with fixed size messages for communication among themselves.
User processes also use this method to communicate with operating system com-
ponents, although a programmer does not see this, since library routines mediate
systems calls. Interprocess communication between user processes in MINIX 3
(and UNIX) is via pipes, which are effectively mailboxes. The only real differ-
ence between a message system with mailboxes and the pipe mechanism is that
pipes do not preserve message boundaries. In other words, if one process writes
10 messages of 100 bytes to a pipe and another process reads 1000 bytes from that
pipe, the reader will get all 10 messages at once. With a true message system,
each read should return only one message. Of course, if the processes agree al-
ways to read and write fixed-size messages from the pipe, or to end each message
with a special character (e.g., linefeed), no problems arise.
     Message passing is commonly used in parallel programming systems. One
well-known message-passing system, for example, is MPI (Message-Passing
Interface). It is widely used for scientific computing. For more information
about it, see for example Gropp et al. (1994) and Snir et al. (1996).

2.3 CLASSICAL IPC PROBLEMS
     The operating systems literature is full of interprocess communication prob-
lems that have been widely discussed using a variety of synchronization methods.
In the following sections we will examine two of the better-known problems.
SEC. 2.3                   CLASSICAL IPC PROBLEMS                                 89

2.3.1 The Dining Philosophers Problem

    In 1965, Dijkstra posed and solved a synchronization problem he called the
dining philosophers problem. Since that time, everyone inventing yet another
synchronization primitive has felt obligated to demonstrate how wonderful the
new primitive is by showing how elegantly it solves the dining philosophers prob-
lem. The problem can be stated quite simply as follows. Five philosophers are
seated around a circular table. Each philosopher has a plate of spaghetti. The
spaghetti is so slippery that a philosopher needs two forks to eat it. Between each
pair of plates is one fork. The layout of the table is illustrated in Fig. 2-18.

Figure 2-18. Lunch time in the Philosophy Department.
    The life of a philosopher consists of alternate periods of eating and thinking.
(This is something of an abstraction, even for philosophers, but the other activities
are irrelevant here.) When a philosopher gets hungry, she tries to acquire her left
and right fork, one at a time, in either order. If successful in acquiring two forks,
she eats for a while, then puts down the forks and continues to think. The key
question is: can you write a program for each philosopher that does what it is sup-
posed to do and never gets stuck? (It has been pointed out that the two-fork
requirement is somewhat artificial; perhaps we should switch from Italian to
Chinese food, substituting rice for spaghetti and chopsticks for forks.)
    Figure 2-19 shows the obvious solution. The procedure take ? fork waits until
the specified fork is available and then seizes it. Unfortunately, the obvious solu-
tion is wrong. Suppose that all five philosophers take their left forks simultane-
ously. None will be able to take their right forks, and there will be a deadlock.
    We could modify the program so that after taking the left fork, the program
checks to see if the right fork is available. If it is not, the philosopher puts down

#define N 5                                  /* number of philosophers */

void philosopher(int i)                      /* i: philosopher number, from 0 to 4 */
{
     while (TRUE) {
          think( );                          /* philosopher is thinking */
          take ? fork(i);                    /* take left fork */
          take ? fork((i+1) % N);            /* take right fork; % is modulo operator */
          eat( );                            /* yum-yum, spaghetti */
          put ? fork(i);                     /* put left fork back on the table */
          put ? fork((i+1) % N);             /* put right fork back on the table */
     }
}

Figure 2-19. A nonsolution to the dining philosophers problem.

the left one, waits for some time, and then repeats the whole process. This propo-
sal too, fails, although for a different reason. With a little bit of bad luck, all the
philosophers could start the algorithm simultaneously, picking up their left forks,
seeing that their right forks were not available, putting down their left forks, wait-
ing, picking up their left forks again simultaneously, and so on, forever. A situa-
tion like this, in which all the programs continue to run indefinitely but fail to
make any progress is called starvation. (It is called starvation even when the
problem does not occur in an Italian or a Chinese restaurant.)
     Now you might think, ‘‘If the philosophers would just wait a random time
instead of the same time after failing to acquire the right-hand fork, the chance
that everything would continue in lockstep for even an hour is very small.’’ This
observation is true, and in nearly all applications trying again later is not a prob-
lem. For example, in a local area network using Ethernet, a computer sends a
packet only when it detects no other computer is sending one. However, because
of transmission delays, two computers separated by a length of cable may send
packets that overlap—a collision. When a collision of packets is detected each
computer waits a random time and tries again; in practice this solution works fine.
However, in some applications one would prefer a solution that always works and
cannot fail due to an unlikely series of random numbers. Think about safety con-
trol in a nuclear power plant.
     One improvement to Fig. 2-19 that has no deadlock and no starvation is to
protect the five statements following the call to think by a binary semaphore.
Before starting to acquire forks, a philosopher would do a down on mutex. After
replacing the forks, she would do an up on mutex. From a theoretical viewpoint,
this solution is adequate. From a practical one, it has a performance bug: only one
philosopher can be eating at any instant. With five forks available, we should be
able to allow two philosophers to eat at the same time.
SEC. 2.3                      CLASSICAL IPC PROBLEMS                                   91

#define N            5                      /* number of philosophers */
#define LEFT         (i+N−1)%N              /* number of i’s left neighbor */
#define RIGHT        (i+1)%N                /* number of i’s right neighbor */
#define THINKING 0                          /* philosopher is thinking */
#define HUNGRY       1                      /* philosopher is trying to get forks */
#define EATING       2                      /* philosopher is eating */
typedef int semaphore;                      /* semaphores are a special kind of int */
int state[N];                               /* array to keep track of everyone’s state */
semaphore mutex = 1;                        /* mutual exclusion for critical regions */
semaphore s[N];                             /* one semaphore per philosopher */
void philosopher(int i)                     /* i: philosopher number, from 0 to N−1 */
{
     while (TRUE) {                         /* repeat forever */
          think( );                         /* philosopher is thinking */
          take ? forks(i);                  /* acquire two forks or block */
          eat( );                           /* yum-yum, spaghetti */
          put ? forks(i);                   /* put both forks back on table */
     }
}
void take ? forks(int i)                    /* i: philosopher number, from 0 to N−1 */
{
     down(&mutex);                          /* enter critical region */
     state[i] = HUNGRY;                     /* record fact that philosopher i is hungry */
     test(i);                               /* try to acquire 2 forks */
     up(&mutex);                            /* exit critical region */
     down(&s[i]);                           /* block if forks were not acquired */
}
void put ? forks(i)                         /* i: philosopher number, from 0 to N−1 */
{
     down(&mutex);                          /* enter critical region */
     state[i] = THINKING;                   /* philosopher has finished eating */
     test(LEFT);                            /* see if left neighbor can now eat */
     test(RIGHT);                           /* see if right neighbor can now eat */
     up(&mutex);                            /* exit critical region */
}

void test(i)                          /* i: philosopher number, from 0 to N−1 */
{
     if (state[i] == HUNGRY && state[LEFT] != EATING && state[RIGHT] != EATING) {
           state[i] = EATING;
           up(&s[i]);
     }
}

Figure 2-20. A solution to the dining philosophers problem.

     The solution presented in Fig. 2-20 is deadlock-free and allows the maximum
parallelism for an arbitrary number of philosophers. It uses an array, state, to
keep track of whether a philosopher is eating, thinking, or hungry (trying to
acquire forks). A philosopher may move into eating state only if neither neighbor
is eating. Philosopher i’s neighbors are defined by the macros LEFT and RIGHT.
In other words, if i is 2, LEFT is 1 and RIGHT is 3.
     The program uses an array of semaphores, one per philosopher, so hungry
philosophers can block if the needed forks are busy. Note that each process runs
the procedure philosopher as its main code, but the other procedures, take ? forks,
put ? forks, and test are ordinary procedures and not separate processes.

2.3.2 The Readers and Writers Problem

     The dining philosophers problem is useful for modeling processes that are
competing for exclusive access to a limited number of resources, such as I/O
devices. Another famous problem is the readers and writers problem which
models access to a database (Courtois et al., 1971). Imagine, for example, an air-
line reservation system, with many competing processes wishing to read and write
it. It is acceptable to have multiple processes reading the database at the same
time, but if one process is updating (writing) the database, no other process may
have access to the database, not even a reader. The question is how do you pro-
gram the readers and the writers? One solution is shown in Fig. 2-21.
     In this solution, the first reader to get access to the data base does a down on
the semaphore db. Subsequent readers merely have to increment a counter, rc.
As readers leave, they decrement the counter and the last one out does an up on
the semaphore, allowing a blocked writer, if there is one, to get in.
     The solution presented here implicitly contains a subtle decision that is worth
commenting on. Suppose that while a reader is using the data base, another
reader comes along. Since having two readers at the same time is not a problem,
the second reader is admitted. A third and subsequent readers can also be admit-
ted if they come along.
     Now suppose that a writer comes along. The writer cannot be admitted to the
data base, since writers must have exclusive access, so the writer is suspended.
Later, additional readers show up. As long as at least one reader is still active,
subsequent readers are admitted. As a consequence of this strategy, as long as
there is a steady supply of readers, they will all get in as soon as they arrive. The
writer will be kept suspended until no reader is present. If a new reader arrives,
say, every 2 seconds, and each reader takes 5 seconds to do its work, the writer
will never get in.
     To prevent this situation, the program could be written slightly differently:
When a reader arrives and a writer is waiting, the reader is suspended behind the
writer instead of being admitted immediately. In this way, a writer has to wait for
readers that were active when it arrived to finish but does not have to wait for
SEC. 2.3                      CLASSICAL IPC PROBLEMS                                 93

typedef int semaphore;                  /* use your imagination */
semaphore mutex = 1;                    /* controls access to ‘rc’ */
semaphore db = 1;                       /* controls access to the database */
int rc = 0;                             /* # of processes reading or wanting to */

void reader(void)
{
     while (TRUE) {                     /* repeat forever */
          down(&mutex);                 /* get exclusive access to ‘rc’ */
          rc = rc + 1;                  /* one reader more now */
          if (rc == 1) down(&db);       /* if this is the first reader ... */
          up(&mutex);                   /* release exclusive access to ‘rc’ */
          read ? data ? base( );        /* access the data */
          down(&mutex);                 /* get exclusive access to ‘rc’ */
          rc = rc − 1;                  /* one reader fewer now */
          if (rc == 0) up(&db);         /* if this is the last reader ... */
          up(&mutex);                   /* release exclusive access to ‘rc’ */
          use ? data ? read( );         /* noncritical region */
     }
}

void writer(void)
{
     while (TRUE) {                     /* repeat forever */
          think ? up ? data( );         /* noncritical region */
          down(&db);                    /* get exclusive access */
          write ? data ? base( );       /* update the data */
          up(&db);                      /* release exclusive access */
     }
}

Figure 2-21. A solution to the readers and writers problem.

readers that came along after it. The disadvantage of this solution is that it
achieves less concurrency and thus lower performance. Courtois et al. present a
solution that gives priority to writers. For details, we refer you to the paper.

2.4 SCHEDULING
    In the examples of the previous sections, we have often had situations in
which two or more processes (e.g., producer and consumer) were logically run-
nable. When a computer is multiprogrammed, it frequently has multiple proc-
esses competing for the CPU at the same time. When more than one process is in

the ready state and there is only one CPU available, the operating system must de-
cide which process to run first. The part of the operating system that makes the
choice is called the scheduler; the algorithm it uses is called the scheduling al-
gorithm.
    Many scheduling issues apply both to processes and threads. Initially, we will
focus on process scheduling, but later we will take a brief look at some issues
specific to thread scheduling.

2.4.1 Introduction to Scheduling

    Back in the old days of batch systems with input in the form of card images
on a magnetic tape, the scheduling algorithm was simple: just run the next job on
the tape. With timesharing systems, the scheduling algorithm became more com-
plex, because there were generally multiple users waiting for service. There may
be one or more batch streams as well (e.g., at an insurance company, for process-
ing claims). On a personal computer you might think there would be only one
active process. After all, a user entering a document on a word processor is
unlikely to be simultaneously compiling a program in the background. However,
there are often background jobs, such as electronic mail daemons sending or re-
ceiving e-mail. You might also think that computers have gotten so much faster
over the years that the CPU is rarely a scarce resource any more. However, new
applications tend to demand more resources. Processing digital photographs or
watching real time video are examples.

Process Behavior

    Nearly all processes alternate bursts of computing with (disk) I/O requests, as
shown in Fig. 2-22. Typically the CPU runs for a while without stopping, then a
system call is made to read from a file or write to a file. When the system call
completes, the CPU computes again until it needs more data or has to write more
data, and so on. Note that some I/O activities count as computing. For example,
when the CPU copies bits to a video RAM to update the screen, it is computing,
not doing I/O, because the CPU is in use. I/O in this sense is when a process
enters the blocked state waiting for an external device to complete its work.
    The important thing to notice about Fig. 2-22 is that some processes, such as
the one in Fig. 2-22(a), spend most of their time computing, while others, such as
the one in Fig. 2-22(b), spend most of their time waiting for I/O. The former are
called compute-bound; the latter are called I/O-bound. Compute-bound proc-
esses typically have long CPU bursts and thus infrequent I/O waits, whereas I/O-
bound processes have short CPU bursts and thus frequent I/O waits. Note that the
key factor is the length of the CPU burst, not the length of the I/O burst. I/O-
bound processes are I/O bound because they do not compute much between I/O
requests, not because they have especially long I/O requests. It takes the same
SEC. 2.4                              SCHEDULING                                           95

(a)

        Long CPU burst

                                                                         Waiting for I/O
                             Short CPU burst

(b)

                                       Time

Figure 2-22. Bursts of CPU usage alternate with periods of waiting for I/O. (a)
        A CPU-bound process. (b) An I/O-bound process.

time to read a disk block no matter how much or how little time it takes to process
the data after they arrive.
    It is worth noting that as CPUs get faster, processes tend to get more I/O-
bound. This effect occurs because CPUs are improving much faster than disks.
As a consequence, the scheduling of I/O-bound processes is likely to become a
more important subject in the future. The basic idea here is that if an I/O-bound
process wants to run, it should get a chance quickly so it can issue its disk request
and keep the disk busy.

When to Schedule

    There are a variety of situations in which scheduling may occur. First,
scheduling is absolutely required on two occasions:
      1. When a process exits.
      2. When a process blocks on I/O, or a semaphore.

In each of these cases the process that had most recently been running becomes
unready, so another must be chosen to run next.
    There are three other occasions when scheduling is usually done, although
logically it is not absolutely necessary at these times:
      1. When a new process is created.
      2. When an I/O interrupt occurs.
      3. When a clock interrupt occurs.
In the case of a new process, it makes sense to reevaluate priorities at this time. In
some cases the parent may be able to request a different priority for its child.

     In the case of an I/O interrupt, this usually means that an I/O device has now
completed its work. So some process that was blocked waiting for I/O may now
be ready to run.
     In the case of a clock interrupt, this is an opportunity to decide whether the
currently running process has run too long. Scheduling algorithms can be divided
into two categories with respect to how they deal with clock interrupts. A non-
preemptive scheduling algorithm picks a process to run and then just lets it run
until it blocks (either on I/O or waiting for another process) or until it voluntarily
releases the CPU. In contrast, a preemptive scheduling algorithm picks a process
and lets it run for a maximum of some fixed time. If it is still running at the end
of the time interval, it is suspended and the scheduler picks another process to run
(if one is available). Doing preemptive scheduling requires having a clock inter-
rupt occur at the end of the time interval to give control of the CPU back to the
scheduler. If no clock is available, nonpreemptive scheduling is the only option.

Categories of Scheduling Algorithms

     Not surprisingly, in different environments different scheduling algorithms are
needed. This situation arises because different application areas (and different
kinds of operating systems) have different goals. In other words, what the sched-
uler should optimize for is not the same in all systems. Three environments worth
distinguishing are

     1. Batch.
     2. Interactive.

     3. Real time.

In batch systems, there are no users impatiently waiting at their terminals for a
quick response. Consequently, nonpreemptive algorithms, or preemptive algo-
rithms with long time periods for each process are often acceptable. This ap-
proach reduces process switches and thus improves performance.
    In an environment with interactive users, preemption is essential to keep one
process from hogging the CPU and denying service to the others. Even if no
process intentionally ran forever, due to a program bug, one process might shut
out all the others indefinitely. Preemption is needed to prevent this behavior.
    In systems with real-time constraints, preemption is, oddly enough, sometimes
not needed because the processes know that they may not run for long periods of
time and usually do their work and block quickly. The difference with interactive
systems is that real-time systems run only programs that are intended to further
the application at hand. Interactive systems are general purpose and may run arbi-
trary programs that are not cooperative or even malicious.
SEC. 2.4                              SCHEDULING                                             97
Scheduling Algorithm Goals

    In order to design a scheduling algorithm, it is necessary to have some idea of
what a good algorithm should do. Some goals depend on the environment (batch,
interactive, or real time), but there are also some that are desirable in all cases.
Some goals are listed in Fig. 2-23. We will discuss these in turn below.

      All systems
            Fairness — giving each process a fair share of the CPU
            Policy enforcement — seeing that stated policy is carried out
            Balance — keeping all parts of the system busy

      Batch systems
           Throughput — maximize jobs per hour
           Turnaround time — minimize time between submission and termination
           CPU utilization — keep the CPU busy all the time

      Interactive systems
            Response time — respond to requests quickly
            Proportionality — meet users’ expectations

      Real—time systems
           Meeting deadlines — avoid losing data
           Predictability — avoid quality degradation in multimedia systems

Figure 2-23. Some goals of the scheduling algorithm under different circumstances.

     Under all circumstances, fairness is important. Comparable processes should
get comparable service. Giving one process much more CPU time than an equiv-
alent one is not fair. Of course, different categories of processes may be treated
differently. Think of safety control and doing the payroll at a nuclear reactor’s
computer center.
     Somewhat related to fairness is enforcing the system’s policies. If the local
policy is that safety control processes get to run whenever they want to, even if it
means the payroll is 30 sec late, the scheduler has to make sure this policy is
enforced.
     Another general goal is keeping all parts of the system busy when possible. If
the CPU and all the I/O devices can be kept running all the time, more work gets
done per second than if some of the components are idle. In a batch system, for
example, the scheduler has control of which jobs are brought into memory to run.
Having some CPU-bound processes and some I/O-bound processes in memory
together is a better idea than first loading and running all the CPU-bound jobs and
then, when they are finished, loading and running all the I/O-bound jobs. If the
latter strategy is used, when the CPU-bound processes are running, they will fight

for the CPU and the disk will be idle. Later, when the I/O-bound jobs come in,
they will fight for the disk and the CPU will be idle. Better to keep the whole sys-
tem running at once by a careful mix of processes.
     The managers of corporate computer centers that run many batch jobs (e.g.,
processing insurance claims) typically look at three metrics to see how well their
systems are performing: throughput, turnaround time, and CPU utilization.
Throughput is the number of jobs per second that the system completes. All
things considered, finishing 50 jobs per second is better than finishing 40 jobs per
second. Turnaround time is the average time from the moment that a batch job is
submitted until the moment it is completed. It measures how long the average
user has to wait for the output. Here the rule is: Small is Beautiful.
     A scheduling algorithm that maximizes throughput may not necessarily mini-
mize turnaround time. For example, given a mix of short jobs and long jobs, a
scheduler that always ran short jobs and never ran long jobs might achieve an
excellent throughput (many short jobs per second) but at the expense of a terrible
turnaround time for the long jobs. If short jobs kept arriving at a steady rate, the
long jobs might never run, making the mean turnaround time infinite while
achieving a high throughput.
     CPU utilization is also an issue with batch systems because on the big main-
frames where batch systems run, the CPU is still a major expense. Thus computer
center managers feel guilty when it is not running all the time. Actually though,
this is not such a good metric. What really matters is how many jobs per second
come out of the system (throughput) and how long it takes to get a job back (turn-
around time). Using CPU utilization as a metric is like rating cars based on how
many times per second the engine turns over.
     For interactive systems, especially timesharing systems and servers, different
goals apply. The most important one is to minimize response time, that is the
time between issuing a command and getting the result. On a personal computer
where a background process is running (for example, reading and storing email
from the network), a user request to start a program or open a file should take pre-
cedence over the background work. Having all interactive requests go first will
be perceived as good service.
     A somewhat related issue is what might be called proportionality. Users
have an inherent (but often incorrect) idea of how long things should take. When
a request that is perceived as complex takes a long time, users accept that, but
when a request that is perceived as simple takes a long time, users get irritated.
For example, if clicking on a icon that calls up an Internet provider using an ana-
log modem takes 45 seconds to establish a connection, the user will probably
accept that as a fact of life. On the other hand, if clicking on an icon that breaks
the connection takes 45 seconds, the user will probably be swearing a blue streak
by the 30-sec mark and frothing at the mouth by 45 sec. This behavior is due to
the common user perception that placing a phone call and getting a connection is
supposed to take a lot longer than just hanging up. In some cases (such as this
SEC. 2.4                           SCHEDULING                                      99
one), the scheduler cannot do anything about the response time, but in other cases
it can, especially when the delay is due to a poor choice of process order.
     Real-time systems have different properties than interactive systems, and thus
different scheduling goals. They are characterized by having deadlines that must
or at least should be met. For example, if a computer is controlling a device that
produces data at a regular rate, failure to run the data-collection process on time
may result in lost data. Thus the foremost need in a real-time system is meeting
all (or most) deadlines.
     In some real-time systems, especially those involving multimedia, predictabil-
ity is important. Missing an occasional deadline is not fatal, but if the audio proc-
ess runs too erratically, the sound quality will deteriorate rapidly. Video is also an
issue, but the ear is much more sensitive to jitter than the eye. To avoid this prob-
lem, process scheduling must be highly predictable and regular.

2.4.2 Scheduling in Batch Systems

    It is now time to turn from general scheduling issues to specific scheduling al-
gorithms. In this section we will look at algorithms used in batch systems. In the
following ones we will examine interactive and real-time systems. It is worth
pointing out that some algorithms are used in both batch and interactive systems.
We will study these later. Here we will focus on algorithms that are only suitable
in batch systems.

First-Come First-Served

    Probably the simplest of all scheduling algorithms is nonpreemptive first-
come first-served. With this algorithm, processes are assigned the CPU in the
order they request it. Basically, there is a single queue of ready processes. When
the first job enters the system from the outside in the morning, it is started
immediately and allowed to run as long as it wants to. As other jobs come in,
they are put onto the end of the queue. When the running process blocks, the first
process on the queue is run next. When a blocked process becomes ready, like a
newly arrived job, it is put on the end of the queue.
    The great strength of this algorithm is that it is easy to understand and equally
easy to program. It is also fair in the same sense that allocating scarce sports or
concert tickets to people who are willing to stand on line starting at 2 A.M. is fair.
With this algorithm, a single linked list keeps track of all ready processes. Pick-
ing a process to run just requires removing one from the front of the queue.
Adding a new job or unblocked process just requires attaching it to the end of the
queue. What could be simpler?
    Unfortunately, first-come first-served also has a powerful disadvantage. Sup-
pose that there is one compute-bound process that runs for 1 sec at a time and
many I/O-bound processes that use little CPU time but each have to perform 1000

disk reads in order to complete. The compute-bound process runs for 1 sec, then
it reads a disk block. All the I/O processes now run and start disk reads. When
the compute-bound process gets its disk block, it runs for another 1 sec, followed
by all the I/O-bound processes in quick succession.
     The net result is that each I/O-bound process gets to read 1 block per second
and will take 1000 sec to finish. With a scheduling algorithm that preempted the
compute-bound process every 10 msec, the I/O-bound processes would finish in
10 sec instead of 1000 sec, and without slowing down the compute-bound process
very much.

Shortest Job First

     Now let us look at another nonpreemptive batch algorithm that assumes the
run times are known in advance. In an insurance company, for example, people
can predict quite accurately how long it will take to run a batch of 1000 claims,
since similar work is done every day. When several equally important jobs are
sitting in the input queue waiting to be started, the scheduler picks the shortest
job first. Look at Fig. 2-24. Here we find four jobs A, B, C, and D with run times
of 8, 4, 4, and 4 minutes, respectively. By running them in that order, the turn-
around time for A is 8 minutes, for B is 12 minutes, for C is 16 minutes, and for D
is 20 minutes for an average of 14 minutes.
          8         4      4      4                        4      4      4         8

          A         B      C     D                         B      C     D          A

                   (a)                                                  (b)

Figure 2-24. An example of shortest job first scheduling. (a) Running four jobs
        in the original order. (b) Running them in shortest job first order.

    Now let us consider running these four jobs using shortest job first, as shown
in Fig. 2-24(b). The turnaround times are now 4, 8, 12, and 20 minutes for an
average of 11 minutes. Shortest job first is provably optimal. Consider the case
of four jobs, with run times of a, b, c, and d, respectively. The first job finishes at
time a, the second finishes at time a + b, and so on. The mean turnaround time is
(4a + 3b + 2c + d)/4. It is clear that a contributes more to the average than the
other times, so it should be the shortest job, with b next, then c, and finally d as
the longest as it affects only its own turnaround time. The same argument applies
equally well to any number of jobs.
    It is worth pointing out that shortest job first is only optimal when all the jobs
are available simultaneously. As a counterexample, consider five jobs, A through
E, with run times of 2, 4, 1, 1, and 1, respectively. Their arrival times are 0, 0, 3,
3, and 3. Initially, only A or B can be chosen, since the other three jobs have not
SEC. 2.4                             SCHEDULING                                     101
arrived yet. Using shortest job first we will run the jobs in the order A, B, C, D, E,
for an average wait of 4.6. However, running them in the order B, C, D, E, A has
an average wait of 4.4.

Shortest Remaining Time Next

    A preemptive version of shortest job first is shortest remaining time next.
With this algorithm, the scheduler always chooses the process whose remaining
run time is the shortest. Again here, the run time has to be known in advance.
When a new job arrives, its total time is compared to the current process’ remain-
ing time. If the new job needs less time to finish than the current process, the
current process is suspended and the new job started. This scheme allows new
short jobs to get good service.
Three-Level Scheduling

     From a certain perspective, batch systems allow scheduling at three different
levels, as illustrated in Fig. 2-25. As jobs arrive at the system, they are initially
placed in an input queue stored on the disk. The admission scheduler decides
which jobs to admit to the system. The others are kept in the input queue until
they are selected. A typical algorithm for admission control might be to look for a
mix of compute-bound jobs and I/O-bound jobs. Alternatively, short jobs could
be admitted quickly whereas longer jobs would have to wait. The admission
scheduler is free to hold some jobs in the input queue and admit jobs that arrive
later if it so chooses.

                                              CPU

                                                       CPU scheduler

 Arriving
   job
             Input
             queue
                                             Main
                                            Memory

                                                                  Memory     Disk
                         Admission
                         scheduler                               scheduler

Figure 2-25. Three-level scheduling.

    Once a job has been admitted to the system, a process can be created for it
and it can contend for the CPU. However, it might well happen that the number

of processes is so large that there is not enough room for all of them in memory.
In that case, some of the processes have to be swapped out to disk. The second
level of scheduling is deciding which processes should be kept in memory and
which ones should be kept on disk. We will call this scheduler the memory
scheduler, since it determines which processes are kept in memory and which on
the disk.
     This decision has to be reviewed frequently to allow the processes on disk to
get some service. However, since bringing a process in from disk is expensive,
the review probably should not happen more often than once per second, maybe
less often. If the contents of main memory are shuffled too often, a large amount
of disk bandwidth will be wasted, slowing down file I/O.
     To optimize system performance as a whole, the memory scheduler might
well want to carefully decide how many processes it wants in memory, called the
degree of multiprogramming, and what kind of processes. If it has information
about which processes are compute bound and which are I/O bound, it can try to
keep a mix of these process types in memory. As a very crude approximation, if a
certain class of process computes about 20% of the time, keeping five of them
around is roughly the right number to keep the CPU busy.
     To make its decisions, the memory scheduler periodically reviews each proc-
ess on disk to decide whether or not to bring it into memory. Among the criteria
that it can use to make its decision are the following ones:
      1. How long has it been since the process was swapped in or out?
      2. How much CPU time has the process had recently?
      3. How big is the process? (Small ones do not get in the way.)
      4. How important is the process?

    The third level of scheduling is actually picking one of the ready processes in
main memory to run next. Often this is called the CPU scheduler and is the one
people usually mean when they talk about the ‘‘scheduler.’’ Any suitable algo-
rithm can be used here, either preemptive or nonpreemptive. These include the
ones described above as well as a number of algorithms to be described in the
next section.

2.4.3 Scheduling in Interactive Systems

    We will now look at some algorithms that can be used in interactive systems.
All of these can also be used as the CPU scheduler in batch systems as well.
While three-level scheduling is not possible here, two-level scheduling (memory
scheduler and CPU scheduler) is possible and common. Below we will focus on
the CPU scheduler and some common scheduling algorithms.
SEC. 2.4                                  SCHEDULING                                     103
Round-Robin Scheduling

     Now let us look at some specific scheduling algorithms. One of the oldest,
simplest, fairest, and most widely used algorithms is round robin. Each process
is assigned a time interval, called its quantum, which it is allowed to run. If the
process is still running at the end of the quantum, the CPU is preempted and given
to another process. If the process has blocked or finished before the quantum has
elapsed, the CPU switching is done when the process blocks, of course. Round
robin is easy to implement. All the scheduler needs to do is maintain a list of
runnable processes, as shown in Fig. 2-26(a). When the process uses up its quan-
tum, it is put on the end of the list, as shown in Fig. 2-26(b).
Current         Next                                   Current
process        process                                 process

      B        F      D       G       A                       F      D       G       A    B

                      (a)                                                   (b)

Figure 2-26. Round-robin scheduling. (a) The list of runnable processes. (b)
          The list of runnable processes after B uses up its quantum.

     The only interesting issue with round robin is the length of the quantum.
Switching from one process to another requires a certain amount of time for doing
the administration—saving and loading registers and memory maps, updating var-
ious tables and lists, flushing and reloading the memory cache, etc. Suppose that
this process switch or context switch, as it is sometimes called, takes 1 msec,
including switching memory maps, flushing and reloading the cache, etc. Also
suppose that the quantum is set at 4 msec. With these parameters, after doing 4
msec of useful work, the CPU will have to spend 1 msec on process switching.
Twenty percent of the CPU time will be wasted on administrative overhead.
Clearly, this is too much.
     To improve the CPU efficiency, we could set the quantum to, say, 100 msec.
Now the wasted time is only 1 percent. But consider what happens on a timeshar-
ing system if ten interactive users hit the carriage return key at roughly the same
time. Ten processes will be put on the list of runnable processes. If the CPU is
idle, the first one will start immediately, the second one may not start until 100
msec later, and so on. The unlucky last one may have to wait 1 sec before getting
a chance, assuming all the others use their full quanta. Most users will perceive a
1-sec response to a short command as sluggish.
     Another factor is that if the quantum is set longer than the mean CPU burst,
preemption will rarely happen. Instead, most processes will perform a blocking
operation before the quantum runs out, causing a process switch. Eliminating pre-
emption improves performance because process switches then only happen when

they are logically necessary, that is, when a process blocks and cannot continue
because it is logically waiting for something.
    The conclusion can be formulated as follows: setting the quantum too short
causes too many process switches and lowers the CPU efficiency, but setting it
too long may cause poor response to short interactive requests. A quantum of
around 20–50 msec is often a reasonable compromise.

Priority Scheduling

     Round-robin scheduling makes the implicit assumption that all processes are
equally important. Frequently, the people who own and operate multiuser com-
puters have different ideas on that subject. At a university, the pecking order may
be deans first, then professors, secretaries, janitors, and finally students. The need
to take external factors into account leads to priority scheduling. The basic idea
is straightforward: Each process is assigned a priority, and the runnable process
with the highest priority is allowed to run.
     Even on a PC with a single owner, there may be multiple processes, some
more important than others. For example, a daemon process sending electronic
mail in the background should be assigned a lower priority than a process display-
ing a video film on the screen in real time.
     To prevent high-priority processes from running indefinitely, the scheduler
may decrease the priority of the currently running process at each clock tick (i.e.,
at each clock interrupt). If this action causes its priority to drop below that of the
next highest process, a process switch occurs. Alternatively, each process may be
assigned a maximum time quantum that it is allowed to run. When this quantum
is used up, the next highest priority process is given a chance to run.
     Priorities can be assigned to processes statically or dynamically. On a mili-
tary computer, processes started by generals might begin at priority 100, processes
started by colonels at 90, majors at 80, captains at 70, lieutenants at 60, and so on.
Alternatively, at a commercial computer center, high-priority jobs might cost 100
dollars an hour, medium priority 75 dollars an hour, and low priority 50 dollars an
hour. The UNIX system has a command, nice, which allows a user to voluntarily
reduce the priority of his process, in order to be nice to the other users. Nobody
ever uses it.
     Priorities can also be assigned dynamically by the system to achieve certain
system goals. For example, some processes are highly I/O bound and spend most
of their time waiting for I/O to complete. Whenever such a process wants the
CPU, it should be given the CPU immediately, to let it start its next I/O request,
which can then proceed in parallel with another process actually computing.
Making the I/O-bound process wait a long time for the CPU will just mean having
it around occupying memory for an unnecessarily long time. A simple algorithm
for giving good service to I/O-bound processes is to set the priority to 1/ f, where f
is the fraction of the last quantum that a process used. A process that used only 1
SEC. 2.4                             SCHEDULING                                     105
msec of its 50 msec quantum would get priority 50, while a process that ran 25
msec before blocking would get priority 2, and a process that used the whole
quantum would get priority 1.
     It is often convenient to group processes into priority classes and use priority
scheduling among the classes but round-robin scheduling within each class. Fig-
ure 2-27 shows a system with four priority classes. The scheduling algorithm is as
follows: as long as there are runnable processes in priority class 4, just run each
one for one quantum, round-robin fashion, and never bother with lower priority
classes. If priority class 4 is empty, then run the class 3 processes round robin. If
classes 4 and 3 are both empty, then run class 2 round robin, and so on. If priori-
ties are not adjusted occasionally, lower priority classes may all starve to death.
                  Queue           Runable processes
                 headers

                 Priority 4                                    (Highest priority)

                 Priority 3

                 Priority 2

                 Priority 1                                    (Lowest priority)

Figure 2-27. A scheduling algorithm with four priority classes.

    MINIX 3 uses a similar system to Fig. 2-27, although there are sixteen priority
classes in the default configuration. In MINIX 3, components of the operating sys-
tem run as processes. MINIX 3 puts tasks (I/O drivers) and servers (memory
manager, file system, and network) in the highest priority classes. The initial
priority of each task or service is defined at compile time; I/O from a slow device
may be given lower priority than I/O from a fast device or even a server. User
processes generally have lower priority than system components, but all priorities
can change during execution.

Multiple Queues

    One of the earliest priority schedulers was in CTSS (Corbató et al., 1962).
CTSS had the problem that process switching was very slow because the 7094
could hold only one process in memory. Each switch meant swapping the current
process to disk and reading in a new one from disk. The CTSS designers quickly
realized that it was more efficient to give CPU-bound processes a large quantum
once in a while, rather than giving them small quanta frequently (to reduce swap-
ping). On the other hand, giving all processes a large quantum would mean poor
response time, as we have already observed. Their solution was to set up priority
classes. Processes in the highest class were run for one quantum. Processes in

the next highest class were run for two quanta. Processes in the next class were
run for four quanta, and so on. Whenever a process used up all the quanta allo-
cated to it, it was moved down one class.
     As an example, consider a process that needed to compute continuously for
100 quanta. It would initially be given one quantum, then swapped out. Next
time it would get two quanta before being swapped out. On succeeding runs it
would get 4, 8, 16, 32, and 64 quanta, although it would have used only 37 of the
final 64 quanta to complete its work. Only 7 swaps would be needed (including
the initial load) instead of 100 with a pure round-robin algorithm. Furthermore, as
the process sank deeper and deeper into the priority queues, it would be run less
and less frequently, saving the CPU for short, interactive processes.
     The following policy was adopted to prevent a process that needed to run for a
long time when it first started but became interactive later, from being punished
forever. Whenever a carriage return was typed at a terminal, the process belong-
ing to that terminal was moved to the highest priority class, on the assumption that
it was about to become interactive. One fine day, some user with a heavily CPU-
bound process discovered that just sitting at the terminal and typing carriage
returns at random every few seconds did wonders for his response time. He told
all his friends. Moral of the story: getting it right in practice is much harder than
getting it right in principle.
     Many other algorithms have been used for assigning processes to priority
classes. For example, the influential XDS 940 system (Lampson, 1968), built at
Berkeley, had four priority classes, called terminal, I/O, short quantum, and long
quantum. When a process that was waiting for terminal input was finally awak-
ened, it went into the highest priority class (terminal). When a process waiting for
a disk block became ready, it went into the second class. When a process was still
running when its quantum ran out, it was initially placed in the third class. How-
ever, if a process used up its quantum too many times in a row without blocking
for terminal or other I/O, it was moved down to the bottom queue. Many other
systems use something similar to favor interactive users and processes over back-
ground ones.
Shortest Process Next
    Because shortest job first always produces the minimum average response
time for batch systems, it would be nice if it could be used for interactive proc-
esses as well. To a certain extent, it can be. Interactive processes generally fol-
low the pattern of wait for command, execute command, wait for command, exe-
cute command, and so on. If we regard the execution of each command as a
separate ‘‘job,’’ then we could minimize overall response time by running the
shortest one first. The only problem is figuring out which of the currently run-
nable processes is the shortest one.
    One approach is to make estimates based on past behavior and run the process
with the shortest estimated running time. Suppose that the estimated time per
SEC. 2.4                             SCHEDULING                                         107
command for some terminal is T 0 . Now suppose its next run is measured to be
T 1 . We could update our estimate by taking a weighted sum of these two
numbers, that is, aT 0 + (1 − a)T 1 . Through the choice of a we can decide to have
the estimation process forget old runs quickly, or remember them for a long time.
With a = 1/2, we get successive estimates of
   T 0 , T 0 /2 + T 1 /2, T 0 /4 + T 1 /4 + T 2 /2, T 0 /8 + T 1 /8 + T 2 /4 + T 3 /2
After three new runs, the weight of T 0 in the new estimate has dropped to 1/8.
    The technique of estimating the next value in a series by taking the weighted
average of the current measured value and the previous estimate is sometimes
called aging. It is applicable to many situations where a prediction must be made
based on previous values. Aging is especially easy to implement when a = 1/2.
All that is needed is to add the new value to the current estimate and divide the
sum by 2 (by shifting it right 1 bit).

Guaranteed Scheduling

    A completely different approach to scheduling is to make real promises to the
users about performance and then live up to them. One promise that is realistic to
make and easy to live up to is this: If there are n users logged in while you are
working, you will receive about 1/n of the CPU power. Similarly, on a single-
user system with n processes running, all things being equal, each one should get
1/n of the CPU cycles.
    To make good on this promise, the system must keep track of how much CPU
each process has had since its creation. It then computes the amount of CPU each
one is entitled to, namely the time since creation divided by n. Since the amount
of CPU time each process has actually had is also known, it is straightforward to
compute the ratio of actual CPU time consumed to CPU time entitled. A ratio of
0.5 means that a process has only had half of what it should have had, and a ratio
of 2.0 means that a process has had twice as much as it was entitled to. The algo-
rithm is then to run the process with the lowest ratio until its ratio has moved
above its closest competitor.

Lottery Scheduling

     While making promises to the users and then living up to them is a fine idea,
it is difficult to implement. However, another algorithm can be used to give simi-
larly predictable results with a much simpler implementation. It is called lottery
scheduling (Waldspurger and Weihl, 1994).
     The basic idea is to give processes lottery tickets for various system
resources, such as CPU time. Whenever a scheduling decision has to be made, a
lottery ticket is chosen at random, and the process holding that ticket gets the

resource. When applied to CPU scheduling, the system might hold a lottery 50
times a second, with each winner getting 20 msec of CPU time as a prize.
     To paraphrase George Orwell: ‘‘All processes are equal, but some processes
are more equal.’’ More important processes can be given extra tickets, to increase
their odds of winning. If there are 100 tickets outstanding, and one process holds
20 of them, it will have a 20 percent chance of winning each lottery. In the long
run, it will get about 20 percent of the CPU. In contrast to a priority scheduler,
where it is very hard to state what having a priority of 40 actually means, here the
rule is clear: a process holding a fraction f of the tickets will get about a fraction f
of the resource in question.
     Lottery scheduling has several interesting properties. For example, if a new
process shows up and is granted some tickets, at the very next lottery it will have
a chance of winning in proportion to the number of tickets it holds. In other
words, lottery scheduling is highly responsive.
     Cooperating processes may exchange tickets if they wish. For example, when
a client process sends a message to a server process and then blocks, it may give
all of its tickets to the server, to increase the chance of the server running next.
When the server is finished, it returns the tickets so the client can run again. In
fact, in the absence of clients, servers need no tickets at all.
     Lottery scheduling can be used to solve problems that are difficult to handle
with other methods. One example is a video server in which several processes are
feeding video streams to their clients, but at different frame rates. Suppose that
the processes need frames at 10, 20, and 25 frames/sec. By allocating these proc-
esses 10, 20, and 25 tickets, respectively, they will automatically divide the CPU
in approximately the correct proportion, that is, 10 : 20 : 25.

Fair-Share Scheduling

     So far we have assumed that each process is scheduled on its own, without
regard to who its owner is. As a result, if user 1 starts up 9 processes and user 2
starts up 1 process, with round robin or equal priorities, user 1 will get 90% of the
CPU and user 2 will get only 10% of it.
     To prevent this situation, some systems take into account who owns a process
before scheduling it. In this model, each user is allocated some fraction of the
CPU and the scheduler picks processes in such a way as to enforce it. Thus if two
users have each been promised 50% of the CPU, they will each get that, no matter
how many processes they have in existence.
     As an example, consider a system with two users, each of which has been
promised 50% of the CPU. User 1 has four processes, A, B, C, and D, and user 2
has only 1 process, E. If round-robin scheduling is used, a possible scheduling
sequence that meets all the constraints is this one:
      A E B E C E D E A E B E C E D E ...
SEC. 2.4                           SCHEDULING                                     109
On the other hand, if user 1 is entitled to twice as much CPU time as user 2, we
might get
    A B E C D E A B E C D E ...
Numerous other possibilities exist, of course, and can be exploited, depending on
what the notion of fairness is.

2.4.4 Scheduling in Real-Time Systems

    A real-time system is one in which time plays an essential role. Typically,
one or more physical devices external to the computer generate stimuli, and the
computer must react appropriately to them within a fixed amount of time. For
example, the computer in a compact disc player gets the bits as they come off the
drive and must convert them into music within a very tight time interval. If the
calculation takes too long, the music will sound peculiar. Other real-time systems
are patient monitoring in a hospital intensive-care unit, the autopilot in an aircraft,
and robot control in an automated factory. In all these cases, having the right
answer but having it too late is often just as bad as not having it at all.
    Real-time systems are generally categorized as hard real time, meaning there
are absolute deadlines that must be met, or else, and soft real time, meaning that
missing an occasional deadline is undesirable, but nevertheless tolerable. In both
cases, real-time behavior is achieved by dividing the program into a number of
processes, each of whose behavior is predictable and known in advance. These
processes are generally short lived and can run to completion in well under a
second. When an external event is detected, it is the job of the scheduler to
schedule the processes in such a way that all deadlines are met.
    The events that a real-time system may have to respond to can be further
categorized as periodic (occurring at regular intervals) or aperiodic (occurring
unpredictably). A system may have to respond to multiple periodic event streams.
Depending on how much time each event requires for processing, it may not even
be possible to handle them all. For example, if there are m periodic events and
event i occurs with period Pi and requires Ci seconds of CPU time to handle each
event, then the load can only be handled if
                                      m   Ci
                                      Σ ??? ≤ 1
                                      i =1 Pi

A real-time system that meets this criteria is said to be schedulable.
    As an example, consider a soft real-time system with three periodic events,
with periods of 100, 200, and 500 msec, respectively. If these events require 50,
30, and 100 msec of CPU time per event, respectively, the system is schedulable
because 0.5 + 0.15 + 0.2 < 1. If a fourth event with a period of 1 sec is added, the
system will remain schedulable as long as this event does not need more than 150

msec of CPU time per event. Implicit in this calculation is the assumption that the
context-switching overhead is so small that it can be ignored.
     Real-time scheduling algorithms can be static or dynamic. The former make
their scheduling decisions before the system starts running. The latter make their
scheduling decisions at run time. Static scheduling only works when there is per-
fect information available in advance about the work needed to be done and the
deadlines that have to be met. Dynamic scheduling algorithms do not have these
restrictions.

2.4.5 Policy versus Mechanism

     Up until now, we have tacitly assumed that all the processes in the system
belong to different users and are thus competing for the CPU. While this is often
true, sometimes it happens that one process has many children running under its
control. For example, a database management system process may have many
children. Each child might be working on a different request, or each one might
have some specific function to perform (query parsing, disk access, etc.). It is
entirely possible that the main process has an excellent idea of which of its chil-
dren are the most important (or the most time critical) and which the least. Unfor-
tunately, none of the schedulers discussed above accept any input from user proc-
esses about scheduling decisions. As a result, the scheduler rarely makes the best
choice.
     The solution to this problem is to separate the scheduling mechanism from
the scheduling policy. What this means is that the scheduling algorithm is
parameterized in some way, but the parameters can be filled in by user processes.
Let us consider the database example once again. Suppose that the kernel uses a
priority scheduling algorithm but provides a system call by which a process can
set (and change) the priorities of its children. In this way the parent can control in
detail how its children are scheduled, even though it does not do the scheduling
itself. Here the mechanism is in the kernel but policy is set by a user process.

2.4.6 Thread Scheduling

     When several processes each have multiple threads, we have two levels of
parallelism present: processes and threads. Scheduling in such systems differs
substantially depending on whether user-level threads or kernel-level threads (or
both) are supported.
     Let us consider user-level threads first. Since the kernel is not aware of the
existence of threads, it operates as it always does, picking a process, say, A, and
giving A control for its quantum. The thread scheduler inside A decides which
thread to run, say A1. Since there are no clock interrupts to multiprogram threads,
this thread may continue running as long as it wants to. If it uses up the process’
entire quantum, the kernel will select another process to run.
SEC. 2.4                                     SCHEDULING                                           111
    When the process A finally runs again, thread A1 will resume running. It will
continue to consume all of A’s time until it is finished. However, its antisocial
behavior will not affect other processes. They will get whatever the scheduler
considers their appropriate share, no matter what is going on inside process A.
    Now consider the case that A’s threads have relatively little work to do per
CPU burst, for example, 5 msec of work within a 50-msec quantum. Conse-
quently, each one runs for a little while, then yields the CPU back to the thread
scheduler. This might lead to the sequence A1, A2, A3, A1, A2, A3, A1, A2, A3,
A1, before the kernel switches to process B. This situation is illustrated in Fig. 2-
28(a).
                  Process A           Process B                   Process A           Process B
Order in which
 threads run

 2. Runtime         1   2   3                                         1    3           2
    system
    picks a
    thread

                     1. Kernel picks a process                      1. Kernel picks a thread

              Possible:     A1, A2, A3, A1, A2, A3             Possible:      A1, A2, A3, A1, A2, A3
              Not possible: A1, B1, A2, B2, A3, B3             Also possible: A1, B1, A2, B2, A3, B3
                                (a)                                             (b)

Figure 2-28. (a) Possible scheduling of user-level threads with a 50-msec proc-
         ess quantum and threads that run 5 msec per CPU burst. (b) Possible scheduling
         of kernel-level threads with the same characteristics as (a).

    The scheduling algorithm used by the run-time system can be any of the ones
described above. In practice, round-robin scheduling and priority scheduling are
most common. The only constraint is the absence of a clock to interrupt a thread
that has run too long.
    Now consider the situation with kernel-level threads. Here the kernel picks a
particular thread to run. It does not have to take into account which process the
thread belongs to, but it can if it wants to. The thread is given a quantum and is
forceably suspended if it exceeds the quantum. With a 50-msec quantum but
threads that block after 5 msec, the thread order for some period of 30 msec might
be A1, B1, A2, B2, A3, B3, something not possible with these parameters and
user-level threads. This situation is partially depicted in Fig. 2-28(b).
    A major difference between user-level threads and kernel-level threads is the
performance. Doing a thread switch with user-level threads takes a handful of
machine instructions. With kernel-level threads it requires a full context switch,
changing the memory map, and invalidating the cache, which is several orders of

magnitude slower. On the other hand, with kernel-level threads, having a thread
block on I/O does not suspend the entire process as it does with user-level threads.
    Since the kernel knows that switching from a thread in process A to a thread
in process B is more expensive that running a second thread in process A (due to
having to change the memory map and having the memory cache spoiled), it can
take this information into account when making a decision. For example, given
two threads that are otherwise equally important, with one of them belonging to
the same process as a thread that just blocked and one belonging to a different
process, preference could be given to the former.
    Another important factor to consider is that user-level threads can employ an
application-specific thread scheduler. For example, consider a web server which
has a dispatcher thread to accept and distribute incoming requests to worker
threads. Suppose that a worker thread has just blocked and the dispatcher thread
and two worker threads are ready. Who should run next? The run-time system,
knowing what all the threads do, can easily pick the dispatcher to run next, so it
can start another worker running. This strategy maximizes the amount of parallel-
ism in an environment where workers frequently block on disk I/O. With kernel-
level threads, the kernel would never know what each thread did (although they
could be assigned different priorities). In general, however, application-specific
thread schedulers can tune an application better than the kernel can.

2.5 OVERVIEW OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3

    Having completed our study of the principles of process management, inter-
process communication, and scheduling, we can now take a look at how they are
applied in MINIX 3. Unlike UNIX, whose kernel is a monolithic program not split
up into modules, MINIX 3 itself is a collection of processes that communicate with
each other and also with user processes, using a single interprocess communica-
tion primitive—message passing. This design gives a more modular and flexible
structure, making it easy, for example, to replace the entire file system by a com-
pletely different one, without having even to recompile the kernel.

2.5.1 The Internal Structure of MINIX 3

   Let us begin our study of MINIX 3 by taking a bird’s-eye view of the system.
MINIX 3 is structured in four layers, with each layer performing a well-defined
function. The four layers are illustrated in Fig. 2-29.
    The kernel in the bottom layer schedules processes and manages the transi-
tions between the ready, running, and blocked states of Fig. 2-2. The kernel also
handles all messages between processes. Message handling requires checking for
legal destinations, locating the send and receive buffers in physical memory, and
SEC. 2.5                OVERVIEW OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                                         113

    Layer
                       User          User         User                   User
     4       Init
                      process       process      process
                                                                …        processes
            Process        File       Info    Network                    Server         User
     3
            manager      system      server    server
                                                              …          processes      mode

            Disk       TTY        Ethernet                               Device
     2
            driver    driver       driver
                                                        …                drivers
                                               Clock         System                     Kernel
     1                  Kernel                 task           task       Kernel
                                                                                        mode

Figure 2-29. MINIX 3 is structured in four layers. Only processes in the bottom
         layer may use privileged (kernel mode) instructions.

copying bytes from sender to receiver. Also part of the kernel is support for
access to I/O ports and interrupts, which on modern processors require use of
privileged kernel mode instructions not available to ordinary processes.
     In addition to the kernel itself, this layer contains two modules that function
similarly to device drivers. The clock task is an I/O device driver in the sense
that it interacts with the hardware that generates timing signals, but it is not user-
accessible like a disk or communications line driver—it interfaces only with the
kernel.
     One of the main functions of layer 1 is to provide a set of privileged kernel
calls to the drivers and servers above it. These include reading and writing I/O
ports, copying data between address spaces, and so on. Implementation of these
calls is done by the system task. Although the system task and the clock task are
compiled into the kernel’s address space, they are scheduled as separate processes
and have their own call stacks.
     Most of the kernel and all of the clock and system tasks are written in C.
However, a small amount of the kernel is written in assembly language. The as-
sembly language parts deal with interrupt handling, the low-level mechanics of
managing context switches between processes (saving and restoring registers and
the like), and low-level parts of manipulating the MMU hardware. By and large,
the assembly-language code handles those parts of the kernel that deal directly
with the hardware at a very low level and which cannot be expressed in C. These
parts have to be rewritten when MINIX 3 is ported to a new architecture.
     The three layers above the kernel could be considered to be a single layer
because the kernel fundamentally treats them all of them the same way. Each one
is limited to user mode instructions, and each is scheduled to run by the kernel.
None of them can access I/O ports directly. Furthermore, none of them can
access memory outside the segments allotted to it.
     However, processes potentially have special privileges (such as the ability to
make kernel calls). This is the real difference between processes in layers 2, 3,
and 4. The processes in layer 2 have the most privileges, those in layer 3 have

some privileges, and those in layer 4 have no special privileges. For example,
processes in layer 2, called device drivers, are allowed to request that the system
task read data from or write data to I/O ports on their behalf. A driver is needed
for each device type, including disks, printers, terminals, and network interfaces.
If other I/O devices are present, a driver is needed for each one of those, as well.
Device drivers may also make other kernel calls, such as requesting that newly-
read data be copied to the address space of a different process.
     The third layer contains servers, processes that provide useful services to the
user processes. Two servers are essential. The process manager (PM) carries
out all the MINIX 3 system calls that involve starting or stopping process execu-
tion, such as fork, exec, and exit, as well as system calls related to signals, such as
alarm and kill, which can alter the execution state of a process. The process
manager also is responsible for managing memory, for instance, with the brk sys-
tem call. The file system (FS) carries out all the file system calls, such as read,
mount, and chdir.
     It is important to understand the difference between kernel calls and POSIX
system calls. Kernel calls are low-level functions provided by the system task to
allow the drivers and servers to do their work. Reading a hardware I/O port is a
typical kernel call. In contrast, the POSIX system calls such as read, fork, and
unlink are high-level calls defined by the POSIX standard, and are available to user
programs in layer 4. User programs contain many POSIX calls but no kernel calls.
Occasionally when we are not being careful with our language we may call a ker-
nel call a system call. The mechanisms used to make these calls are similar, and
kernel calls can be considered a special subset of system calls.
     In addition to the PM and FS, other servers exist in layer 3. They perform
functions that are specific to MINIX 3. It is safe to say that the functionality of the
process manager and the file system will be found in any operating system. The
information server (IS) handles jobs such as providing debugging and status
information about other drivers and servers, something that is more necessary in a
system like MINIX 3, designed for experimentation, than would be the case for a
commercial operating system which users cannot alter. The reincarnation ser-
ver (RS) starts, and if necessary restarts, device drivers that are not loaded into
memory at the same time as the kernel. In particular, if a driver fails during
operation, the reincarnation server detects this failure, kills the driver if it is not
already dead, and starts a fresh copy of the driver, making the system highly fault
tolerant. This functionality is absent from most operating systems. On a net-
worked system the optional network server (inet) is also in level 3. Servers can-
not do I/O directly, but they can communicate with drivers to request I/O. Servers
can also communicate with the kernel via the system task.
     As we noted at the start of Chap. 1, operating systems do two things: manage
resources and provide an extended machine by implementing system calls. In
MINIX 3 the resource management is largely done by the drivers in layer 2, with
help from the kernel layer when privileged access to I/O ports or the interrupt
SEC. 2.5             OVERVIEW OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                            115
system is required. System call interpretation is done by the process manager and
file system servers in layer 3. The file system has been carefully designed as a
file ‘‘server’’ and could be moved to a remote machine with few changes.
     The system does not need to be recompiled to include additional servers. The
process manager and the file system can be supplemented with the network server
and other servers by attaching additional servers as required when MINIX 3 starts
up or later. Device drivers, although typically started when the system is started,
can also be started later. Both device drivers and servers are compiled and stored
on disk as ordinary executable files, but when properly started up they are granted
access to the special privileges needed. A user program called service provides
an interface to the reincarnation server which manages this. Although the drivers
and servers are independent processes, they differ from user processes in that nor-
mally they never terminate while the system is active.
     We will often refer to the drivers and servers in layers 2 and 3 as system
processes. Arguably, system processes are part of the operating system. They do
not belong to any user, and many if not all of them will be activated before the
first user logs on. Another difference between system processes and user proc-
esses is that system processes have higher execution priority than user processes.
In fact, normally drivers have higher execution priority than servers, but this is not
automatic. Execution priority is assigned on a case-by-case basis in MINIX 3; it is
possible for a driver that services a slow device to be given lower priority than a
server that must respond quickly.
     Finally, layer 4 contains all the user processes—shells, editors, compilers, and
user-written a.out programs. Many user processes come and go as users log in, do
work, and log out. A running system normally has some user processes that are
started when the system is booted and which run forever. One of these is init,
which we will describe in the next section. Also, several daemons are likely to be
running. A daemon is a background process that executes periodically or always
waits for some event, such as the arrival of a packet from the network. In a sense
a daemon is a server that is started independently and runs as a user process. Like
true servers installed at startup time, it is possible to configure a daemon to have a
higher priority than ordinary user processes.
     A note about the terms task and device driver is needed. In older versions of
MINIX all device drivers were compiled together with the kernel, which gave
them access to data structures belonging to the kernel and each other. They also
could all access I/O ports directly. They were referred to as ‘‘tasks’’ to distinguish
them from pure independent user-space processes. In MINIX 3, device drivers
have been implemented completely in user-space. The only exception is the clock
task, which is arguably not a device driver in the same sense as drivers that can be
accessed through device files by user processes. Within the text we have taken
pains to use the term ‘‘task’’ only when referring to the clock task or the system
task, both of which are compiled into the kernel to function. We have been care-
ful to replace the word ‘‘task’’ with ‘‘device driver’’ where we refer to user-space

device drivers. However, function names, variable names, and comments in the
source code have not been as carefully updated. Thus, as you look at source code
during your study of MINIX 3 you may find the word ‘‘task’’ where ‘‘device
driver’’ is meant.

2.5.2 Process Management in MINIX 3

     Processes in MINIX 3 follow the general process model described at length
earlier in this chapter. Processes can create subprocesses, which in turn can create
more subprocesses, yielding a tree of processes. In fact, all the user processes in
the whole system are part of a single tree with init (see Fig. 2-29) at the root.
Servers and drivers are a special case, of course, since some of them must be
started before any user process, including init.

MINIX 3 Startup

     How does an operating system start up? We will summarize the MINIX 3
startup sequence in the next few pages. For a look at how some other operating
systems do this, see Dodge et al. (2005).
     On most computers with disk devices, there is a boot disk hierarchy. Typi-
cally, if a floppy disk is in the first floppy disk drive, it will be the boot disk. If no
floppy disk is present and a CD-ROM is present in the first CD-ROM drive, it
becomes the boot disk. If there is neither a floppy disk nor a CD-ROM present,
the first hard drive becomes the boot disk. The order of this hierarchy may be
configurable by entering the BIOS immediately after powering the computer up.
Additional devices, especially other removable storage devices, may be supported
as well.
     When the computer is turned on, if the boot device is a diskette, the hardware
reads the first sector of the first track of the boot disk into memory and executes
the code it finds there. On a diskette this sector contains the bootstrap program.
It is very small, since it has to fit in one sector (512 bytes). The MINIX 3 bootstrap
loads a larger program, boot, which then loads the operating system itself.
     In contrast, hard disks require an intermediate step. A hard disk is divided
into partitions, and the first sector of a hard disk contains a small program and
the disk’s partition table. Collectively these two pieces are called the master
boot record. The program part is executed to read the partition table and to
select the active partition. The active partition has a bootstrap on its first sector,
which is then loaded and executed to find and start a copy of boot in the partition,
exactly as is done when booting from a diskette.
     CD-ROMs came along later in the history of computers than floppy disks and
hard disks, and when support for booting from a CD-ROM is present it is capable
SEC. 2.5              OVERVIEW OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                            117
of more than just loading one sector. A computer that supports booting from a
CD-ROM can load a large block of data into memory immediately. Typically
what is loaded from the CD-ROM is an exact copy of a bootable floppy disk,
which is placed in memory and used as a RAM disk. After this first step control
is transferred to the RAM disk and booting continues exactly as if a physical
floppy disk were the boot device. On an older computer which has a CD-ROM
drive but does not support booting from a CD-ROM, the bootable floppy disk
image can be copied to a floppy disk which can then be used to start the system.
The CD-ROM must be in the CD-ROM drive, of course, since the bootable floppy
disk image expects that.
     In any case, the MINIX 3 boot program looks for a specific multipart file on
the diskette or partition and loads the individual parts into memory at the proper
locations. This is the boot image. The most important parts are the kernel (which
include the clock task and the system task), the process manager, and the file sys-
tem. Additionally, at least one disk driver must be loaded as part of the boot
image. There are several other programs loaded in the boot image. These include
the reincarnation server, the RAM disk, console, and log drivers, and init.
     It should be strongly emphasized that all parts of the boot image are separate
programs. After the essential kernel, process manager and file system have been
loaded many other parts could be loaded separately. An exception is the reincar-
nation server. It must be part of the boot image. It gives ordinary processes
loaded after initialization the special priorities and privileges which make them
into system processes, It can also restart a crashed driver, which explains its
name. As mentioned above, at least one disk driver is essential. If the root file
system is to be copied to a RAM disk, the memory driver is also required, other-
wise it could be loaded later. The tty and log drivers are optional in the boot
image. They are loaded early just because it is useful to be able to display mes-
sages on the console and save information to a log early in the startup process.
Init could certainly be loaded later, but it controls initial configuration of the sys-
tem, and it was easiest just to include it in the boot image file.
     Startup is not a trivial operation. Operations that are in the realms of the disk
driver and the file system must be performed by boot before these parts of the sys-
tem are active. In a later section we will detail how MINIX 3 is started. For now,
suffice it to say that once the loading operation is complete the kernel starts run-
ning.
     During its initialization phase the kernel starts the system and clock tasks, and
then the process manager and the file system. The process manager and the file
system then cooperate in starting other servers and drivers that are part of the boot
image. When all these have run and initialized themselves, they will block, wait-
ing for something to do. MINIX 3 scheduling prioritizes processes. Only when all
tasks, drivers, and servers loaded in the boot image have blocked will init, the first
user process, be executed. System components loaded with the boot image or
during initialization are shown in Fig. 2-30.

                                                                           
             Component ? Description                                                                            ? Loaded by                            ?
                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                             
                                   kernel        ? Kernel + clock and system tasks                                 ? (in boot image) ?
              pm                                  ? Process manager                                                 ? (in boot image) ?
                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                             
                                   fs                ? File system                                                     ? (in boot image) ?
                                                                                                                                                              
                                   rs                   ? (Re)starts servers and drivers
                                                                                                                            (in boot image) ?
                                                                               
                                   memory                ? RAM disk driver                                                 ? (in boot image) ?
                                                                                                                                                                
                                   log                      ? Buffers log output
                                                                                                                                (in boot image) ?
                    tty                                      ? Console and keyboard driver                                     ? (in boot image) ?
                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                         
                                   driver                       ? Disk (at, bios, or floppy) driver                               ? (in boot image) ?
                       init                                      ? parent of all user processes                                    ? (in boot image) ?
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                            
                                   floppy                           ? Floppy driver (if booted from hard disk) ? /etc/rc                                             ?
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                   is                                  ? Information server (for debug dumps) ? /etc/rc
                                                                                                                                                                          
                             cmos                                       ? Reads CMOS clock to set time                                  ? /etc/rc                          ?
                             
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
                                   random                                  ? Random number generator                                       ? /etc/rc                           ?
                                 printer                                    ? Printer driver                                                ? /etc/rc                            ?
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                    

Figure 2-30. Some important MINIX 3 system components. Others such as an
         Ethernet driver and the inet server may also be present.

Initialization of the Process Tree

     Init is the first user process, and also the last process loaded as part of the
boot image. You might think building of a process tree such as that of Fig. 1-5
begins once init starts running. Well, not exactly. That would be true in a con-
ventional operating system, but MINIX 3 is different. First, there are already quite
a few system processes running by the time init gets to run. The tasks CLOCK
and SYSTEM that run within the kernel are unique processes that are not visible
outside of the kernel. They receive no PIDs and are not considered part of any
tree of processes. The process manager is the first process to run in user space; it
is given PID 0 and is neither a child nor a parent of any other process. The rein-
carnation server is made the parent of all the other processes started from the boot
image (e.g., the drivers and servers). The logic of this is that the reincarnation
server is the process that should be informed if any of these should need to be res-
tarted.
     As we will see, even after init starts running there are differences between the
way a process tree is built in MINIX 3 and the conventional concept. Init in a
UNIX-like system is given PID 1, and even though init is not the first process to
run, the traditional PID 1 is reserved for it in MINIX 3. Like all the user space
processes in the boot image (except the process manager), init is made one of the
children of the reincarnation server. As in a standard UNIX-like system, init first
executes the /etc/rc shell script. This script starts additional drivers and servers
SEC. 2.5              OVERVIEW OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                              119
that are not part of the boot image. Any program started by the rc script will be a
child of init. One of the first programs run is a utility called service. Service
itself runs as a child of init, as would be expected. But now things once again
vary from the conventional.
     Service is the user interface to the reincarnation server. The reincarnation ser-
ver starts an ordinary program and converts it into a system process. It starts
floppy (if it was not used in booting the system), cmos (which is needed to read
the real-time clock), and is, the information server which manages the debug
dumps that are produced by pressing function keys (F1, F2, etc.) on the console
keyboard. One of the actions of the reincarnation server is to adopt all system
processes except the process manager as its own children.
     After the cmos device driver has been started the rc script can initialize the
real-time clock. Up to this point all files needed must be found on the root device.
The servers and drivers needed initially are in the /sbin directory; other commands
needed for startup are in /bin. Once the initial startup steps have been completed
other file systems such as /usr are mounted. An important function of the rc script
is to check for file system problems that might have resulted from a previous sys-
tem crash. The test is simple—when the system is shutdown correctly by execut-
ing the shutdown command an entry is written to the login history file,
/usr/adm/wtmp. The command shutdown –C checks whether the last entry in
wtmp is a shutdown entry. If not, it is assumed an abnormal shutdown occurred,
and the fsck utility is run to check all file systems. The final job of /etc/rc is to
start daemons. This may be done by subsidiary scripts. If you look at the output
of a ps axl command, which shows both PIDs and parent PIDs (PPIDs), you will
see that daemons such as update and usyslogd will normally be the among the first
persistent processes which are children of init.
     Finally init reads the file /etc/ttytab, which lists all potential terminal devices.
Those devices that can be used as login terminals (in the standard distribution, just
the main console and up to three virtual consoles, but serial lines and network
pseudo terminals can be added) have an entry in the getty field of /etc/ttytab, and
init forks off a child process for each such terminal. Normally, each child exe-
cutes /usr/bin/getty which prints a message, then waits for a name to be typed. If
a particular terminal requires special treatment (e.g., a dial-up line) /etc/ttytab can
specify a command (such as /usr/bin/stty) to be executed to initialize the line
before running getty.
     When a user types a name to log in, /usr/bin/login is called with the name as
its argument. Login determines if a password is required, and if so prompts for
and verifies the password. After a successful login, login executes the user’s shell
(by default /bin/sh, but another shell may be specified in the /etc/passwd file).
The shell waits for commands to be typed and then forks off a new process for
each command. In this way, the shells are the children of init, the user processes
are the grandchildren of init, and all the user processes in the system are part of a
single tree. In fact, except for the tasks compiled into the kernel and the process

manager, all processes, both system processes and user processes, form a tree.
But unlike the process tree of a conventional UNIX system, init is not at the root
of the tree, and the structure of the tree does not allow one to determine the order
in which system processes were started.
    The two principal MINIX 3 system calls for process management are fork and
exec. Fork is the only way to create a new process. Exec allows a process to exe-
cute a specified program. When a program is executed, it is allocated a portion of
memory whose size is specified in the program file’s header. It keeps this amount
of memory throughout its execution, although the distribution among data seg-
ment, stack segment, and unused can vary as the process runs.
    All the information about a process is kept in the process table, which is
divided up among the kernel, process manager, and file system, with each one
having those fields that it needs. When a new process comes into existence (by
fork), or an old process terminates (by exit or a signal), the process manager first
updates its part of the process table and then sends messages to the file system and
kernel telling them to do likewise.

2.5.3 Interprocess Communication in MINIX 3

    Three primitives are provided for sending and receiving messages. They are
called by the C library procedures
    send(dest, &message);
to send a message to process dest,
    receive(source, &message);
to receive a message from process source (or ANY), and
    sendrec(src ? dst, &message);
to send a message and wait for a reply from the same process. The second param-
eter in each call is the local address of the message data. The message passing
mechanism in the kernel copies the message from the sender to the receiver. The
reply (for sendrec) overwrites the original message. In principle this kernel
mechanism could be replaced by a function which copies messages over a net-
work to a corresponding function on another machine, to implement a distributed
system. In practice this would be complicated somewhat by the fact that message
contents sometimes include pointers to large data structures, and a distributed sys-
tem would have to provide for copying the data itself over the network.
    Each task, driver or server process is allowed to exchange messages only with
certain other processes. Details of how this is enforced will be described later.
The usual flow of messages is downward in the layers of Fig 2-29, and messages
can be between processes in the same layer or between processes in adjacent
SEC. 2.5             OVERVIEW OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                            121
layers. User processes cannot send messages to each other. User processes in
layer 4 can initiate messages to servers in layer 3, servers in layer 3 can initiate
messages to drivers in layer 2.
    When a process sends a message to a process that is not currently waiting for
a message, the sender blocks until the destination does a receive. In other words,
MINIX 3 uses the rendezvous method to avoid the problems of buffering sent, but
not yet received, messages. The advantage of this approach is that it is simple and
eliminates the need for buffer management (including the possibility of running
out of buffers). In addition, because all messages are of fixed length determined
at compile time, buffer overrun errors, a common source of bugs, are structurally
prevented.
    The basic purpose of the restrictions on exchanges of messages is that if proc-
ess A is allowed to generate a send or sendrec directed to process B, then process
B can be allowed to call receive with A designated as the sender, but B should not
be allowed to send to A. Obviously, if A tries to send to B and blocks, and B tries
to send to A and blocks we have a deadlock. The ‘‘resource’’ that each would
need to complete the operations is not a physical resource like an I/O device, it is
a call to receive by the target of the message. We will have more to say about
deadlocks in Chap. 3.
    Occasionally something different from a blocking message is needed. There
exists another important message-passing primitive. It is called by the C library
procedure
    notify(dest);
and is used when a process needs to make another process aware that something
important has happened. A notify is nonblocking, which means the sender contin-
ues to execute whether or not the recipient is waiting. Because it does not block,
a notification avoids the possibility of a message deadlock.
    The message mechanism is used to deliver a notification, but the information
conveyed is limited. In the general case the message contains only the identity of
the sender and a timestamp added by the kernel. Sometimes this is all that is
necessary. For instance, the keyboard uses a notify call when one of the function
keys (F1 to F12 and shifted F1 to F12) is pressed. In MINIX 3, function keys are
used to trigger debugging dumps. The Ethernet driver is an example of a process
that generates only one kind of debug dump and never needs to get any other com-
munication from the console driver. Thus a notification to the Ethernet driver
from the keyboard driver when the dump-Ethernet-stats key is pressed is unambi-
guous. In other cases a notification is not sufficient, but upon receiving a notifica-
tion the target process can send a message to the originator of the notification to
request more information.
    There is a reason notification messages are so simple. Because a notify call
does not block, it can be made when the recipient has not yet done a receive. But
the simplicity of the message means that a notification that cannot be received is

easily stored so the recipient can be informed of it the next time the recipient calls
receive. In fact, a single bit suffices. Notifications are meant for use between
system processes, of which there can be only a relatively small number. Every
system process has a bitmap for pending notifications, with a distinct bit for every
system process. So if process A needs to send a notification to process B at a time
when process B is not blocked on a receive, the message-passing mechanism sets
a bit which corresponds to A in B’s bitmap of pending notifications. When B
finally does a receive, the first step is to check its pending notifications bitmap. It
can learn of attempted notifications from multiple sources this way. The single
bit is enough to regenerate the information content of the notification. It tells the
identity of the sender, and the message passing code in the kernel adds the times-
tamp when it is delivered. Timestamps are used primarily to see if timers have
expired, so it does not matter that the timestamp may be for a time later than the
time when the sender first tried to send the notification.
     There is a further refinement to the notification mechanism. In certain cases
an additional field of the notification message is used. When the notification is
generated to inform a recipient of an interrupt, a bitmap of all possible sources of
interrupts is included in the message. And when the notification is from the sys-
tem task a bitmap of all pending signals for the recipient is part of the message.
The natural question at this point is, how can this additional information be stored
when the notification must be sent to a process that is not trying to receive a mes-
sage? The answer is that these bitmaps are in kernel data structures. They do not
need to be copied to be preserved. If a notification must be deferred and reduced
to setting a single bit, when the recipient eventually does a receive and the notifi-
cation message is regenerated, knowing the origin of the notification is enough to
specify which additional information needs to be included in the message. And
for the recipient, the origin of the notification also tells whether or not the mes-
sage contains additional information, and, if so, how it is to be interpreted,
     A few other primitives related to interprocess communication exist. They will
be mentioned in a later section. They are less important than send, receive, send-
rec, and notify.

2.5.4 Process Scheduling in MINIX 3

     The interrupt system is what keeps a multiprogramming operating system go-
ing. Processes block when they make requests for input, allowing other processes
to execute. When input becomes available, the current running process is inter-
rupted by the disk, keyboard, or other hardware. The clock also generates inter-
rupts that are used to make sure a running user process that has not requested
input eventually relinquishes the CPU, to give other processes their chance to run.
It is the job of the lowest layer of MINIX 3 to hide these interrupts by turning them
into messages. As far as processes are concerned, when an I/O device completes
SEC. 2.5              OVERVIEW OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                            123
an operation it sends a message to some process, waking it up and making it eligi-
ble to run.
     Interrupts are also generated by software, in which case they are often called
traps. The send and receive operations that we described above are translated by
the system library into software interrupt instructions which have exactly the
same effect as hardware-generated interrupts—the process that executes a
software interrupt is immediately blocked and the kernel is activated to process
the interrupt. User programs do not refer to send or receive directly, but any time
one of the system calls listed in Fig. 1-9 is invoked, either directly or by a library
routine, sendrec is used internally and a software interrupt is generated.
     Each time a process is interrupted (whether by a conventional I/O device or
by the clock) or due to execution of a software interrupt instruction, there is an
opportunity to redetermine which process is most deserving of an opportunity to
run. Of course, this must be done whenever a process terminates, as well, but in a
system like MINIX 3 interruptions due to I/O operations or the clock or message
passing occur more frequently than process termination.
     The MINIX 3 scheduler uses a multilevel queueing system. Sixteen queues
are defined, although recompiling to use more or fewer queues is easy. The
lowest priority queue is used only by the IDLE process which runs when there is
nothing else to do. User processes start by default in a queue several levels higher
than the lowest one.
     Servers are normally scheduled in queues with priorities higher than allowed
for user processes, drivers in queues with priorities higher than those of servers,
and the clock and system tasks are scheduled in the highest priority queue. Not
all of the sixteen available queues are likely to be in use at any time. Processes
are started in only a few of them. A process may be moved to a different priority
queue by the system or (within certain limits) by a user who invokes the nice
command. The extra levels are available for experimentation, and as additional
drivers are added to MINIX 3 the default settings can be adjusted for best perfor-
mance. For instance, if it were desired to add a server to stream digital audio or
video to a network, such a server might be assigned a higher starting priority than
current servers, or the initial priority of a current server or driver might be reduced
in order for the new server to achieve better performance.
     In addition to the priority determined by the queue on which a process is
placed, another mechanism is used to give some processes an edge over others.
The quantum, the time interval allowed before a process is preempted, is not the
same for all processes. User processes have a relatively low quantum. Drivers
and servers normally should run until they block. However, as a hedge against
malfunction they are made preemptable, but are given a large quantum. They are
allowed to run for a large but finite number of clock ticks, but if they use their
entire quantum they are preempted in order not to hang the system. In such a case
the timed-out process will be considered ready, and can be put on the end of its
queue. However, if a process that has used up its entire quantum is found to have

been the process that ran last, this is taken as a sign it may be stuck in a loop and
preventing other processes with lower priority from running. In this case its prior-
ity is lowered by putting it on the end of a lower priority queue. If the process
times out again and another process still has not been able to run, its priority will
again be lowered. Eventually, something else should get a chance to run.
     A process that has been demoted in priority can earn its way back to a higher
priority queue. If a process uses all of its quantum but is not preventing other
processes from running it will be promoted to a higher priority queue, up to the
maximum priority permitted for it. Such a process apparently needs its quantum,
but is not being inconsiderate of others.
     Otherwise, processes are scheduled using a slightly modified round robin. If a
process has not used its entire quantum when it becomes unready, this is taken to
mean that it blocked waiting for I/O, and when it becomes ready again it is put on
the head of the queue, but with only the left-over part of its previous quantum.
This is intended to give user processes quick response to I/O. A process that
became unready because it used its entire quantum is placed at the end of the
queue in pure round robin fashion.
     With tasks normally having the highest priority, drivers next, servers below
drivers, and user processes last, a user process will not run unless all system proc-
esses have nothing to do, and a system process cannot be prevented from running
by a user process.
     When picking a process to run, the scheduler checks to see if any processes
are queued in the highest priority queue. If one or more are ready, the one at the
head of the queue is run. If none is ready the next lower priority queue is simi-
larly tested, and so on. Since drivers respond to requests from servers and servers
respond to requests from user processes, eventually all high priority processes
should complete whatever work was requested of them. They will then block
with nothing to do until user processes get a turn to run and make more requests.
If no process is ready, the IDLE process is chosen. This puts the CPU in a low-
power mode until the next interrupt occurs.
     At each clock tick, a check is made to see if the current process has run for
more than its allotted quantum. If it has, the scheduler moves it to the end of its
queue (which may require doing nothing if it is alone on the queue). Then the
next process to run is picked, as described above. Only if there are no processes
on higher-priority queues and if the previous process is alone on its queue will it
get to run again immediately. Otherwise the process at the head of the highest
priority nonempty queue will run next. Essential drivers and servers are given
such large quanta that normally they are normally never preempted by the clock.
But if something goes wrong their priority can be temporarily lowered to prevent
the system from coming to a total standstill. Probably nothing useful can be done
if this happens to an essential server, but it may be possible to shut the system
down gracefully, preventing data loss and possibly collecting information that can
help in debugging the problem.
SEC. 2.6          IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                            125
2.6 IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3
     We are now moving closer to looking at the actual code, so a few words about
the notation we will use are perhaps in order. The terms ‘‘procedure,’’ ‘‘function,’’
and ‘‘routine’’ will be used interchangeably. Names of variables, procedures, and
files will be written in italics, as in rw ? flag. When a variable, procedure, or file
name starts a sentence, it will be capitalized, but the actual names begin with
lower case letters. There are a few exceptions, the tasks which are compiled into
the kernel are identified by upper case names, such as CLOCK, SYSTEM, and
IDLE. System calls will be in lower case Helvetica, for example, read.
     The book and the software, both of which are continuously evolving, did not
‘‘go to press’’ on the same day, so there may be minor discrepancies between the
references to the code, the printed listing, and the CD-ROM version. Such differ-
ences generally only affect a line or two, however. The source code printed in the
book has been simplified by omitting code used to compile options that are not
discussed in the book. The complete version is on the CD-ROM. The MINIX 3
Web site (www.minix3.org) has the current version, which has new features and
additional software and documentation.

2.6.1 Organization of the MINIX 3 Source Code

    The implementation of MINIX 3 as described in this book is for an IBM PC-
type machine with an advanced processor chip (e.g., 80386, 80486, Pentium, Pen-
tium Pro, II, III, 4, M, or D) that uses 32-bit words. We will refer to all of these
as Intel 32-bit processors. The full path to the C language source code on a stan-
dard Intel-based platform is /usr/src/ (a trailing ‘‘/’’ in a path name indicates that it
refers to a directory). The source directory tree for other platforms may be in a
different location. Throughout the book, MINIX 3 source code files will be re-
ferred to using a path starting with the top src/ directory. An important subdirec-
tory of the source tree is src/include/, where the master copy of the C header files
are located. We will refer to this directory as include/.
    Each directory in the source tree contains a file named Makefile which di-
rects the operation of the UNIX-standard make utility. The Makefile controls com-
pilation of files in its directory and may also direct compilation of files in one or
more subdirectories. The operation of make is complex and a full description is
beyond the scope of this section, but it can be summarized by saying that make
manages efficient compilation of programs involving multiple source files. Make
assures that all necessary files are compiled. It tests previously compiled modules
to see if they are up to date and recompiles any whose source files have been
modified since the previous compilation. This saves time by avoiding recompila-
tion of files that do not need to be recompiled. Finally, make directs the combina-
tion of separately compiled modules into an executable program and may also
manage installation of the completed program.

    All or part of the src/ tree can be relocated, since the Makefile in each source
directory uses a relative path to C source directories. For instance, you may want
to make a source directory on the root filesystem, /src/, for speedy compilation if
the root device is a RAM disk. If you are developing a special version you can
make a copy of src/ under another name.
    The path to the C header files is a special case. During compilation every
Makefile expects to find header files in /usr/include/ (or the equivalent path on a
non-Intel platform). However, src/tools/Makefile, used to recompile the system,
expects to find a master copy of the headers in /usr/src/include (on an Intel sys-
tem). Before recompiling the system, however, the entire /usr/include/ directory
tree is deleted and /usr/src/include/ is copied to /usr/include/. This was done to
make it possible to keep all files needed in the development of MINIX 3 in one
place. This also makes it easy to maintain multiple copies of the entire source and
headers tree for experimenting with different configurations of the MINIX 3 sys-
tem. However, if you want to edit a header file as part of such an experiment, you
must be sure to edit the copy in the src/include directory and not the one in
/usr/include/.
    This is a good place to point out for newcomers to the C language how file
names are quoted in a #include statement. Every C compiler has a default header
directory where it looks for include files. Frequently, this is /usr/include/. When
the name of a file to include is quoted between less-than and greater-than symbols
(‘‘< ... >’’) the compiler searches for the file in the default header directory or a
specified subdirectory, for example,
    #include <filename>
includes a file from /usr/include/.
    Many programs also require definitions in local header files that are not meant
to be shared system-wide. Such a header may have the same name as and be
meant to replace or supplement a standard header. When the name is quoted
between ordinary quote characters (‘‘ ′′ ... ′′’’) the file is searched for first in the
same directory as the source file (or a specified subdirectory) and then, if not
found there, in the default directory. Thus
    #include ′′filename′′
reads a local file.
    The include/ directory contains a number of POSIX standard header files. In
addition, it has three subdirectories:
      sys/       – additional POSIX headers.
      minix/     – header files used by the MINIX 3 operating system.
      ibm/       – header files with IBM PC-specific definitions.
To support extensions to MINIX 3 and programs that run in the MINIX 3 environ-
ment, other files and subdirectories are also present in include/ as provided on the
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                          127
CD-ROM and also on the MINIX 3 Web site. For instance, include/arpa/ and the
include/net/ directory and its subdirectory include/net/gen/ support network exten-
sions. These are not necessary for compiling the basic MINIX 3 system, and files
in these directories are not listed in Appendix B.
     In addition to src/include/, the src/ directory contains three other important
subdirectories with operating system source code:
     kernel/     – layer 1 (scheduling, messages, clock and system tasks).
     drivers/    – layer 2 (device drivers for disk, console, printer, etc. ).
     servers/    –layer 3 (process manager, file system, other servers).
    Three other source code directories are not printed or discussed in the text, but
are essential to producing a working system:
     src/lib/    – source code for library procedures (e.g., open, read).
     src/tools/ – Makefile and scripts for building the MINIX 3 system.
     src/boot/   – the code for booting and installing MINIX 3.
     The standard distribution of MINIX 3 includes many additional source files not
discussed in this text. In addition to the process manager and file system source
code, the system source directory src/servers/ contains source code for the init
program and the reincarnation server, rs, both of which are essential parts of a
running MINIX 3 system. The network server source code is in src/servers/inet/.
Src/drivers/ has source code for device drivers not discussed in this text, including
alternative disk drivers, sound cards, and network adapters. Since MINIX 3 is an
experimental operating system, meant to be modified, there is a src/test/ directory
with programs designed to test thoroughly a newly compiled MINIX 3 system. An
operating system exists, of course, to support commands (programs) that will run
on it, so there is a large src/commands/ directory with source code for the utility
programs (e.g., cat, cp, date, ls, pwd and more than 200 others). Source code for
some major open source applications originally developed by the GNU and BSD
projects is here, too.
     The ‘‘book’’ version of MINIX 3 is configured with many of the optional parts
omitted (trust us: we cannot fit everything into one book or into your head in a
semester-long course). The ‘‘book’’ version is compiled using modified Makefiles
that do not refer to unnecessary files. (A standard Makefile requires that files for
optional components be present, even if not to be compiled.) Omitting these files
and the conditional statements that select them makes reading the code easier.
     For convenience we will usually refer to simple file names when it it is clear
from the context what the complete path is. However, be aware that some file
names appear in more than one directory. For instance, there are several files
named const.h. Src/kernel/const.h defines constants used in the kernel, while
src/servers/pm/const.h defines constants used by the process manager, etc.

     The files in a particular directory will be discussed together, so there should
not be any confusion. The files are listed in Appendix B in the order they are dis-
cussed in the text, to make it easier to follow along. Acquisition of a couple of
bookmarks might be of use at this point, so you can go back and forth between the
text and the listing. To keep the size of the listing reasonable, code for every file
is not printed. In general, those functions that are described in detail in the text
are listed in Appendix B; those that are just mentioned in passing are not listed,
but the complete source is on the CD-ROM and Web site, both of which also pro-
vide an index to functions, definitions, and global variables in the source code.
     Appendix C contains an alphabetical list of all files described in Appendix B,
divided into sections for headers, drivers, kernel, file system, and process
manager. This appendix and the Web site and CD-ROM indices reference the
listed objects by line number in the source code.
     The code for layer 1 is contained in the directory src/kernel/. Files in this
directory support process control, the lowest layer of the MINIX 3 structure we
saw in Fig. 2-29. This layer includes functions which handle system initialization,
interrupts, message passing and process scheduling. Intimately connected with
these are two modules compiled into the same binary, but which run as indepen-
dent processes. These are the system task which provides an interface between
kernel services and processes in higher layers, and the clock task which provides
timing signals to the kernel. In Chap. 3, we will look at files in several of the sub-
directories of src/drivers, which support various device drivers, the second layer
in Fig. 2-29. Then in Chap. 4, we will look at the process manager files in
src/servers/pm/. Finally, in Chap. 5, we will study the file system, whose source
files are located in src/servers/fs/.

2.6.2 Compiling and Running MINIX 3

    To compile MINIX 3, run make in src/tools/. There are several options, for
installing MINIX 3 in different ways. To see the possibilities run make with no
argument. The simplest method is make image.
    When make image is executed, a fresh copy of the header files in src/include/
is copied to /usr/include/. Then source code files in src/kernel/ and several sub-
directories of src/servers/ and src/drivers/ are compiled to object files. All the
object files in src/kernel/ are linked to form a single executable program, kernel.
The object files in src/servers/pm/ are also linked together to form a single exe-
cutable program, pm, and all the object files in src/servers/fs/ are linked to form
fs. The additional programs listed as part of the boot image in Fig. 2-30 are also
compiled and linked in their own directories. These include rs and init in subdir-
ectories of src/servers/ and memory/, log/, and tty/ in subdirectories of
src/drivers/. The component designated ‘‘driver’’ in Fig. 2-30 can be one of
several disk drivers; we discuss here a MINIX 3 system configured to boot from
the hard disk using the standard at ? wini driver, which will be compiled in
SEC. 2.6            IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                                      129
src/drivers/at ? wini/. Other drivers can be added, but most drivers need not be com-
piled into the boot image. The same is true for networking support; compilation
of the basic MINIX 3 system is the same whether or not networking will be used.
                                                                Limit of memory

                                           Memory
                                         available for
                                        user programs

                                                                3549K
      src/servers/init/init                   Init
                                                                3537K
       src/drivers/at_wini/at_wini        Disk driver
                                                                3489K
      src/drivers/log/log                 Log driver
                                                                3416K
      src/drivers/memory/memory         Memory driver
                                                                3403K
      src/drivers/tty/tty               Console driver
                                                                3375K
      src/servers/rs/rs              Reincarnation server
                                                                3236K     (Depends on number
                                                                          of buffers included
      src/servers/fs/fs                  File system                      in file system)
                                                                1093K
       src/servers/pm/pm              Process manager
                                                                1024K
                                      Read only memory
                                        and I/O adapter
                                           memory
                                     (unavailable to MINIX 3)
                                                                 640K
                                        [Boot monitor]
                                                                 590K

                                           Memory
                                         available for
                                        user programs

                                                                    55K
                                         System task
       src/kernel/kernel                  Clock task
                                            Kernel
                                                                     2K Start of kernel
                                       [Used by BIOS]
                                                                     1K
                                      [Interrupt vectors]
                                                                0

Figure 2-31. Memory layout after MINIX 3 has been loaded from the disk into
        memory. The kernel, servers, and drivers are independently compiled and
        linked programs, listed on the left. Sizes are approximate and not to scale.
    To install a working MINIX 3 system capable of being booted, a program
called installboot (whose source is in src/boot/) adds names to kernel, pm, fs, init,
and the other components of the boot image, pads each one out so that its length is

a multiple of the disk sector size (to make it easier to load the parts indepen-
dently), and concatenates them onto a single file. This new file is the boot image
and can be copied into the /boot/ directory or the /boot/image/ directory of a
floppy disk or a hard disk partition. Later, the boot monitor program can load the
boot image and transfer control to the operating system.
     Figure 2-31 shows the layout of memory after the concatenated programs are
separated and loaded. The kernel is loaded in low memory, all the other parts of
the boot image are loaded above 1 MB. When user programs are run, the avail-
able memory above the kernel will be used first. When a new program will not fit
there, it will be loaded in the high memory range, above init. Details, of course,
depend upon the system configuration. For instance, the example in the figure is
for a MINIX 3 file system configured with a block cache that can hold 512 4-KB
disk blocks. This is a modest amount; more is recommended if adequate memory
is available. On the other hand, if the size of the block cache were reduced drasti-
cally it would be possible to make the entire system fit into less than 640K of
memory, with room for a few user processes as well.
     It is important to realize that MINIX 3 consists of several totally independent
programs that communicate only by passing messages. A procedure called panic
in the directory src/servers/fs/ does not conflict with a procedure called panic in
src/servers/pm/ because they ultimately are linked into different executable files.
The only procedures that the three pieces of the operating system have in common
are a few of the library routines in src/lib/. This modular structure makes it very
easy to modify, say, the file system, without having these changes affect the proc-
ess manager. It also makes it straightforward to remove the file system altogether
and to put it on a different machine as a file server, communicating with user
machines by sending messages over a network.
     As another example of the modularity of MINIX 3, adding network support
makes absolutely no difference to the process manager, the file system, or the ker-
nel. Both an Ethernet driver and the inet server can be activated after the boot
image is loaded; they would appear in Fig. 2-30 with the processes started by
/etc/rc, and they would be loaded into one of the ‘‘Memory available for user pro-
grams’’ regions of Fig. 2-31. A MINIX 3 system with networking enabled can be
used as a remote terminal or an ftp and web server. Only if you want to allow
incoming logins to the MINIX 3 system over the network would any part of MINIX
3 as described in the text need modification: this is tty, the console driver, which
would need to be recompiled with pseudo terminals configured to allow remote
logins.

2.6.3 The Common Header Files

    The include/ directory and its subdirectories contain a collection of files
defining constants, macros, and types. The POSIX standard requires many of these
definitions and specifies in which files of the main include/ directory and its sub-
SEC. 2.6          IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                                   131
directory include/sys/ each required definition is to be found. The files in these
directories are header or include files, identified by the suffix .h, and used by
means of #include statements in C source files. These statements are a built-in
feature of the C language. Include files make maintenance of a large system
easier.
     Headers likely to be needed for compiling user programs are mainly found in
include/ whereas include/sys/ traditionally is used for files that are used primarily
for compiling system programs and utilities. The distinction is not terribly impor-
tant, and a typical compilation, whether of a user program or part of the operating
system, will include files from both of these directories. We will discuss here the
files that are needed to compile the standard MINIX 3 system, first treating those
in include/ and then those in include/sys/. In the next section we will discuss files
in the include/minix/ and include/ibm/ directories, which, as the directory names
indicate, are unique to MINIX 3 and its implementation on IBM-type (really,
Intel-type) computers.
     The first headers to be considered are truly general purpose ones, so much so
that they are not referenced directly by any of the C language source files for the
MINIX 3 system. Rather, they are themselves included in other header files. Each
major component of MINIX 3 has a master header file, such as src/kernel/kernel.h ,
src/servers/pm/pm.h, and src/servers/fs/fs.h. These are included in every compila-
tion of these components. Source code for each of the device drivers includes a
somewhat similar file, src/drivers/drivers.h. Each master header is tailored to the
needs of the corresponding part of the MINIX 3 system, but each one starts with a
section like the one shown in Fig. 2-32 and includes most of the files shown there.
The master headers will be discussed again in other sections of the book. This
preview is to emphasize that headers from several directories are used together.
In this section and the next one we will mention each of the files referenced in
Fig. 2-32.

#include <minix/config.h>                      /* MUST be first */
#include <ansi.h>                              /* MUST be second */
#include <limits.h>
#include <errno.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <minix/const.h>
#include <minix/type.h>
#include <minix/syslib.h>
#include "const.h"

Figure 2-32. Part of a master header which ensures inclusion of header files
        needed by all C source files. Note that two const.h files, one from the include/
        tree and one from the local directory, are referenced.
    Let us start with the first header in include/, ansi.h (line 0000). This is the
second header that is processed whenever any part of the MINIX 3 system is

compiled; only include/minix/config.h is processed earlier. The purpose of ansi.h
is to test whether the compiler meets the requirements of Standard C, as defined
by the International Organization for Standards. Standard C is also often referred
to as ANSI C, since the standard was originally developed by the American Nat-
ional Standards Institute before gaining international recognition. A Standard C
compiler defines several macros that can then be tested in programs being com-
piled. ?? STDC ?? is such a macro, and it is defined by a standard compiler to
have a value of 1, just as if the C preprocessor had read a line like

    #define ?? STDC ?? 1

The compiler distributed with current versions of MINIX 3 conforms to Standard
C, but older versions of MINIX were developed before the adoption of the stan-
dard, and it is still possible to compile MINIX 3 with a classic (Kernighan &
Ritchie) C compiler. It is intended that MINIX 3 should be easy to port to new
machines, and allowing older compilers is part of this. At lines 0023 to 0025 the
statement

    #define ? ANSI

is processed if a Standard C compiler is in use. Ansi.h defines several macros in
different ways, depending upon whether the ? ANSI macro is defined. This is an
example of a feature test macro.
    Another feature test macro defined here is ? POSIX?SOURCE (line 0065).
This is required by POSIX. Here we ensure it is defined if other macros that imply
POSIX conformance are defined.
    When compiling a C program the data types of the arguments and the returned
values of functions must be known before code that references such data can be
generated. In a complex system ordering of function definitions to meet this
requirement is difficult, so C allows use of function prototypes to declare the
arguments and return value types of a function before it is defined. The most
important macro in ansi.h is ? PROTOTYPE. This macro allows us to write func-
tion prototypes in the form
        PROTOTYPE (return-type function-name, (argument-type argument, ... ) )
and have this transformed by the C preprocessor into
    return-type function-name(argument-type, argument, ...)
if the compiler is an ANSI Standard C compiler, or
    return-type function-name()
if the compiler is an old-fashioned (i.e., Kernighan & Ritchie) compiler.
     Before we leave ansi.h let us mention one additional feature. The entire file
(except for initial comments) is enclosed between lines that read
SEC. 2.6            IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                      133
      #ifndef ? ANSI ? H
and
      #endif /* ? ANSI ? H */
On the line immediately following the #ifndef ? ANSI ? H itself is defined. A head-
er file should be included only once in a compilation; this construction ensures
that the contents of the file will be ignored if it is included multiple times. We
will see this technique used in all the header files in the include/ directory.
     Two points about this deserve mention. First, in all of the #ifndef ... #define
sequences for files in the master header directories, the filename is preceded by an
underscore. Another header with the same name may exist within the C source
code directories, and the same mechanism will be used there, but underscores will
not be used. Thus inclusion of a file from the master header directory will not
prevent processing of another header file with the same name in a local directory.
Second, note that the comment /* ? ANSI ? H */ after the #ifndef is not required.
Such comments can be helpful in keeping track of nested #ifndef ... #endif and
#ifdef ... #endif sections. However, care is needed in writing such comments: if
incorrect they are worse than no comment at all.
     The second file in include/ that is indirectly included in most MINIX 3 source
files is the limits.h header (line 0100). This file defines many basic sizes, both
language types such as the number of bits in an integer, as well as operating sys-
tem limits such as the length of a file name.
     Note that for convenience, the line numbering in Appendix B is ratcheted up
to the next multiple of 100 when a new file is listed. Thus do not expect ansi.h to
contain 100 lines (00000 through 00099). In this way, small changes to one file
will (probably) not affect subsequent files in a revised listing. Also note that when
a new file is encountered in the listing, a special three-line header consisting of a
row of + signs, the file name, and another row of + signs is present (without line
numbering). An example of this header is shown between lines 00068 and 00100.
     Errno.h (line 0200), is also included by most of the master headers. It con-
tains the error numbers that are returned to user programs in the global variable
errno when a system call fails. Errno is also used to identify some internal errors,
such as trying to send a message to a nonexistent task. Internally, it would be
inefficient to examine a global variable after a call to a function that might gen-
erate an error, but functions must often return other integers, for instance, the
number of bytes transferred during an I/O operation. The MINIX 3 solution is to
return error numbers as negative values to mark them as error codes within the
system, and then to convert them to positive values before being returned to user
programs. The trick that is used is that each error code is defined in a line like
      #define EPERM        ( ? SIGN 1)
(line 0236). The master header file for each part of the operating system defines
the ? SYSTEM macro, but ? SYSTEM is never defined when a user program is

compiled. If ? SYSTEM is defined, then ? SIGN is defined as ‘‘−’’; otherwise it is
given a null definition.
     The next group of files to be considered are not included in all the master
headers, but are nevertheless used in many source files in all parts of the MINIX 3
system. The most important is unistd.h (line 0400). This header defines many
constants, most of which are required by POSIX. In addition, it includes proto-
types for many C functions, including all those used to access MINIX 3 system
calls. Another widely used file is string.h (line 0600), which provides prototypes
for many C functions used for string manipulation. The header signal.h (line
0700) defines the standard signal names. Several MINIX 3-specific signals for
operating system use are defined, as well. The fact that operating systems func-
tions are handled by independent processes rather than within a monolithic kernel
requires some special signal-like communication between the system components.
Signal.h also contains prototypes for some signal-related functions. As we will
see later, signal handling involves all parts of MINIX 3.
     Fcntl.h (line 0900) symbolically defines many parameters used in file control
operations. For instance, it allows one to use the macro O ? RDONLY instead of
the numeric value 0 as a parameter to a open call. Although this file is referenced
mostly by the file system, its definitions are also needed in a number of places in
the kernel and the process manager.
     As we will see when we look at the device driver layer in Chap. 3, the console
and terminal interface of an operating system is complex, because many different
types of hardware have to interact with the operating system and user programs in
a standardized way. Termios.h (line 1000) defines constants, macros, and func-
tion prototypes used for control of terminal-type I/O devices. The most important
structure is the termios structure. It contains flags to signal various modes of op-
eration, variables to set input and output transmission speeds, and an array to hold
special characters (e.g., the INTR and KILL characters). This structure is required
by POSIX, as are many of the macros and function prototypes defined in this file.
     However, as all-encompassing as the POSIX standard is meant to be, it does
not provide everything one might want, and the last part of the file, from line 1140
onward, provides extensions to POSIX. Some of these are of obvious value, such
as extensions to define standard baud rates of 57,600 baud and higher, and support
for terminal display screen windows. The POSIX standard does not forbid exten-
sions, as no reasonable standard can ever be all-inclusive. But when writing a
program in the MINIX 3 environment which is intended to be portable to other
environments, some caution is required to avoid the use of definitions specific to
MINIX 3. This is fairly easy to do. In this file and other files that define MINIX 3-
specific extensions the use of the extensions is controlled by the
    #ifdef ? MINIX
statement. If the macro ? MINIX is not defined, the compiler will not even see the
MINIX 3 extensions; they will all be completely ignored.
SEC. 2.6          IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                                      135
      Watchdog timers are supported by timers.h (line 1300), which is included in
the kernel’s master header. It defines a struct timer, as well as prototypes of func-
tions used to operate on lists of timers. On line 1321 appears a typedef for
tmr ? func ? t. This data type is a pointer to a function. At line 1332 its use is seen:
within a timer structure, used as an element in a list of timers, one element is a
tmr ? func ? t to specify a function to be called when the timer expires.
      We will mention four more files in the include/ directory that are not listed in
Appendix B. Stdlib.h defines types, macros, and function prototypes that are
likely to be needed in the compilation of all but the most simple of C programs. It
is one of the most frequently used headers in compiling user programs, although
within the MINIX 3 system source it is referenced by only a few files in the kernel.
Stdio.h is familiar to everyone who has started to learn programming in C by writ-
ing the famous ‘‘Hello World!’’ program. It is hardly used at all in system files,
although, like stdlib.h, it is used in almost every user program. A.out.h defines the
format of the files in which executable programs are stored on disk. An exec
structure is defined here, and the information in this structure is used by the proc-
ess manager to load a new program image when an exec call is made. Finally,
stddef.h defines a few commonly used macros.
      Now let us go on to the subdirectory include/sys/. As shown in Fig. 2-32, the
master headers for the main parts of the MINIX 3 system all cause sys/types.h (line
1400) to be read immediately after reading ansi.h. Sys/types.h defines many data
types used by MINIX 3. Errors that could arise from misunderstanding which fun-
damental data types are used in a particular situation can be avoided by using the
definitions provided here. Fig. 2-33 shows the way the sizes, in bits, of a few
types defined in this file differ when compiled for 16-bit or 32-bit processors.
Note that all type names end with ‘‘ ? t’’. This is not just a convention; it is a
requirement of the POSIX standard. This is an example of a reserved suffix, and
‘‘ ? t’’ should not be used as a suffix of any name which is not a type name.
                                                              
                             Type ? 16-Bit MINIX ? 32-Bit MINIX ?
                                                               
                                                                               
                                        gid ? t ?
                                                                  
                                                           8   ?            8   ?
                                 dev ? t ?                16     ?         16     ?
                                                                   
                                                                                     
                                                                      
                                        pid ? t ?         16         ?     32         ?
                                                                                         
                                        ino ? t           16
                                                                          
                                                                           32             ?

Figure 2-33. The size, in bits, of some types on 16-bit and 32-bit systems.

    MINIX 3 currently runs natively on 32-bit microprocessors, but 64-bit proces-
sors will be increasingly important in the future. A type that is not provided by
the hardware can be synthesized if necessary. On line 1471 the u64 ? t type is
defined as struct {u32 ? t[2]}. This type is not needed very often in the current
implementation, but it can be useful—for instance, all disk and partition data
(offsets and sizes) is stored as 64 bit numbers, allowing for very large disks.

     MINIX 3 uses many type definitions that ultimately are interpreted by the
compiler as a relatively small number of common types. This is intended to help
make the code more readable; for instance, a variable declared as the type dev ? t
is recognizable as a variable meant to hold the major and minor device numbers
that identify an I/O device. For the compiler, declaring such a variable as a short
would work equally well. Another thing to note is that many of the types defined
here are matched by corresponding types with the first letter capitalized, for
instance, dev ? t and Dev ? t. The capitalized variants are all equivalent to type int
to the compiler; these are provided to be used in function prototypes which must
use types compatible with the int type to support K&R compilers. The comments
in types.h explain this in more detail.
     One other item worth mention is the section of conditional code that starts
with
    #if ? EM ? WSIZE == 2

(lines 1502 to 1516). As noted earlier, most conditional code has been removed
from the source as discussed in the text. This example was retained so we could
point out one way that conditional definitions can be used. The macro used,
  EM ? WSIZE, is another example of a compiler-defined feature test macro. It
tells the word size for the target system in bytes. The #if ... #else ... #endif se-
quence is a way of getting some definitions right once and for all, to make subse-
quent code compile correctly whether a 16-bit or 32-bit system is in use.
     Several other files in include/sys/ are widely used in the MINIX 3 system. The
file sys/sigcontext.h (line 1600) defines structures used to preserve and restore
normal system operation before and after execution of a signal handling routine
and is used both in the kernel and the process manager. Sys/stat.h (line 1700)
defines the structure which we saw in Fig. 1-12, returned by the stat and fstat sys-
tem calls, as well as the prototypes of the functions stat and fstat and other func-
tions used to manipulate file properties. It is referenced in several parts of the file
system and the process manager.
     Other files we will discuss in this section are not as widely referenced as the
ones discussed above. Sys/dir.h (line 1800) defines the structure of a MINIX 3
directory entry. It is only referenced directly once, but this reference includes it in
another header that is widely used in the file system. It is important because,
among other things, it tells how many characters a file name may contain (60).
The sys/wait.h (line 1900) header defines macros used by the wait and waitpid sys-
tem calls, which are implemented in the process manager.
     Several other files in include/sys/ should be mentioned, although they are not
listed in Appendix B. MINIX 3 supports tracing executables and analyzing core
dumps with a debugger program, and sys/ptrace.h defines the various operations
possible with the ptrace system call. Sys/svrctl.h defines data structures and mac-
ros used by svrctl, which is not really a system call, but is used like one. Svrctl is
used to coordinate server-level processes as the system starts up. The select sys-
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                            137
tem call permits waiting for input on multiple channels—for instance, pseudo ter-
minals waiting for network connections. Definitions needed by this call are in
sys/select.h.
     We have deliberately left discussion of sys/ioctl.h and related files until last,
because they cannot be fully understood without also looking at a file in the next
directory, minix/ioctl.h. The ioctl system call is used for device control opera-
tions. The number of devices which can be interfaced with a modern computer
system is ever increasing. All need various kinds of control. Indeed, the main
difference between MINIX 3 as described in this book and other versions is that
for purposes of the book we describe MINIX 3 with relatively few input/output
devices. Many others, such as network interfaces, SCSI controllers, and sound
cards, can be added.
     To make things more manageable, a number of small files, each containing
one group of definitions, are used. They are all included by sys/ioctl.h (line
2000), which functions similarly to the master header of Fig. 2-32. We have
listed only one of these included files, sys/ioc ? disk.h (line 2100), in Appendix B.
This and the other files included by sys ? ioctl.h are located in the include/sys/
directory because they are considered part of the ‘‘published interface,’’ meaning
a programmer can use them in writing any program to be run in the MINIX 3
environment. However, they all depend upon additional macro definitions pro-
vided in minix/ioctl.h (line 2200), which is included by each. Minix/ioctl.h should
not be used by itself in writing programs, which is why it is in include/minix/
rather than include/sys/.
     The macros defined together by these files define how the various elements
needed for each possible function are packed into a 32 bit integer to be passed to
ioctl. For instance, disk devices need five types of operations, as can be seen in
sys/ioc ? disk.h at lines 2110 to 2114. The alphabetic ’d’ parameter tells ioctl that
the operation is for a disk device, an integer from 3 through 7 codes for the opera-
tion, and the third parameter for a write or read operation tells the size of the
structure in which data is to be passed. In minix/ioctl.h lines 2225 to 2231 show
that 8 bits of the alphabetic code are shifted 8 bits to the left, the 13 least signifi-
cant bits of the size of the structure are shifted 16 bits to the left, and these are
then logically ANDed with the small integer operation code. Another code in the
most significant 3 bits of a 32-bit number encodes the type of return value.
     Although this looks like a lot of work, this work is done at compile time and
makes for a much more efficient interface to the system call at run time, since the
parameter actually passed is the most natural data type for the host machine CPU.
It does, however, bring to mind a famous comment Ken Thompson put into the
source code of an early version of UNIX:
    /* You are not expected to understand this */
    Minix/ioctl.h also contains the prototype for the ioctl system call at line 2241.
This call is not directly invoked by programmers in many cases, since the POSIX-

defined functions prototyped in include/termios.h have replaced many uses of the
old ioctl library function for dealing with terminals, consoles, and similar devices.
Nevertheless, it is still necessary. In fact, the POSIX functions for control of ter-
minal devices are converted into ioctl system calls by the library.

2.6.4 The MINIX 3 Header Files

     The subdirectories include/minix/ and include/ibm/ contain header files spe-
cific to MINIX 3. Files in include/minix/ are needed for an implementation of
MINIX 3 on any platform, although there are platform-specific alternative defini-
tions within some of them. We have already discussed one file here, ioctl.h. The
files in include/ibm/ define structures and macros that are specific to MINIX 3 as
implemented on IBM-type machines.
     We will start with the minix/ directory. In the previous section, it was noted
that config.h (line 2300) is included in the master headers for all parts of the
MINIX 3 system, and is thus the first file actually processed by the compiler. On
many occasions, when differences in hardware or the way the operating system is
intended to be used require changes in the configuration of MINIX 3, editing this
file and recompiling the system is all that must be done. We suggest that if you
modify this file you should also modify the comment on line 2303 to help identify
the purpose of the modifications.
     The user-settable parameters are all in the first part of the file, but some of
these parameters are not intended to be edited here. On line 2326 another header
file, minix/sys ? config.h is included, and definitions of some parameters are inher-
ited from this file. The programmers thought this was a good idea because a few
files in the system need the basic definitions in sys ? config.h without the rest of
those in config.h. In fact, there are many names in config.h which do not begin
with an underscore that are likely to conflict with names in common usage, such
as CHIP or INTEL that would be likely to be found in software ported to MINIX 3
from another operating system. All of the names in sys ? config.h begin with
underscores, and conflicts are less likely.
     MACHINE is actually configured as ? MACHINE ? IBM ? PC in sys ? config.h;
lines 2330 to 2334 lists short alternatives for all possible values for MACHINE.
Earlier versions of MINIX were ported to Sun, Atari, and MacIntosh platforms,
and the full source code contains alternatives for alternative hardware. Most of
the MINIX 3 source code is independent of the type of machine, but an operating
system always has some system-dependent code. Also, it should be noted that,
because MINIX 3 is so new, as of this writing additional work is needed to com-
plete porting MINIX 3 to non-Intel platforms.
     Other definitions in config.h allow customization for other needs in a particu-
lar installation. For instance, the number of buffers used by the file system for the
disk cache should generally be as large as possible, but a large number of buffers
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                           139
requires lots of memory. Caching 128 blocks, as configured on line 2345, is con-
sidered minimal and satisfactory only for a MINIX 3 installation on a system with
less than 16 MB of RAM; for systems with ample memory a much larger number
can be put here. If it is desired to use a modem or log in over a network connec-
tion the NR ? RS ? LINES and NR ? PTYS definitions (lines 2379 and 2380) should
be increased and the system recompiled. The last part of config.h contains defini-
tions that are necessary, but which should not be changed. Many definitions here
just define alternate names for constants defined in sys ? config.h.
     Sys ? config.h (line 2500) contains definitions that are likely to be needed by a
system programmer, for instance someone writing a new device driver. You are
not likely to need to change very much in this file, with the possible exception of
  NR ? PROCS (line 2522). This controls the size of the process table. If you want
to use a MINIX 3 system as a network server with many remote users or many
server processes running simultaneously, you might need to increase this constant.
     The next file is const.h (line 2600), which illustrates another common use of
header files. Here we find a variety of constant definitions that are not likely to be
changed when compiling a new kernel but that are used in a number of places.
Defining them here helps to prevent errors that could be hard to track down if
inconsistent definitions were made in multiple places. Other files named const.h
can be found elsewhere in the MINIX 3 source tree, but they are for more limited
use. Similarly, definitions that are used only in the kernel are included in
src/kernel/const.h. Definitions that are used only in the file system are included in
src/servers/fs/const.h. The process manager uses src/servers/pm/const.h for its
local definitions. Only those definitions that are used in more than one part of the
MINIX 3 system are included in include/minix/const.h.
     A few of the definitions in const.h are noteworthy. EXTERN is defined as a
macro expanding into extern (line 2608). Global variables that are declared in
header files and included in two or more files are declared EXTERN, as in
    EXTERN int who;
If the variable were declared just as
    int who;
and included in two or more files, some linkers would complain about a multiply
defined variable. Furthermore, the C reference manual explicitly forbids this con-
struction (Kernighan and Ritchie, 1988).
    To avoid this problem, it is necessary to have the declaration read
    extern int who;
in all places but one. Using EXTERN prevents this problem by having it expand
into extern everywhere that const.h is included, except following an explicit rede-
finition of EXTERN as the null string. This is done in each part of MINIX 3 by put-
ting global definitions in a special file called glo.h, for instance, src/kernel/glo.h,

which is indirectly included in every compilation. Within each glo.h there is a
sequence
    #ifdef ? TABLE
    #undef EXTERN
    #define EXTERN
    #endif

and in the table.c files of each part of MINIX 3 there is a line
    #define ? TABLE
preceding the #include section. Thus when the header files are included and ex-
panded as part of the compilation of table.c, extern is not inserted anywhere
(because EXTERN is defined as the null string within table.c) and storage for the
global variables is reserved only in one place, in the object file table.o.
    If you are new to C programming and do not quite understand what is going
on here, fear not; the details are really not important. This is a polite way of re-
phrasing Ken Thompson’s famous comment cited earlier. Multiple inclusion of
header files can cause problems for some linkers because it can lead to multiple
declarations for included variables. The EXTERN business is simply a way to
make MINIX 3 more portable so it can be linked on machines whose linkers do not
accept multiply defined variables.
    PRIVATE is defined as a synonym for static. Procedures and data that are not
referenced outside the file in which they are declared are always declared as
PRIVATE to prevent their names from being visible outside the file in which they
are declared. As a general rule, all variables and procedures should be declared
with a local scope, if possible. PUBLIC is defined as the null string. An example
from kernel/proc.c may help make this clear. The declaration
    PUBLIC void lock ? dequeue(rp)
comes out of the C preprocessor as
    void lock ? dequeue(rp)
which, according to the C language scope rules, means that the function name
lock ? dequeue is exported from the file and the function can be called from any-
where in any file linked into the same binary, in this case, anywhere in the kernel.
Another function declared in the same file is
    PRIVATE void dequeue(rp)
which is preprocessed to become
    static void dequeue(rp)
This function can only be called from code in the same source file. PRIVATE and
PUBLIC are not necessary in any sense but are attempts to undo the damage
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                         141
caused by the C scope rules (the default is that names are exported outside the
file; it should be just the reverse).
     The rest of const.h defines numerical constants used throughout the system. A
section of const.h is devoted to machine or configuration-dependent definitions.
For instance, throughout the source code the basic unit of memory allocation is
the click. Different values for the click size may be chosen for different processor
architectures. For Intel platforms it is 1024 bytes. Alternatives for Intel,
Motorola 68000, and Sun SPARC architectures are defined on lines 2673 to 2681.
This file also contains the macros MAX and MIN, so we can say
    z = MAX(x, y);
to assign the larger of x and y to z.
     Type.h (line 2800) is another file that is included in every compilation by
means of the master headers. It contains a number of key type definitions, along
with related numerical values.
     The first two structs define two different types of memory map, one for local
memory regions (within the data space of a process) and one for remote memory
areas, such as a RAM disk (lines 2828 to 2840). This is a good place to mention
the concepts used in referring to memory. As we just mentioned, the click is the
basic unit of measurement of memory; in MINIX 3 for Intel processors a click is
1024 bytes. Memory is measured as phys ? clicks, which can be used by the ker-
nel to access any memory element anywhere in the system, or as vir ? clicks, used
by processes other than the kernel. A vir ? clicks memory reference is always with
respect to the base of a segment of memory assigned to a particular process, and
the kernel often has to make translations between virtual (i.e. process-based) and
physical (RAM-based) addresses. The inconvenience of this is offset by the fact
that a process can do all its own memory references in vir ? clicks.
     One might suppose that the same unit could be used to specify the size of
either type of memory, but there is an advantage to using vir ? clicks to specify the
size of a unit of memory allocated to a process, since when this unit is used a
check is done to be sure that no memory is accessed outside of what has been
specifically assigned to the current process. This is a major feature of the pro-
tected mode of modern Intel processors, such as the Pentium family. Its absence
in the early 8086 and 8088 processors caused some headaches in the design of
earlier versions of MINIX.
    Another important structure defined here is sigmsg (lines 2866 to 2872).
When a signal is caught the kernel has to arrange that the next time the signaled
process gets to run it will run the signal handler, rather than continuing execution
where it was interrupted. The process manager does most of the work of manag-
ing signals; it passes a structure like this to the kernel when a signal is caught.
    The kinfo structure (lines 2875 to 2893) is used to convey information about
the kernel to other parts of the system. The process manager uses this information
when it sets up its part of the process table.

     Data structures and function prototypes for interprocess communication are
defined in ipc.h (line 3000). The most important definition in this file is message
on lines 3020 to 3032. While we could have defined message to be an array of
some number of bytes, it is better programming practice to have it be a structure
containing a union of the various message types that are possible. Seven message
formats, mess ? 1 through mess ? 8, are defined (type mess ? 6 is obsolete). A mes-
sage is a structure containing a field m ? source, telling who sent the message, a
field m ? type, telling what the message type is (e.g., SYS ? EXEC to the system
task) and the data fields.
     The seven message types are shown in Fig. 2-34. In the figure four message
types, the first two and the last two, seem identical. Just in terms of size of the
data elements they are identical, but many of the data types are different. It hap-
pens that on an Intel CPU with a 32-bit word size the int, long, and pointer data
types are all 32-bit types, but this would not necessarily be the case on another
kind of hardware. Defining seven distinct formats makes it easier to recompile
MINIX 3 for a different architecture.
     When it is necessary to send a message containing, say, three integers and
three pointers (or three integers and two pointers), then the first format in Fig. 2-
34 is the one to use. The same applies to the other formats. How does one assign
a value to the first integer in the first format? Suppose that the message is called
x. Then x.m ? u refers to the union portion of the message struct. To refer to the
first of the six alternatives in the union, we use x.m ? u.m ? m1. Finally, to get at
the first integer in this struct we say x.m ? u.m ? m1.m1i1. This is quite a mouthful,
so somewhat shorter field names are defined as macros after the definition of mes-
sage itself. Thus x.m1 ? i1 can be used instead of x.m ? u.m ? m1.m1i1. The short
names all have the form of the letter m, the format number, an underscore, one or
two letters indicating whether the field is an integer, pointer, long, character, char-
acter array, or function, and a sequence number to distinguish multiple instances
of the same type within a message.
     While discussing message formats, this is a good place to note that an operat-
ing system and its compiler often have an ‘‘understanding’’ about things like the
layout of structures, and this can make the implementer’s life easier. In MINIX 3,
the int fields in messages are sometimes used to hold unsigned data types. In
some cases this could cause overflow, but the code was written using the know-
ledge that the MINIX 3 compiler copies unsigned types to ints and vice versa
without changing the data or generating code to detect overflow. A more compul-
sive approach would be to replace each int field with a union of an int and an
unsigned. The same applies to the long fields in the messages; some of them may
be used to pass unsigned long data. Are we cheating here? Perhaps a little bit,
one might say, but if you wish to port MINIX 3 to a new platform, quite clearly the
exact format of the messages is something to which you must pay a great deal of
attention, and now you have been alerted that the behavior of the compiler is
another factor that needs attention.
SEC. 2.6             IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                                   143

 m_source         m_source       m_source        m_source        m_source       m_source      m_source

  m_type           m_type          m_type         m_type          m_type          m_type       m_type

                                                               m5_c2 m5_c1
   m1_i1            m2_i1          m3_i1           m4_l1                          m7_i1        m8_i1

                                                                  m5_i1

   m1_i2            m2_i2          m3_i2           m4_l2                          m7_i2        m8_i2

                                                                  m5_i2

   m1_i3            m2_i3          m3_p1           m4_l3                          m7_i3        m8_p1

                                                                  m5_l1

  m1_p1             m2_l1                          m4_l4                          m7_i4        m8_p2

                                                                  m5_l2

  m1_p2             m2_l2                          m4_l5                          m7_p1        m8_p3
                                  m3_ca1
                                                                  m5_l3

  m1_p3            m2_p1                                                          m7_p2        m8_p4

Figure 2-34. The seven message types used in MINIX 3. The sizes of message
           elements will vary, depending upon the architecture of the machine; this diagram
           illustrates sizes on CPUs with 32-bit pointers, such as those of Pentium family
           members.

     Also defined in ipc.h are prototypes for the message passing primitives des-
cribed earlier (lines 3095 to 3101). In addition to the important send, receive,
sendrec, and notify primitives, several others are defined. None of these are much
used; in fact one could say that they are relicts of earlier stages of development of
MINIX 3. Old computer programs make good archaeological digs. They might
disappear in a future release. Nevertheless, if we do not explain them now some
readers undoubtedly will worry about them. The nonblocking nb ? send and
nb ? receive calls have mostly been replaced by notify, which was implemented
later and considered a better solution to the problem of sending or checking for a
message without blocking. The prototype for echo has no source or destination
field. This primitive serves no useful purpose in production code, but was useful
during development to test the time it took to send and receive a message.

     One other file in include/minix/, syslib.h (line 3200), is almost universally
used by means of inclusion in the master headers of all of the user-space com-
ponents of MINIX 3. This file not included in the kernel’s master header file,
src/kernel/kernel.h , because the kernel does not need library functions to access
itself. Syslib.h contains prototypes for C library functions called from within the
operating system to access other operating system services.
     We do not describe details of C libraries in this text, but many library func-
tions are standard and will be available for any C compiler. However, the C func-
tions referenced by syslib.h are of course quite specific to MINIX 3 and a port of
MINIX 3 to a new system with a different compiler requires porting these library
functions. Fortunately this is not difficult, since most of these functions simply
extract the parameters of the function call and insert them into a message struc-
ture, then send the message and extract the results from the reply message. Many
of these library functions are defined in a dozen or fewer lines of C code.
     Noteworthy in this file are four macros for accessing I/O ports for input or
output using byte or word data types and the prototype of the sys ? sdevio function
to which all four macros refer (lines 3241 to 3250). Providing a way for device
drivers to request reading and writing of I/O ports by the kernel is an essential part
of the MINIX 3 project to move all such drivers to user space.
     A few functions which could have been defined in syslib.h are in a separate
file, sysutil.h (line 3400), because their object code is compiled into a separate
library. Two functions prototyped here need a little more explanation. The first is
printf (line 3442). If you have experience programming in C you will recognize
that printf is a standard library function, referenced in almost all programs.
     This is not the printf function you think it is, however. The version of printf
in the standard library cannot be used within system components. Among other
things, the standard printf is intended to write to standard output, and must be able
to format floating point numbers. Using standard output would require going
through the file system, but for printing messages when there is a problem and a
system component needs to display an error message, it is desirable to be able to
do this without the assistance of any other system components. Also, support for
the full range of format specifications usable with the standard printf would bloat
the code for no useful purpose. So a simplified version of printf that does only
what is needed by operating system components is compiled into the system utili-
ties library. This is found by the compiler in a place that will depend upon the
platform; for 32-bit Intel systems it is /usr/lib/i386/libsysutil.a. When the file sys-
tem, the process manager, or another part of the operating system is linked to
library functions this version is found before the standard library is searched.
     On the next line is a prototype for kputc. This is called by the system version
of printf to do the work of displaying characters on the console. However, more
tricky business is involved here. Kputc is defined in several places. There is a
copy in the system utilities library, which will be the one used by default. But
several parts of the system define their own versions. We will see one when we
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                           145
study the console interface in the next chapter. The log driver (which is not des-
cribed in detail here) also defines its own version. There is even a definition of
kputc in the kernel itself, but this is a special case. The kernel does not use printf.
A special printing function, kprintf, is defined as part of the kernel and is used
when the kernel needs to print.
     When a process needs to execute a MINIX 3 system call, it sends a message to
the process manager (PM for short) or the file system (FS for short). Each mes-
sage contains the number of the system call desired. These numbers are defined
in the next file, callnr.h (line 3500). Some numbers are not used, these are
reserved for calls not yet implemented or represent calls implemented in other
versions which are now handled by library functions. Near the end of the file
some call numbers are defined that do not correspond to calls shown in Fig 1-9.
Svrctl (mentioned earlier), ksig, unpause, revive, and task ? reply are used only
within the operating system itself. The system call mechanism is a convenient
way to implement these. In fact, because they will not be used by external pro-
grams, these ‘‘system calls,’’ may be modified in new versions of MINIX 3
without fear of breaking user programs.
     The next file is com.h (line 3600). One interpretation of the file name is that
is stands for common, another is that it stands for communication. This file pro-
vides common definitions used for communication between servers and device
drivers. On lines 3623 to 3626 task numbers are defined. To distinguish them
from process numbers, task numbers are negative. On lines 3633 to 3640 process
numbers are defined for the processes that are loaded in the boot image. Note
these are slot numbers in the process table; they should not be confused with proc-
ess id (PID) numbers.
     The next section of com.h defines how messages are constructed to carry out a
notify operation. The process numbers are used in generating the value that is
passed in the m ? type field of the message. The message types for notifications
and other messages defined in this file are built by combining a base value that
signifies a type category with a small number that indicates the specific type. The
rest of this file is a compendium of macros that translate meaningful identifiers
into the cryptic numbers that identify message types and field names.
     A few other files in include/minix/ are listed in Appendix B. Devio.h (line
4100) defines types and constants that support user-space access to I/O ports, as
well as some macros that make it easier to write code that specifies ports and
values. Dmap.h (line 4200) defines a struct and an array of that struct, both
named dmap. This table is used to relate major device numbers to the functions
that support them. Major and minor device numbers for the memory device driver
and major device numbers for other important device drivers are also defined.
     Include/minix/ contains several additional specialized headers that are not
listed in Appendix B, but which must be present to compile the system. One is
u64.h which provides support for 64-bit integer arithmetic operations, necessary
to manipulate disk addresses on high capacity disk drives. These were not even

dreamed of when UNIX, the C language, Pentium-class processors, and MINIX
were first conceived. A future version of MINIX 3 may be written in a language
that has built-in support for 64-bit integers on CPUs with 64-bit registers; until
then, the definitions in u64.h provide a work-around.
     Three files remain to be mentioned. Keymap.h defines the structures used to
implement specialized keyboard layouts for the character sets needed for different
languages. It is also needed by programs which generate and load these tables.
Bitmap.h provides a few macros to make operations like setting, resetting, and
testing bits easier. Finally, partition.h defines the information needed by MINIX 3
to define a disk partition, either by its absolute byte offset and size on the disk, or
by a cylinder, head, sector address. The u64 ? t type is used for the offset and size,
to allow use of large disks. This file does not describe the layout of a partition
table on a disk, the file that does that is in the next directory.
     The last specialized header directory we will consider, include/ibm/, contains
several files which provide definitions related to the IBM PC family of computers.
Since the C language knows only memory addresses, and has no provision for ac-
cessing I/O port addresses, the library contains routines written in assembly lan-
guage to read and write from ports. The various routines available are declared in
ibm/portio.h (line 4300). All possible input and output routines for byte, integer,
and long data types, singly or as strings, are available, from inb (input one byte) to
outsl (output a string of longs). Low-level routines in the kernel may also need to
disable or reenable CPU interrupts, which are also actions that C cannot handle.
The library provides assembly code to do this, and intr ? disable and intr ? enable
are declared on lines 4325 and 4326.
     The next file in this directory is interrupt.h (line 4400), which defines port
address and memory locations used by the interrupt controller chip and the BIOS
of PC-compatible systems. Finally, more I/O ports are defined in ports.h (line
4500). This file provides addresses needed to access the keyboard interface and
the timer chip used by the clock chip.
     Several additional files in include/ibm/ with IBM-specific data are not listed
in Appendix B, but are essential and should be mentioned. Bios.h, memory.h, and
partition.h are copiously commented and are worth reading if you would like to
know more about memory use or disk partition tables. Cmos.h, cpu.h, and int86.h
provide additional information on ports, CPU flag bits, and calling BIOS and
DOS services in 16-bit mode. Finally, diskparm.h defines a data structure needed
for formatting a floppy disk.

2.6.5 Process Data Structures and Header Files

     Now let us dive in and see what the code in src/kernel/ looks like. In the pre-
vious two sections we structured our discussion around an excerpt from a typical
master header; we will look first at the real master header for the kernel, kernel.h
(line 4600). It begins by defining three macros. The first, ? POSIX ? SOURCE, is
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                           147
a feature test macro defined by the POSIX standard itself. All such macros are
required to begin with the underscore character, ‘‘?’’. The effect of defining the
  POSIX ? SOURCE macro is to ensure that all symbols required by the standard
and any that are explicitly permitted, but not required, will be visible, while hid-
ing any additional symbols that are unofficial extensions to POSIX. We have
already mentioned the next two definitions: the ? MINIX macro overrides the
effect of ? POSIX ? SOURCE for extensions defined by MINIX 3, and ? SYSTEM
can be tested wherever it is important to do something differently when compiling
system code, as opposed to user code, such as changing the sign of error codes.
Kernel.h then includes other header files from include/ and its subdirectories
include/sys/ include/minix/, and include/ibm/ including all those referred to in
Fig. 2-32. We have discussed all of these files in the previous two sections.
Finally, six additional headers from the local directory, src/kernel/, are included,
their names included in quote characters.
    Kernel.h makes it possible to guarantee that all source files share a large
number of important definitions by writing the single line
    #include ′′kernel.h′′
in each of the other kernel source files. Since the order of inclusion of header files
is sometimes important, kernel.h also ensures that this ordering is done correctly,
once and forever. This carries to a higher level the ‘‘get it right once, then forget
the details’’ technique embodied in the header file concept. Similar master
headers are provided in source directories for other system components, such as
the file system and the process manager.
      Now let us proceed to look at the local header files included in kernel.h. First
we have yet another file named config.h, which, analogous to the system-wide file
include/minix/config.h, must be included before any of the other local include
files. Just as we have files const.h and type.h in the common header directory
include/minix/, we also have files const.h. and type.h in the kernel source direc-
tory, src/kernel/. The files in include/minix/ are placed there because they are
needed by many parts of the system, including programs that run under the control
of the system. The files in src/kernel/ provide definitions needed only for compi-
lation of the kernel. The FS, PM, and other system source directories also contain
const.h and type.h files to define constants and types needed only for those parts
of the system. Two of the other files included in the master header, proto.h glo.h,
have no counterparts in the main include/ directories, but we will find that they,
too, have counterparts used in compiling the file system and the process manager.
The last local header included in kernel.h is another ipc.h.
      Since this is the first time it has come up in our discussion, note at the begin-
ning of kernel/config.h there is a #ifndef ... #define sequence to prevent trouble if
the file is included multiple times. We have seen the general idea before. But
note here that the macro defined here is CONFIG ? H without an underscore. Thus
it is distinct from the macro ? CONFIG ? H defined in include/minix/config.h.

     The kernel’s version of config.h gathers in one place a number of definitions
that are unlikely to need changes if your interest in MINIX 3 is studying how an
operating system works, or using this operating system in a conventional general-
purpose computer. However, suppose you want to make a really tiny version of
MINIX 3 for controlling a scientific instrument or a home-made cellular telephone.
The definitions on lines 4717 to 4743 allow selective disabling of kernel calls.
Eliminating unneeded functionality also reduces memory requirements because
the code needed to handle each kernel call is conditionally compiled using the
definitions on lines 4717 to 4743. If some function is disabled, the code needed to
execute it is omitted from the system binary. For example, a cellular telephone
might not need to fork off new processes, so the code for doing so could be omit-
ted from the executable file, resulting in a smaller memory footprint. Most other
constants defined in this file control basic parameters. For instance, while han-
dling interrupts a special stack of size K ? STACK ? BYTES is used. This value is
set on line 4772. The space for this stack is reserved within mpx386.s, an assem-
bly language file.
     In const.h (line 4800) a macro for converting virtual addresses relative to the
base of the kernel’s memory space to physical addresses is defined on line 4814.
A C function, umap ? local, is defined elsewhere in the kernel code so the kernel
can do this conversion on behalf of other components of the system, but for use
within the kernel the macro is more efficient. Several other useful macros are
defined here, including several for manipulating bitmaps. An important security
mechanism built into the Intel hardware is activated by two macro definition lines
here. The processor status word (PSW) is a CPU register, and I/O Protection
Level (IOPL) bits within it define whether access to the interrupt system and I/O
ports is allowed or denied. On lines 4850 and 4851 different PSW values are
defined that determine this access for ordinary and privileged processes. These
values are put on the stack as part of putting a new process in execution.
     In the next file we will consider, type.h (line 4900), the memory structure
(lines 4925 to 4928) uses two quantities, base address and size, to uniquely
specify an area of memory.
     Type.h defines several other prototypes and structures used in any implemen-
tation of MINIX 3. For instance, two structures, kmessages, used for diagnostic
messages from the kernel, and randomness, used by the random number genera-
tor, are defined. Type.h also contains several machine-dependent type definitions.
To make the code shorter and more readable we have removed conditional code
and definitions for other CPU types. But you should recognize that definitions
like the stackframe ? s structure (lines 4955 to 4974), which defines how machine
registers are saved on the stack, is specific to Intel 32-bit processors. For another
platform the stackframe ? s structure would be defined in terms of the register
structure of the CPU to be used. Another example is the segdesc ? s structure
(lines 4976 to 4983), which is part of the protection mechanism that keeps proc-
esses from accessing memory regions outside those assigned to them. For another
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                          149
CPU the segdesc ? s structure might not exist at all, depending upon the mechan-
ism used to implement memory protection.
     Another point to make about structures like these is that making sure all the
required data is present is necessary, but possibly not sufficient for optimal perfor-
mance. The stackframe ? s must be manipulated by assembly language code.
Defining it in a form that can be efficiently read or written by assembly language
code reduces the time required for a context switch.
     The next file, proto.h (line 5100), provides prototypes of all functions that
must be known outside of the file in which they are defined. All are written using
the ? PROTOTYPE macro discussed in the previous section, and thus the MINIX 3
kernel can be compiled either with a classic C (Kernighan and Ritchie) compiler,
such as the original MINIX 3 C compiler, or a modern ANSI Standard C compiler,
such as the one which is part of the MINIX 3 distribution. A number of these pro-
totypes are system-dependent, including interrupt and exception handlers and
functions that are written in assembly language.
     In glo.h (line 5300) we find the kernel’s global variables. The purpose of the
macro EXTERN was described in the discussion of include/minix/const.h. It nor-
mally expands into extern. Note that many definitions in glo.h are preceded by
this macro. The symbol EXTERN is forced to be undefined when this file is
included in table.c, where the macro ? TABLE is defined. Thus the actual storage
space for the variables defined this way is reserved when glo.h is included in the
compilation of table.c. Including glo.h in other C source files makes the variables
in table.c known to the other modules in the kernel.
     Some of the kernel information structures here are used at startup. Aout (line
5321) will hold the address of an array of the headers of all of the MINIX 3 system
image components. Note that these are physical addresses, that is, addresses
relative to the entire address space of the processor. As we will see later, the phy-
sical address of aout will be passed from the boot monitor to the kernel when
MINIX 3 starts up, so the startup routines of the kernel can get the addresses of all
MINIX 3 components from the monitor’s memory space. Kinfo (line 5322) is also
an important piece of information. Recall that the structure was defined in
include/minix/type.h. Just as the boot monitor uses aout to pass information about
all processes in the boot image to the kernel, the kernel fills in the fields of kinfo
with information about itself that other components of the system may need to
know about.
     The next section of glo.h contains variables related to control of process and
kernel execution. Prev ? ptr, proc ? ptr, and next ? ptr point to the process table
entries of the previous, current, and next processes to run. Bill ? ptr also points to
a process table entry; it shows which process is currently being billed for clock
ticks used. When a user process calls the file system, and the file system is run-
ning, proc ? ptr points to the file system process. However, bill ? ptr will point to
the user making the call, since CPU time used by the file system is charged as
system time to the caller. We have not actually heard of a MINIX system whose

owner charges others for their use of CPU time, but it could be done. The next
variable, k ? reenter, is used to count nested executions of kernel code, such as
when an interrupt occurs when the kernel itself, rather than a user process, is run-
ning. This is important, because switching context from a user process to the ker-
nel or vice versa is different (and more costly) than reentering the kernel. When
an interrupt service complete it is important for it to determine whether control
should remain with the kernel or if a user-space process should be restarted. This
variable is also tested by some functions which disable and reenable interrupts,
such as lock ? enqueue. If such a function is executed when interrupts are disabled
already, the interrupts should not be reenabled when reenabling is not wanted.
Finally, in this section there is a counter for lost clock ticks. How a clock tick can
be lost and what is done about it will be discussed when we discuss the clock task.
    The last few variables defined in glo.h, are declared here because they must
be known throughout the kernel code, but they are declared as extern rather than
as EXTERN because they are initialized variables, a feature of the C language.
The use of the EXTERN macro is not compatible with C-style initialization, since
a variable can only be initialized once.
    Tasks that run in kernel space, currently just the clock task and the system
task, have their own stacks within t ? stack. During interrupt handling, the kernel
uses a separate stack, but it is not declared here, since it is only accessed by the
assembly language level routine that handles interrupt processing, and does not
need to be known globally. The last file included in kernel.h, and thus used in
every compilation, is ipc.h (line 5400). It defines various constants used in inter-
process communication. We will discuss these later when we get to the file where
they are used, kernel/proc.c.
    Several more kernel header files are widely used, although not so much that
they are included in kernel.h. The first of these is proc.h (line 5500), which de-
fines the kernel’s process table. The complete state of a process is defined by the
process’ data in memory, plus the information in its process table slot. The con-
tents of the CPU registers are stored here when a process is not executing and then
are restored when execution resumes. This is what makes possible the illusion
that multiple processes are executing simultaneously and interacting, although at
any instant a single CPU can be executing instructions of only one process. The
time spent by the kernel saving and restoring the process state during each con-
text switch is necessary, but obviously this is time during which the work of the
processes themselves is suspended. For this reason these structures are designed
for efficiency. As noted in the comment at the beginning of proc.h, many routines
written in assembly language also access these structures, and another header,
sconst.h, defines offsets to fields in the process table for use by the assembly
code. Thus changing a definition in proc.h may necessitate a change in sconst.h.
    Before going further we should mention that, because of MINIX 3’s microker-
nel structure, the process table we will discuss is here is paralleled by tables in
PM and FS which contain per-process entries relevant to the function of these
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                            151
parts of MINIX 3. Together, all three of these tables are equivalent to the process
table of an operating system with a monolithic structure, but for the moment when
we speak of the process table we will be talking about only the kernel’s process
table. The others will be discussed in later chapters.
     Each slot in the process table is defined as a struct proc (lines 5516 to 5545).
Each entry contains storage for the process’ registers, stack pointer, state, memory
map, stack limit, process id, accounting, alarm time, and message info. The first
part of each process table entry is a stackframe ? s structure. A process that is
already in memory is put into execution by loading its stack pointer with the ad-
dress of its process table entry and popping all the CPU registers from this struct.
     There is more to the state of a process than just the CPU registers and the data
in memory, however. In MINIX 3, each process has a pointer to a priv structure in
its process table slot (line 5522). This structure defines allowed sources and desti-
nations of messages for the process and many other privileges. We will look at
details later. For the moment, note that each system process has a pointer to a
unique copy of this structure, but user privileges are all equal—the pointers of all
user processes point to the same copy of the structure. There is also a byte-sized
field for a set of bit flags, p ? rts ? flags (line 5523). The meanings of the bits will
be described below. Setting any bit to 1 means a process is not runnable, so a
zero in this field indicates a process is ready.
     Each slot in the process table provides space for information that may be
needed by the kernel. For instance, the p ? max ? priority field (line 5526), tells
which scheduling queue the process should be queued on when it is ready to run
for the first time. Because the priority of a process may be reduced if it prevents
other processes from running, there is also a p ? priority field which is initially set
equal to p ? max ? priority. P ? priority is the field that actually determines the
queue used each time the process is ready.
     The time used by each process is recorded in the two clock ? t variables at
lines 5532 and 5533. This information must be accessed by the kernel and it
would be inefficient to store this in a process’ own memory space, although logi-
cally that could be done. P ? nextready (line 5535), is used to link processes to-
gether on the scheduler queues.
     The next few fields hold information related to messages between processes.
When a process cannot complete a send because the destination is not waiting, the
sender is put onto a queue pointed to by the destination’s p ? caller ? q pointer (line
5536). That way, when the destination finally does a receive, it is easy to find all
the processes wanting to send to it. The p ? q ? link field (line 5537) is used to link
the members of the queue together.
     The rendezvous method of passing messages is made possible by the storage
space reserved at lines 5538 to 5540. When a process does a receive and there is
no message waiting for it, it blocks and the number of the process it wants to
receive from is stored in p ? getfrom. Similarly, p ? sendto holds the process
number of the destination when a process does a send and the recipient is not

waiting. The address of the message buffer is stored in p ? messbuf. The penulti-
mate field in each process table slot is p ? pending (line 5542), a bitmap used to
keep track of signals that have not yet been passed to the process manager
(because the process manager is not waiting for a message).
     Finally, the last field in a process table entry is a character array, p ? name, for
holding the name of the process. This field is not needed for process management
by the kernel. MINIX 3 provides various debug dumps triggered by pressing a
special key on the console keyboard. Some of these allow viewing information
about all processes, with the name of each process printed along with other data.
Having a meaningful name associated with each process makes understanding and
debugging kernel operation easier.
     Following the definition of a process table slot come definitions of various
constants used in its elements. The various flag bits that can be set in p ? rts ? flags
are defined and described on lines 5548 to 5555. If the slot is not in use,
SLOT ? FREE is set. After a fork, NO ? MAP is set to prevent the child process
from running until its memory map has been set up. SENDING and RECEIVING
indicate that the process is blocked trying to send or receive a message. SIG-
NALED and SIG ? PENDING indicate that signals have been received, and
P ? STOP provides support for tracing. NO ? PRIV is used to temporarily prevent a
new system process from executing until its setup is complete.
     The number of scheduling queues and allowable values for the p ? priority
field are defined next (lines 5562 to 5567). In the current version of this file user
processes are allowed to be given access to the highest priority queue; this is
probably a carry-over from the early days of testing drivers in user space and
MAX ? USER ? Q should probably adjusted to a lower priority (larger number).
     Next come several macros that allow addresses of important parts of the proc-
ess table to be defined as constants at compilation time, to provide faster access at
run time, and then more macros for run time calculations and tests. The macro
proc ? addr (line 5577) is provided because it is not possible to have negative sub-
scripts in C. Logically, the array proc should go from −NR ? TASKS to
+NR ? PROCS. Unfortunately, in C it must start at 0, so proc[0] refers to the most
negative task, and so forth. To make it easier to keep track of which slot goes with
which process, we can write
    rp = proc ? addr(n);
to assign to rp the address of the process slot for process n, either positive or
negative.
     The process table itself is defined here as an array of proc structures,
proc[NR ? TASKS + NR ? PROCS] (line 5593). Note that NR ? TASKS is defined in
include/minix/com.h (line 3630) and the constant NR ? PROCS is defined in
include/minix/config.h (line 2522). Together these set the size of the kernel’s
process table. NR ? PROCS can be changed to create a system capable of handling
a larger number of processes, if that is necessary (e.g., on a large server).
SEC. 2.6          IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                             153
      Finally, several macros are defined to speed access. The process table is
accessed frequently, and calculating an address in an array requires slow multipli-
cation operations, so an array of pointers to the process table elements,
pproc ? addr (line 5594), is provided. The two arrays rdy ? head and rdy ? tail are
used to maintain the scheduling queues. For example, the first process on the
default user queue is pointed to by rdy ? head[USER ? Q].
      As we mentioned at the beginning of the discussion of proc.h there is another
file sconst.h (line 5600), which must be synchronized with proc.h if there are
changes in the structure of the process table. Sconst.h defines constants used by
assembler code, expressed in a form usable by the assembler. All of these are
offsets into the stackframe ? s structure portion of a process table entry. Since
assembler code is not processed by the C compiler, it is simpler to have such
definitions in a separate file. Also, since these definitions are all machine depen-
dent, isolating them here simplifies the process of porting MINIX 3 to another pro-
cessor which will need a different version of sconst.h. Note that many offsets are
expressed as the previous value plus W, which is set equal to the word size at line
5601. This allows the same file to serve for compiling a 16-bit or 32-bit version
of MINIX 3.
      Duplicate definitions create a potential problem. Header files are supposed to
allow one to provide a single correct set of definitions and then proceed to use
them in many places without devoting a lot of further attention to the details.
Obviously, duplicate definitions, like those in proc.h and sconst.h, violate that
principle. This is a special case, of course, but as such, special attention is re-
quired if changes are made to either of these files to ensure the two files remain
consistent.
      The system privileges structure, priv, that was mentioned briefly in the discus-
sion of the process table is fully defined in priv.h, on lines 5718 to 5735. First
there is a set of flag bits, s ? flags, and then come the s ? trap ? mask, s ? ipc ? from,
s ? ipc ? to, and s ? call ? mask fields which define which system calls may be ini-
tiated, which processes messages may be received from or sent to, and which ker-
nel calls are allowed.
      The priv structure is not part of the process table, rather each process table
slot has a pointer to an instance of it. Only system processes have private copies;
user processes all point to the same copy. Thus, for a user process the remaining
fields of the structure are not relevant, as sharing them does not make sense.
These fields are bitmaps of pending notifications, hardware interrupts, and sig-
nals, and a timer. It makes sense to provide these here for system processes, how-
ever. User processes have notifications, signals, and timers managed on their
behalf by the process manager.
      The organization of priv.h is similar to that of proc.h. After the definition of
the priv structure come macros definitions for the flag bits, some important ad-
dresses known at compile time, and some macros for address calculations at run
time. Then the table of priv structures, priv[NR ? SYS ? PROCS], is defined,

followed by an array of pointers, ppriv ? addr[NR ? SYS ? PROCS] (lines 5762 and
5763). The pointer array provides fast access, analogous to the array of pointers
that provides fast access to process table slots. The value of STACK ? GUARD
defined on line 5738 is a pattern that is easily recognizable. Its use will be seen
later; the reader is invited to search the Internet to learn about the history of this
value.
     The last item in priv.h is a test to make sure that NR ? SYS ? PROCS has been
defined to be larger than the number of processes in the boot image. The #error
line will print a message if the test condition tests true. Although behavior may
be different with other C compilers, with the standard MINIX 3 compiler this will
also abort the compilation.
     The F4 key triggers a debug dump that shows some of the information in the
privilege table. Figure 2-35 shows a few lines of this table for some representa-
tive processes. The flags entries mean P: preemptable, B: billable, S: system. The
traps mean E: echo, S: send, R: receive, B: both, N: notification. The bitmap has
a bit for each of the NR ? SYS ? PROCS (32) system processes allowed, the order
corresponds to the id field. (In the figure only 16 bits are shown, to make it fit the
page better.) All user processes share id 0, which is the left-most bit position.
The bitmap shows that user processes such as init can send messages only to the
process manager, file system, and reincarnation server, and must use sendrec.
The servers and drivers shown in the figure can use any of the ipc primitives and
all but memory can send to any other process.

      --nr-    -id-      -name-          -flags-      -traps-       -ipc?to mask - - - - - -
       (-4 )   (01)      IDLE            P- BS-       -----         00000000 00001111
       [-3 ]   (02)      CLOCK           ---S-        - - R- -      00000000 00001111
       [-2 ]   (03)      SYSTEM          ---S-        - - R- -      00000000 00001111
       [-1 ]   (04)      KERNEL          ---S-        -----         00000000 00001111
          0    (05)      pm              P- - S -     ESRBN         11111111 11111111
          1    (06)      fs              P- - S -     ESRBN         11111111 11111111
          2    (07)      rs              P- - S -     ESRBN         11111111 11111111
          3    (09)      memory          P- - S -     ESRBN         00110111 01101111
          4    (10)      log             P- - S -     ESRBN         11111111 11111111
          5    (08)      tty             P- - S -     ESRBN         11111111 11111111
          6    (11)      driver          P- - S -     ESRBN         11111111 11111111
          7    (00)      init            P- B - -     E - - B-      00000111 00000000

Figure 2-35. Part of a debug dump of the privilege table. The clock task, file
         server, tty, and init processes privileges are typical of tasks, servers, device
         drivers, and user processes, respectively. The bitmap is truncated to 16 bits.

    Another header that is included in a number of different source files is
protect.h (line 5800). Almost everything in this file deals with architecture details
of the Intel processors that support protected mode (the 80286, 80386, 80486, and
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                          155
the Pentium series). A detailed description of these chips is beyond the scope of
this book. Suffice it to say that they contain internal registers that point to
descriptor tables in memory. Descriptor tables define how system resources are
used and prevent processes from accessing memory assigned to other processes.
      The architecture of 32-bit Intel processors also provides for four privilege
levels, of which MINIX 3 takes advantage of three. These are defined symboli-
cally on lines 5843 to 5845. The most central parts of the kernel, the parts that
run during interrupts and that manage context switches, always run with
INTR ? PRIVILEGE. Every address in the memory and every register in the CPU
can be accessed by a process with this privilege level. The tasks run at
TASK ? PRIVILEGE level, which allows them to access I/O but not to use instruc-
tions that modify special registers, like those that point to descriptor tables.
Servers and user processes run at USER ? PRIVILEGE level. Processes executing
at this level are unable to execute certain instructions, for instance those that
access I/O ports, change memory assignments, or change privilege levels them-
selves.
      The concept of privilege levels will be familiar to those who are familiar with
the architecture of modern CPUs, but those who have learned computer architec-
ture through study of the assembly language of low-end microprocessors may not
have encountered such features.
      One header file in kernel/ has not yet been described: system.h, and we will
postpone discussing it until later in this chapter when we describe the system task,
which runs as an independent process, although it is compiled with the kernel.
For now we are through with header files and are ready to dig into the *.c C
language source files. The first of these that we will look at is table.c (line 6000).
Compilation of this produces no executable code, but the compiled object file
table.o will contain all the kernel data structures. We have already seen many of
these data structures defined, in glo.h and other headers. On line 6028 the macro
  TABLE is defined, immediately before the #include statements. As explained
earlier, this definition causes EXTERN to become defined as the null string, and
storage space to be allocated for all the data declarations preceded by EXTERN.
      In addition to the variables declared in header files there are two other places
where global data storage is allocated. Some definitions are made directly in
table.c. On lines 6037 to 6041 the stack space needed by kernel components is
defined, and the total amount of stack space for tasks is reserved as the array
t ? stack[TOT ? STACK ? SPACE] on line 6045.
      The rest of table.c defines many constants related to properties of processes,
such as the combinations of flag bits, call traps, and masks that define to whom
messages and notifications can be sent that we saw in Fig. 2-35 (lines 6048 to
6071). Following this are masks to define the kernel calls allowed for various
processes. The process manager and file server are all allowed unique combina-
tions. The reincarnation server is allowed access to all kernel calls, not for its
own use, but because as the parent of other system processes it can only pass to its

children subsets of its own privileges. Drivers are given a common set of kernel
call masks, except for the RAM disk driver which needs unusual access to
memory. (Note that the comment on line 6075 that mentions the ‘‘system services
manager’’ should say ‘‘reincarnation server’’—the name was changed during
development and some comments still refer to the old name.)
    Finally, on lines 6095 to 6109, the image table is defined. It has been put here
rather than in a header file because the trick with EXTERN used to prevent multi-
ple declarations does not work with initialized variables; that is, you may not say
    extern int x = 3;
anywhere. The image table provides details needed to initialize all of the proc-
esses that are loaded from the boot image. It will be used by the system at startup.
As an example of the information contained here, consider the field labeled ‘‘qs’’
in the comment on line 6096. This shows the size of the quantum assigned to
each process. Ordinary user processes, as children of init, get to run for 8 clock
ticks. The CLOCK and SYSTEM tasks are allowed to run for 64 clock ticks if
necessary. They are not really expected to run that long before blocking, but
unlike user-space servers and drivers they cannot be demoted to a lower-priority
queue if they prevent other processes from getting a chance to run.
     If a new process is to be added to the boot image, a new row must be provided
in the image table. An error in matching the size of image to other constants is in-
tolerable and cannot be permitted. At the end of table.c tests are made for errors,
using a little trick. The array dummy is declared here twice. In each declaration
the size of dummy will be impossible and will trigger a compiler error if a mistake
has been made. Since dummy is declared as extern, no space is allocated for it
here (or anywhere). Since it is not referenced anywhere else in the code, this will
not bother the compiler.
     Additional global storage is allocated at the end of the assembly language file
mpx386.s. Although it will require skipping ahead several pages in the listing to
see this, it is appropriate to discuss this now, since we are on the subject of global
variables. On line 6822 the assembler directive .sect .rom is used to put a magic
number (to identify a valid MINIX 3 kernel) at the very beginning of the kernel’s
data segment. A .sect bss assembler directive and the .space pseudoinstruction
are also used here to reserve space for the kernel’s stack. The .comm pseudoin-
struction labels several words at the top of the stack so they may be manipulated
directly. We will come back to mpx386.s in a few pages, after we have discussed
bootstrapping MINIX 3.

2.6.6 Bootstrapping MINIX 3

   It is almost time to start looking at the executable code—but not quite. Before
we do that, let us take a few moments to understand how MINIX 3 is loaded into
memory. It is, of course, loaded from a disk, but the process is not completely
SEC. 2.6             IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                                                                           157
trivial and the exact sequence of events depends on the kind of disk. In particular,
it depends on whether the disk is partitioned or not. Figure 2-36 shows how
diskettes and partitioned disks are laid out.

                                                                                  boot record &
               ock                                                       s te r
            tbl s      Boot pr                                     Ma n 1 bootbloc part
                              ogr                                             o               k      itio
          o
        Bo load                   am                                  r t it i                           n
                                                                   Pa                        loa
                                                                                                 d

                                                                                                                           ta
                                                                                     n 2 b         s
                                                                               rtitio     ootb

                                                                                                                              b
                                                                          Pa loads

                                                                                                                                  le
                                                                                               loc

                                                                                                                Bo
                                                                                                  k

                                                                                                                  ot p
                                                                                             Bo
                                                                                               ot p

                                                                                                                rogram for pa
                                                                                                   rogram
                                                                                                          for
                                                                                 pa

                                                                                                                             rtit
                                                                                   rtiti
                                                                                        on 2

                                                                                                                                 io
                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                    1

                      (a)                                                        (b)

Figure 2-36. Disk structures used for bootstrapping. (a) Unpartitioned disk.
        The first sector is the bootblock. (b) Partitioned disk. The first sector is the mas-
        ter boot record, also called masterboot.

     When the system is started, the hardware (actually, a program in ROM) reads
the first sector of the boot disk, copies it to a fixed location in memory, and exe-
cutes the code found there. On an unpartitioned MINIX 3 diskette, the first sector
is a bootblock which loads the boot program, as in Fig. 2-36(a). Hard disks are
partitioned, and the program on the first sector (called masterboot on MINIX sys-
tems) first relocates itself to a different memory region, then reads the partition
table, loaded with it from the first sector. Then it loads and executes the first sec-
tor of the active partition, as shown in Fig. 2-36(b). (Normally one and only one
partition is marked active). A MINIX 3 partition has the same structure as an
unpartitioned MINIX 3 diskette, with a bootblock that loads the boot program.
The bootblock code is the same for an unpartitioned or a partitioned disk. Since
the masterboot program relocates itself the bootblock code can be written to run at
the same memory address where masterboot is originally loaded.
     The actual situation can be a little more complicated than the figure shows,
because a partition may contain subpartitions. In this case the first sector of the
partition will be another master boot record containing the partition table for the
subpartitions. Eventually, however, control will be passed to a boot sector, the
first sector on a device that is not further subdivided. On a diskette the first sector

is always a boot sector. MINIX 3 does allow a form of partitioning of a diskette,
but only the first partition may be booted; there is no separate master boot record,
and subpartitions are not possible. This makes it possible for partitioned and non-
partitioned diskettes to be mounted in exactly the same way. The main use for a
partitioned floppy disk is that it provides a convenient way to divide an installa-
tion disk into a root image to be copied to a RAM disk and a mounted portion that
can be dismounted when no longer needed, in order to free the diskette drive for
continuing the installation process.
     The MINIX 3 boot sector is modified at the time it is written to the disk by a
special program called installboot which writes the boot sector and patches into it
the disk address of a file named boot on its partition or subpartition. In MINIX 3,
the standard location for the boot program is in a directory of the same name, that
is, /boot/boot. But it could be anywhere—the patching of the boot sector just
mentioned locates the disk sectors from which it is to be loaded. This is necessary
because previous to loading boot there is no way to use directory and file names
to find a file.
     Boot is the secondary loader for MINIX 3. It can do more than just load the
operating system however, as it is a monitor program that allows the user to
change, set, and save various parameters. Boot looks in the second sector of its
partition to find a set of parameters to use. MINIX 3, like standard UNIX, reserves
the first 1K block of every disk device as a bootblock, but only one 512-byte sec-
tor is loaded by the ROM boot loader or the master boot sector, so 512 bytes are
available for saving settings. These control the boot operation, and are also
passed to the operating system itself. The default settings present a menu with
one choice, to start MINIX 3, but the settings can be modified to present a more
complex menu allowing other operating systems to be started (by loading and exe-
cuting boot sectors from other partitions), or to start MINIX 3 with various options.
The default settings can also be modified to bypass the menu and start MINIX 3
immediately.
     Boot is not a part of the operating system, but it is smart enough to use the file
system data structures to find the actual operating system image. Boot looks for a
file with the name specified in the image= boot parameter, which by default is
/boot/image. If there is an ordinary file with this name it is loaded, but if this is
the name of a directory the newest file within it is loaded. Many operating sys-
tems have a predefined file name for the boot image. But MINIX 3 users are
encouraged to modify it and to create new versions. It is useful to be able to se-
lect from multiple versions, in order to return to an older version if an experiment
is unsuccessful.
     We do not have space here to go into more detail about the boot monitor. It is
a sophisticated program, almost a miniature operating system in itself. It works
together with MINIX 3, and when MINIX 3 is properly shut down, the boot monitor
regains control. If you would like to know more, the MINIX 3 Web site provides a
link to a detailed description of the boot monitor source code.
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                         159
     The MINIX 3 boot image (also called system image) is a concatenation of
several program files: the kernel, process manager, file system, reincarnation
server, several device drivers, and init, as shown in Fig 2-30. Note that MINIX 3
as described here is configured with just one disk driver in the boot image, but
several may be present, with the active one selected by a label. Like all binary
programs, each file in the boot image includes a header that tells how much space
to reserve for uninitialized data and stack after loading the executable code and
initialized data, so the next program can be loaded at the proper address.
     The memory regions available for loading the boot monitor and the com-
ponent programs of MINIX 3 will depend upon the hardware. Also, some archi-
tectures may require adjustment of internal addresses within executable code to
correct them for the actual address where a program is loaded. The segmented
architecture of Intel processors makes this unnecessary.
     Details of the loading process differ with machine type. The important thing
is that by one means or another the operating system is loaded into memory. Fol-
lowing this, a small amount of preparation is required before MINIX 3 can be
started. First, while loading the image, boot reads a few bytes from the image that
tell boot some of its properties, most importantly whether it was compiled to run
in 16-bit or 32-bit mode. Then some additional information needed to start the
system is made available to the kernel. The a.out headers of the components of
the MINIX 3 image are extracted into an array within boot’s memory space, and
the base address of this array is passed to the kernel. MINIX 3 can return control
to the boot monitor when it terminates, so the location where execution should
resume in the monitor is also passed on. These items are passed on the stack, as
we shall see later.
     Several other pieces of information, the boot parameters, must be communi-
cated from the boot monitor to the operating system. Some are needed by the ker-
nel and some are not needed but are passed along for information, for instance,
the name of the boot image that was loaded. These items can all be represented as
string=value pairs, and the address of a table of these pairs is passed on the stack.
Fig. 2-37 shows a typical set of boot parameters as displayed by the sysenv com-
mand from the MINIX 3 command line.
     In this example, an important item we will see again soon is the memory
parameter; in this case it indicates that the boot monitor has determined that there
are two segments of memory available for MINIX 3 to use. One begins at hexade-
cimal address 800 (decimal 2048) and has a size of hexadecimal 0x92540
(decimal 599,360) bytes; the other begins at 100000 (1,048,576) and contains
0x3df00000 (64,946,176) bytes. This is typical of all but the most elderly PC-
compatible computers. The design of the original IBM PC placed read-only
memory at the top of the usable range of memory, which is limited to 1 MB on an
8088 CPU. Modern PC-compatible machines always have more memory than the
original PC, but for compatibility they still have read-only memory at the same
addresses as the older machines. Thus, the read-write memory is discontinuous,

                 rootdev=904
                 ramimagedev=904
                 ramsize=0
                 processor=686
                 bus=at
                 video=vga
                 chrome=color
                 memory=800:92540,100000:3DF0000
                 label=AT
                 controller=c0
                 image=boot/image

Figure 2-37. Boot parameters passed to the kernel at boot time in a typical
        MINIX 3 system.

with a block of ROM between the lower 640 KB and the upper range above 1
MB. The boot monitor loads the kernel into the low memory range and the
servers, drivers, and init into the memory range above the ROM if possible. This
is primarily for the benefit of the file system, so a large block cache can be used
without bumping into the read-only memory.
    We should also mention here that operating systems are not universally
loaded from local disks. Diskless workstations may load their operating systems
from a remote disk, over a network connection. This requires network software in
ROM, of course. Although details vary from what we have described here, the
elements of the process are likely to be similar. The ROM code must be just
smart enough to get an executable file over the net that can then obtain the com-
plete operating system. If MINIX 3 were loaded this way, very little would need
to be changed in the initialization process that occurs once the operating system
code is loaded into memory. It would, of course, need a network server and a
modified file system that could access files via the network.

2.6.7 System Initialization

    Earlier versions of MINIX could be compiled in 16-bit mode if compatibility
with older processor chips were required, and MINIX 3 retains some source code
for 16-bit mode. However, the version described here and distributed on the CD-
ROM is usable only on 32-bit machines with 80386 or better processors. It does
not work in 16-bit mode, and creation of a 16-bit version may require removing
some features. Among other things, 32-bit binaries are larger than 16-bit ones,
and independent user-space drivers cannot share code the way it could be done
when drivers were compiled into a single binary. Nevertheless, a common base of
C source code is used and the compiler generates the appropriate output depend-
ing upon whether the compiler itself is the 16-bit or 32-bit version of the compiler.
SEC. 2.6          IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                               161
A macro defined by the compiler itself determines the definition of the
  WORD ? SIZE macro in the file include/minix/sys ? config.h.
    The first part of MINIX 3 to execute is written in assembly language, and dif-
ferent source code files must be used for the 16-bit or 32-bit compiler. The 32-bit
version of the initialization code is in mpx386.s. The alternative, for 16-bit sys-
tems, is in mpx88.s. Both of these also include assembly language support for
other low-level kernel operations. The selection is made automatically in mpx.s.
This file is so short that the entire file can be presented in Fig. 2-38.

#include <minix/config.h>
#if ?WORD?SIZE == 2
#include "mpx88.s"
#else
#include "mpx386.s"
#endif

Figure 2-38. How alternative assembly language source files are selected.

Mpx.s shows an unusual use of the C preprocessor #include statement. Cus-
tomarily the #include preprocessor directive is used to include header files, but it
can also be used to select an alternate section of source code. Using #if statements
to do this would require putting all the code in both of the large files mpx88.s and
mpx386.s into a single file. Not only would this be unwieldy; it would also be
wasteful of disk space, since in a particular installation it is likely that one or the
other of these two files will not be used at all and can be archived or deleted. In
the following discussion we will use the 32-bit mpx386.s.
     Since this is almost our first look at executable code, let us start with a few
words about how we will do this throughout the book. The multiple source files
used in compiling a large C program can be hard to follow. In general, we will
keep discussions confined to a single file at a time. The order of inclusion of the
files in Appendix B is the order in which we discuss them in the text. We will
start with the entry point for each part of the MINIX 3 system, and we will follow
the main line of execution. When a call to a supporting function is encountered,
we will say a few words about the purpose of the call, but normally we will not go
into a detailed description of the internals of the function at that point, leaving that
until we arrive at the definition of the called function. Important subordinate
functions are usually defined in the same file in which they are called, following
the higher-level calling functions, but small or general-purpose functions are
sometimes collected in separate files. We do not attempt to discuss the internals
of every function, and files that contain such functions may not be listed in
Appendix B.
     To facilitate portability to other platforms, separate files are frequently used
for machine-dependent and machine-independent code. To make code easier to
understand and reduce the overall size of the listings, most conditional code for

platforms other than Intel 32-bit systems has been stripped from the printed files
in Appendix B. Complete versions of all files are in the source directories on the
CD-ROM and are also available on the MINIX 3 Web site.
     A substantial amount of effort has been made to make the code readable by
humans. But a large program has many branches, and sometimes understanding a
main function requires reading the functions it calls, so having a few slips of
paper to use as bookmarks and deviating from our order of discussion to look at
things in a different order may be helpful at times.
     Having laid out our intended way of organizing the discussion of the code, we
start by an exception. Startup of MINIX 3 involves several transfers of control
between the assembly language routines in mpx386.s and C language routines in
the files start.c and main.c. We will describe these routines in the order that they
are executed, even though that involves jumping from one file to another.
     Once the bootstrap process has loaded the operating system into memory,
control is transferred to the label MINIX (in mpx386.s, line 6420). The first
instruction is a jump over a few bytes of data; this includes the boot monitor flags
(line 6423) mentioned earlier. At this point the flags have already served their
purpose; they were read by the monitor when it loaded the kernel into memory.
They are located here because it is an easily specified address. They are used by
the boot monitor to identify various characteristics of the kernel, most impor-
tantly, whether it is a 16-bit or 32-bit system. The boot monitor always starts in
16-bit mode, but switches the CPU to 32-bit mode if necessary. This happens
before control passes to the label MINIX.
     Understanding the state of the stack at this point will help make sense of the
following code. The monitor passes several parameters to MINIX 3, by putting
them on the stack. First the monitor pushes the address of the variable aout,
which holds the address of an array of the header information of the component
programs of the boot image. Next it pushes the size and then the address of the
boot parameters. These are all 32-bit quantities. Next come the monitor’s code
segment address and the location to return to within the monitor when MINIX 3
terminates. These are both 16-bit quantities, since the monitor operates in 16-bit
protected mode. The first few instructions in mpx386.s convert the 16-bit stack
pointer used by the monitor into a 32-bit value for use in protected mode. Then
the instruction
    mov      ebp, esp
(line 6436) copies the stack pointer value to the ebp register, so it can be used
with offsets to retrieve from the stack the values placed there by the monitor, as is
done at lines 6464 to 6467. Note that because the stack grows downward with
Intel processors, 8(ebp) refers to a value pushed subsequent to pushing the value
located at 12(ebp).
     The assembly language code must do a substantial amount of work, setting up
a stack frame to provide the proper environment for code compiled by the C
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                          163
compiler, copying tables used by the processor to define memory segments, and
setting up various processor registers. As soon as this work is complete, the ini-
tialization process continues by calling (at line 6481) the C function cstart (in
start.c, which we will consider next). Note that it is referred to as ? cstart in the
assembly language code. This is because all functions compiled by the C compiler
have an underscore prepended to their names in the symbol tables, and the linker
looks for such names when separately compiled modules are linked. Since the
assembler does not add underscores, the writer of an assembly language program
must explicitly add one in order for the linker to be able to find a corresponding
name in the object file compiled by the C compiler.
     Cstart calls another routine to initialize the Global Descriptor Table, the
central data structure used by Intel 32-bit processors to oversee memory protec-
tion, and the Interrupt Descriptor Table, used to select the code to be executed
for each possible interrupt type. Upon returning from cstart the lgdt and lidt
instructions (lines 6487 and 6488) make these tables effective by loading the dedi-
cated registers by which they are addressed. The instruction
    jmpf     CS ? SELECTOR:csinit
looks at first glance like a no-operation, since it transfers control to exactly where
control would be if there were a series of nop instructions in its place. But this is
an important part of the initialization process. This jump forces use of the struc-
tures just initialized. After some more manipulation of the processor registers,
MINIX terminates with a jump (not a call) at line 6503 to the kernel’s main entry
point (in main.c). At this point the initialization code in mpx386.s is complete.
The rest of the file contains code to start or restart a task or process, interrupt
handlers, and other support routines that had to be written in assembly language
for efficiency. We will return to these in the next section.
     We will now look at the top-level C initialization functions. The general stra-
tegy is to do as much as possible using high-level C code. As we have seen, there
are already two versions of the mpx code. One chunk of C code can eliminate two
chunks of assembler code. Almost the first thing done by cstart (in start.c, line
6920) is to set up the CPU’s protection mechanisms and the interrupt tables, by
calling prot ? init. Then it copies the boot parameters to the kernel’s memory, and
it scans them, using the function get ? value (line 6997) to search for parameter
names and return corresponding value strings. This process determines the type
of video display, processor type, bus type, and, if in 16-bit mode, the processor
operating mode (real or protected). All this information is stored in global vari-
ables, for access when needed by any part of the kernel code.
     Main (in main.c, line 7130), completes initialization and then starts normal
execution of the system. It configures the interrupt control hardware by calling
intr ? init. This is done here because it cannot be done until the machine type is
known. (Because intr ? init is very dependent upon the hardware the procedure is
in a separate file which we will describe later.) The parameter (1) in the call tells

intr ? init that it is initializing for MINIX 3. With a parameter (0) it can be called to
reinitialize the hardware to the original state when MINIX 3 terminates and returns
control to the boot monitor. Intr ? init ensures that any interrupts that occur before
initialization is complete have no effect. How this is done will be described later.
     The largest part of main’s code is devoted to setup of the process table and the
privilege table, so that when the first tasks and processes are scheduled, their
memory maps, registers, and privilege information will be set correctly. All slots
in the process table are marked as free and the pproc ? addr array that speeds
access to the process table is initialized by the loop on lines 7150 to 7154. The
loop on lines 7155 to 7159 clears the privilege table and the ppriv ? addr array
similarly to the process table and its access array. For both the process and
privilege tables, putting a specific value in one field is adequate to mark the slot
as not in use. But for each table every slot, whether in use or not, needs to be ini-
tialized with an index number.
     An aside on a minor characteristic of the C language: the code on line 7153
    (pproc ? addr + NR ? TASKS)[i] = rp;
could just as well have been written as
    pproc ? addr[i + NR ? TASKS] = rp;
In the C language a[i] is just another way of writing *(a+i). So it does not make
much difference if you add a constant to a or to i. Some C compilers generate
slightly better code if you add a constant to the array instead of the index.
Whether it really makes a difference here, we cannot say.
     Now we come to the long loop on lines 7172 to 7242, which initializes the
process table with the necessary information to run all of the processes in the boot
image. (Note that there is another outdated comment on line 7161 which men-
tions only tasks and servers.) All of these processes must be present at startup
time and none of them will terminate during normal operation. At the start of the
loop, ip is assigned the address of an entry in the image table created in table.c
(line 7173). Since ip is a pointer to a structure, the elements of the structure can
be accessed using notation like ip−>proc ? nr, as is done on line 7174. This nota-
tion is used extensively in the MINIX 3 source code. In a similar way, rp is a
pointer to a slot of the process table, and priv(rp) points to a slot of the privilege
table. Much of the initialization of the process and privilege tables in the long
loop consists of reading a value from the image table and storing it in the process
table or the privilege table.
     On line 7185 a test is made for processes that are part of the kernel, and if this
is true the special STACK ? GUARD pattern is stored in the base of the task’s stack
area. This can be checked later on to be sure the stack has not overflowed. Then
the initial stack pointer for each task is set up. Each task needs its own private
stack pointer. Since the stack grows toward lower addresses in memory, the initial
stack pointer is calculated by adding the size of the task’s stack to the current base
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                        165
address (lines 7190 and 7191). There is one exception: the KERNEL process (also
identified as HARDWARE in some places) is never considered ready, never runs
as an ordinary process, and thus has no need of a stack pointer.
     The binaries of boot image components are compiled like any other MINIX 3
programs, and the compiler creates a header, as defined in include/a.out.h, at the
beginning of each of the files. The boot loader copies each of these headers into
its own memory space before MINIX 3 starts, and when the monitor transfers con-
trol to the MINIX: entry point in mpx386.s the physical address of the header area
is passed to the assembly code in the stack, as we have seen. At line 7202, one of
these headers is copied to a local exec structure, ehdr, using hdrindex as the index
into the array of headers. Then the data and text segment addresses are converted
to clicks and entered into the memory map for this process (lines 7205 to 7214).
     Before continuing, we should mention a few points. First, for kernel proc-
esses hdrindex is always assigned a value of zero at line 7178. These processes
are all compiled into the same file as the kernel, and the information about their
stack requirements is in the image table. Since a task compiled into the kernel can
call code and access data located anywhere in the kernel’s space, the size of an
individual task is not meaningful. Thus the same element of the array at aout is
accessed for the kernel and for each task, and the size fields for a task is filled
with the sizes for the kernel itself. The tasks get their stack information from the
image table, initialized during compilation of table.c. After all kernel processes
have been processed, hdrindex is incremented on each pass through the loop (line
7196), so all the user-space system processes get the proper data from their own
headers.
     Another point to mention here is that functions that copy data are not neces-
sarily consistent in the order in which the source and destination are specified. In
reading this loop, beware of potential confusion. The arguments to strncpy, a
function from the standard C library, are ordered such that the destination comes
first: strncpy(to, from, count). This is analogous to an assignment operation, in
which the left hand side specifies the variable being assigned to and the right hand
side is the expression specifying the value to be assigned. This function is used at
line 7179 to copy a process name into each process table slot for debugging and
other purposes. In contrast, the phys ? copy function uses an opposite convention,
phys ? copy(from, to, quantity). Phys ? copy is used at line 7202 to copy program
headers of user-space processes.
     Continuing our discussion of the initialization of the process table, at lines
7220 and 7221 the initial value of the program counter and the processor status
word are set. The processor status word for the tasks is different from that for
device drivers and servers, because tasks have a higher privilege level that allows
them to access I/O ports. Following this, if the process is a user-space one, its
stack pointer is initialized.
     One entry in the process table does not need to be (and cannot be) scheduled.
The HARDWARE process exists only for bookkeeping purposes—it is credited

with the time used while servicing an interrupt. All other processes are put on the
appropriate queues by the code in lines 7234 and 7235. The function called
lock ? enqueue disables interrupts before modifying the queues and then reenables
them when the queue has been modified. This is not required at this point when
nothing is running yet, but it is the standard method, and there is no point in creat-
ing extra code to be used just once.
     The last step in initializing each slot in the process table is to call the function
alloc ? segments at line 7241. This machine-dependent routine sets into the proper
fields the locations, sizes, and permission levels for the memory segments used by
each process. For older Intel processors that do not support protected mode, it
defines only the segment locations. It would have to be rewritten to handle a pro-
cessor type with a different method of allocating memory.
     Once the process table has been initialized for all the tasks, the servers, and
init, the system is almost ready to roll. The variable bill ? ptr tells which process
gets billed for processor time; it needs to have an initial value set at line 7250, and
IDLE is clearly an appropriate choice. Now the kernel is ready to begin its nor-
mal work of controlling and scheduling the execution of processes, as illustrated
in Fig. 2-2.
     Not all of the other parts of the system are ready for normal operation yet, but
all of these other parts run as independent processes and have been marked ready
and queued to run. They will initialize themselves when they run. All that is left
is for the kernel to call announce to announce it is ready and then to call restart
(lines 7251 and 7252). In many C programs main is a loop, but in the MINIX 3
kernel its job is done once the initialization is complete. The call to restart on
line 7252 starts the first queued process. Control never returns to main.
       Restart is an assembly language routine in mpx386.s. In fact, ? restart is not
a complete function; it is an intermediate entry point in a larger procedure. We
will discuss it in detail in the next section; for now we will just say that ? restart
causes a context switch, so the process pointed to by proc ? ptr will run. When
  restart has executed for the first time we can say that MINIX 3 is running—it is
executing a process. ? Restart is executed again and again as tasks, servers, and
user processes are given their opportunities to run and then are suspended, either
to wait for input or to give other processes their turns.
     Of course, the first time ? restart is executed, initialization is only complete
for the kernel. Recall that there are three parts to the MINIX 3 process table. You
might ask how can any processes run when major parts of the process table have
not been set up yet. The full answer to this will be seen in later chapters. The
short answer is that the instruction pointers of all processes in the boot image ini-
tially point to initialization code for each process, and all will block fairly soon.
Eventually, the process manager and the file system will get to run their initializa-
tion code, and their parts of the process table will be completed. Eventually init
will fork off a getty process for each terminal. These processes will block until
input is typed at some terminal, at which point the first user can log in.
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                         167
     We have now traced the startup of MINIX 3 through three files, two written in
C and one in assembly language. The assembly language file, mpx386.s, contains
additional code used in handling interrupts, which we will look at in the next sec-
tion. However, before we go on let us wrap up with a brief description of the
remaining routines in the two C files. The remaining function in start.c is
get ? value (line 6997). It is used to find entries in the kernel environment, which
is a copy of the boot parameters. It is a simplified version of a standard library
function which is rewritten here in order to keep the kernel simple.
     There are three additional procedures in main.c. Announce displays a copy-
right notice and tells whether MINIX 3 is running in real mode or 16-bit or 32-bit
protected mode, like this:
    MINIX 3.1 Copyright 2006 Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
    Executing in 32-bit protected mode
When you see this message you know initialization of the kernel is complete.
Prepare ? shutdown (line 7272) signals all system processes with a SIGKSTOP
signal (system processes cannot be signaled in the same way as user processes).
Then it sets a timer to allow all the system process time to clean up before it calls
the final procedure here, shutdown. Shutdown will normally return control to the
MINIX 3 boot monitor. To do so the interrupt controllers are restored to the BIOS
settings by the intr ? init(0) call on line 7338.

2.6.8 Interrupt Handling in MINIX

     Details of interrupt hardware are system dependent, but any system must have
elements functionally equivalent to those to be described for systems with 32-bit
Intel CPUs. Interrupts generated by hardware devices are electrical signals and
are handled in the first place by an interrupt controller, an integrated circuit that
can sense a number of such signals and for each one generate a unique data pat-
tern on the processor’s data bus. This is necessary because the processor itself has
only one input for sensing all these devices, and thus cannot differentiate which
device needs service. PCs using Intel 32-bit processors are normally equipped
with two such controller chips. Each can handle eight inputs, but one is a slave
which feeds its output to one of the inputs of the master, so fifteen distinct exter-
nal devices can be sensed by the combination, as shown in Fig. 2-39. Some of the
fifteen inputs are dedicated; the clock input, IRQ 0, for instance, does not have a
connection to any socket into which a new adapter can be plugged. Others are
connected to sockets and can be used for whatever device is plugged in.
     In the figure, interrupt signals arrive on the various IRQ n lines shown at the
right. The connection to the CPU’s INT pin tells the processor that an interrupt
has occurred. The INTA (interrupt acknowledge) signal from the CPU causes the
controller responsible for the interrupt to put data on the system data bus telling
the processor which service routine to execute. The interrupt controller chips are

            Interrupt                                                      IRQ 0 (clock)
      INT               s            INT                                   IRQ 1 (keyboard)
                        y
                        s            Master                                IRQ 3 (tty 2)
                        t           interrupt                              IRQ 4 (tty 1)
   CPU                              controller                             IRQ 5 (XT Winchester)
                        e
                        m                                                  IRQ 6 (floppy)
    INTA                             ACK                                   IRQ 7 (printer)
            Interrupt   d
               ack      a                                                  IRQ 8 (real time clock)
                                                        INT
                        t                                                  IRQ 9 (redirected IRQ 2)
                        a                                 Slave            IRQ 10
                                                        interrupt          IRQ 11
                        b                               controller         IRQ 12
                        u                                                  IRQ 13 (FPU exception)
                        s                               ACK                IRQ 14 (AT Winchester)
                                                                           IRQ 15

Figure 2-39. Interrupt processing hardware on a 32-bit Intel PC.

programmed during system initialization, when main calls intr ? init. The pro-
gramming determines the output sent to the CPU for a signal received on each of
the input lines, as well as various other parameters of the controller’s operation.
The data put on the bus is an 8-bit number, used to index into a table of up to 256
elements. The MINIX 3 table has 56 elements. Of these, 35 are actually used; the
others are reserved for use with future Intel processors or for future enhancements
to MINIX 3. On 32-bit Intel processors this table contains interrupt gate descrip-
tors, each of which is an 8-byte structure with several fields.
     Several modes of response to interrupts are possible; in the one used by
MINIX 3, the fields of most concern to us in each of the interrupt gate descriptors
point to the service routine’s executable code segment and the starting address
within it. The CPU executes the code pointed to by the selected descriptor. The
result is exactly the same as execution of an
    int        <nnn>
assembly language instruction. The only difference is that in the case of a
hardware interrupt the <nnn> originates from a register in the interrupt controller
chip, rather than from an instruction in program memory.
    The task-switching mechanism of a 32-bit Intel processor that is called into
play in response to an interrupt is complex, and changing the program counter to
execute another function is only a part of it. When the CPU receives an interrupt
while running a process it sets up a new stack for use during the interrupt service.
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                          169
The location of this stack is determined by an entry in the Task State Segment
(TSS). One such structure exists for the entire system, initialized by cstart’s call
to prot ? init, and modified as each process is started. The effect is that the new
stack created by an interrupt always starts at the end of the stackframe ? s structure
within the process table entry of the interrupted process. The CPU automatically
pushes several key registers onto this new stack, including those necessary to rein-
state the interrupted process’ own stack and restore its program counter. When the
interrupt handler code starts running, it uses this area in the process table as its
stack, and much of the information needed to return to the interrupted process will
have already been stored. The interrupt handler pushes the contents of additional
registers, filling the stackframe, and then switches to a stack provided by the ker-
nel while it does whatever must be done to service the interrupt.
     Termination of an interrupt service routine is done by switching the stack
from the kernel stack back to a stackframe in the process table (but not necessarily
the same one that was created by the last interrupt), explicitly popping the addi-
tional registers, and executing an iretd (return from interrupt) instruction. Iretd
restores the state that existed before an interrupt, restoring the registers that were
pushed by the hardware and switching back to a stack that was in use before an
interrupt. Thus an interrupt stops a process, and completion of the interrupt ser-
vice restarts a process, possibly a different one from the one that was most
recently stopped. Unlike the simpler interrupt mechanisms that are the usual sub-
ject of assembly language programming texts, nothing is stored on the interrupted
process’ working stack when a user process is interrupted. Furthermore, because
the stack is created anew in a known location (determined by the TSS) after an
interrupt, control of multiple processes is simplified. To start a different process
all that is necessary is to point the stack pointer to the stackframe of another proc-
ess, pop the registers that were explicitly pushed, and execute an iretd instruction.
     The CPU disables all interrupts when it receives an interrupt. This guarantees
that nothing can occur to cause the stackframe within a process table entry to
overflow. This is automatic, but assembly-level instructions exist to disable and
enable interrupts, as well. Interrupts remain disabled while the kernel stack, lo-
cated outside the process table, is in use. A mechanism exists to allow an excep-
tion handler (a response to an error detected by the CPU) to run when the kernel
stack is in use. An exception is similar to an interrupt and exceptions cannot be
disabled. Thus, for the sake of exceptions there must be a way to deal with what
are essentially nested interrupts. In this case a new stack is not created. Instead,
the CPU pushes the essential registers needed for resumption of the interrupted
code onto the existing stack. An exception is not supposed to occur while the ker-
nel is running, however, and will result in a panic.
     When an iretd is encountered while executing kernel code, a the return
mechanism is simpler than the one used when a user process is interrupted. The
processor can determine how to handle the iretd by examining the code segment
selector that is popped from the stack as part of the iretd’s action.

     The privilege levels mentioned earlier control the different responses to inter-
rupts received while a process is running and while kernel code (including inter-
rupt service routines) is executing. The simpler mechanism is used when the
privilege level of the interrupted code is the same as the privilege level of the
code to be executed in response to the interrupt. The usual case, however, is that
the interrupted code is less privileged than the interrupt service code, and in this
case the more elaborate mechanism, using the TSS and a new stack, is employed.
The privilege level of a code segment is recorded in the code segment selector,
and as this is one of the items stacked during an interrupt, it can be examined
upon return from the interrupt to determine what the iretd instruction must do.
     Another service is provided by the hardware when a new stack is created to
use while servicing an interrupt. The hardware checks to make sure the new stack
is big enough for at least the minimum quantity of information that must be placed
on it. This protects the more privileged kernel code from being accidentally (or
maliciously) crashed by a user process making a system call with an inadequate
stack. These mechanisms are built into the processor specifically for use in the
implementation of operating systems that support multiple processes.
     This behavior may be confusing if you are unfamiliar with the internal work-
ing of 32-bit Intel CPUs. Ordinarily we try to avoid describing such details, but
understanding what happens when an interrupt occurs and when an iretd instruc-
tion is executed is essential to understanding how the kernel controls the transi-
tions to and from the ‘‘running’’ state of Fig. 2-2. The fact that the hardware han-
dles much of the work makes life much easier for the programmer, and presum-
ably makes the resulting system more efficient. All this help from the hardware
does, however, make it hard to understand what is happening just by reading the
software.
     Having now described the interrupt mechanism, we will return to mpx386.s
and look at the tiny part of the MINIX 3 kernel that actually sees hardware inter-
rupts. An entry point exists for each interrupt. The source code at each entry
point, ? hwint00 to ? hwint07, (lines 6531 to 6560) looks like a call to
hwint ? master (line 6515), and the entry points ? hwint08 to ? hwint15 (lines 6583
to 6612) look like calls to hwint ? slave (line 6566). Each entry point appears to
pass a parameter in the call, indicating which device needs service. In fact, these
are really not calls, but macros, and eight separate copies of the code defined by
the macro definition of hwint ? master are assembled, with only the irq parameter
different. Similarly, eight copies of the hwint ? slave macro are assembled. This
may seem extravagant, but assembled code is very compact. The object code for
each expanded macro occupies fewer than 40 bytes. In servicing an interrupt,
speed is important, and doing it this way eliminates the overhead of executing
code to load a parameter, call a subroutine, and retrieve the parameter.
     We will continue the discussion of hwint ? master as if it really were a single
function, rather than a macro that is expanded in eight different places. Recall
that before hwint ? master begins to execute, the CPU has created a new stack in
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                          171
the stackframe ? s of the interrupted process, within its process table slot. Several
key registers have already been saved there, and all interrupts are disabled. The
first action of hwint ? master is to call save (line 6516). This subroutine pushes all
the other registers necessary to restart the interrupted process. Save could have
been written inline as part of the macro to increase speed, but this would have
more than doubled the size of the macro, and in any case save is needed for calls
by other functions. As we shall see, save plays tricks with the stack. Upon
returning to hwint ? master, the kernel stack, not a stackframe in the process table,
is in use.
     Two tables declared in glo.h are now used. ? Irq ? handlers contains the hook
information, including addresses of handler routines. The number of the interrupt
being serviced is converted to an address within ? irq ? handlers. This address is
then pushed onto the stack as the argument to ? intr ? handle, and ? intr ? handle is
called, We will look at the code of ? intr ? handle later. For the moment, we will
just say that not only does it call the service routine for the interrupt that was
called, it sets or resets a flag in the ? irq ? actids array to indicate whether this
attempt to service the interrupt succeeded, and it gives other entries on the queue
another chance to run and be removed from the list. Depending upon exactly
what was required of the handler, the IRQ may or may not be available to receive
another interrupt upon the return from the call to ? intr ? handle. This is deter-
mined by checking the corresponding entry in ? irq ? actids.
     A nonzero value in ? irq ? actids shows that interrupt service for this IRQ is
not complete. If so, the interrupt controller is manipulated to prevent it from re-
sponding to another interrupt from the same IRQ line. (lines 6722 to 6724). This
operation masks the ability of the controller chip to respond to a particular input;
the CPU’s ability to respond to all interrupts is inhibited internally when it first
receives the interrupt signal and has not yet been restored at this point.
     A few words about the assembly language code used may be helpful to
readers unfamiliar with assembly language programming. The instruction
    jz 0f
on line 6521 does not specify a number of bytes to jump over. The 0f is not a hex-
adecimal number, nor is it a normal label. Ordinary label names are not permitted
to begin with numeric characters. This is the way the MINIX 3 assembler speci-
fies a local label; the 0f means a jump forward to the next numeric label 0, on
line 6525. The byte written on line 6526 allows the interrupt controller to resume
normal operation, possibly with the line for the current interrupt disabled.
     An interesting and possibly confusing point is that the 0: label on line 6525
occurs elsewhere in the same file, on line 6576 in hwint ? slave. The situation is
even more complicated than it looks at first glance since these labels are within
macros and the macros are expanded before the assembler sees this code. Thus
there are actually sixteen 0: labels in the code seen by the assembler. The possible
proliferation of labels declared within macros is the reason why the assembly

language provides local labels; when resolving a local label, the assembler uses
the nearest one that matches in the specified direction, and additional occurrences
of a local label are ignored.
       Intr ? handle is hardware dependent, and details of its code will be discussed
when we get to the file i8259.c. However, a few word about how it functions are
in order now. ? Intr ? handle scans a linked list of structures that hold, among
other things, addresses of functions to be called to handle an interrupt for a de-
vice, and the process numbers of the device drivers. It is a linked list because a
single IRQ line may be shared with several devices. The handler for each device
is supposed to test whether its device actually needs service. Of course, this step
is not necessary for an IRQ such as the clock interrupt, IRQ 0, which is hard
wired to the chip that generates clock signals with no possibility of any other
device triggering this IRQ.
     The handler code is intended to be written so it can return quickly. If there is
no work to be done or the interrupt service is completed immediately, the handler
returns TRUE. A handler may perform an operation like reading data from an
input device and transferring the data to a buffer where it can be accessed when
the corresponding driver has its next chance to run. The handler may then cause a
message to be sent to its device driver, which in turn causes the device driver to
be scheduled to run as a normal process. If the work is not complete, the handler
returns FALSE. An element of the ? irq ? act ? ids array is a bitmap that records the
results for all the handlers on the list in such a way that the result will be zero if
and only if every one of the handlers returned TRUE. If that is not the case, the
code on lines 6522 to 6524 disables the IRQ before the interrupt controller as a
whole is reenabled on line 6536.
     This mechanism ensures that none of the handlers on the chain belonging to
an IRQ will be activated until all of the device drivers to which these handlers
belong have completed their work. Obviously, there needs to be another way to
reenable an IRQ. That is provided in a function enable ? irq which we will see
later. Suffice it to say, each device driver must be sure that enable ? irq is called
when its work is done. It also is obvious that enable ? irq first should reset its own
bit in the element of ? irq ? act ? ids that corresponds to the IRQ of the driver, and
then should test whether all bits have been reset. Only then should the IRQ be
reenabled on the interrupt controller chip.
     What we have just described applies in its simplest form only to the clock
driver, because the clock is the only interrupt-driven device that is compiled into
the kernel binary. The address of an interrupt handler in another process is not
meaningful in the context of the kernel, and the enable ? irq function in the kernel
cannot be called by a separate process in its own memory space. For user-space
device drivers, which means all device drivers that respond to hardware-initiated
interrupts except for the clock driver, the address of a common handler,
generic ? handler, is stored in the linked list of hooks. The source code for this
function is in the system task files, but since the system task is compiled together
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                           173
with the kernel and since this code is executed in response to an interrupt it cannot
really be considered part of the system task. The other information in each ele-
ment of the list of hooks includes the process number of the associated device
driver. When generic ? handler is called it sends a message to the correct device
driver which causes the specific handler functions of the driver to run. The sys-
tem task supports the other end of the chain of events described above as well.
When a user-space device driver completes its work it makes a sys ? irqctl kernel
call, which causes the system task to call enable ? irq on behalf of that driver to
prepare for the next interrupt.
     Returning our attention to hwint ? master, note that it terminates with a ret
instruction (line 6527). It is not obvious that something tricky happens here. If a
process has been interrupted, the stack in use at this point is the kernel stack, and
not the stack within a process table that was set up by the hardware before
hwint ? master was started. In this case, manipulation of the stack by save will
have left the address of ? restart on the kernel stack. This results in a task, driver,
server, or user process once again executing. It may not be, and in fact very likely
is not, the same process as was executing when the interrupt occurred. This
depends upon whether the processing of the message created by the device-
specific interrupt service routine caused a change in the process scheduling
queues. In the case of a hardware interrupt this will almost always be the case.
Interrupt handlers usually result in messages to device drivers, and device drivers
generally are queued on higher priority queues than user processes. This, then, is
the heart of the mechanism which creates the illusion of multiple processes exe-
cuting simultaneously.
     To be complete, let us mention that if an interrupt could occur while kernel
code were executing, the kernel stack would already be in use, and save would
leave the address of restart1 on the kernel stack. In this case, whatever the kernel
was doing previously would continue after the ret at the end of hwint ? master.
This is a description of handling of nested interrupts, and these are not allowed to
occur in MINIX 3— interrupts are not enabled while kernel code is running. How-
ever, as mentioned previously, the mechanism is necessary in order to handle
exceptions. When all the kernel routines involved in responding to an exception
are complete ? restart will finally execute. In response to an exception while exe-
cuting kernel code it will almost certainly be true that a process different from the
one that was interrupted last will be put into execution. The response to an excep-
tion in the kernel is a panic, and what happens will be an attempt to shut down the
system with as little damage as possible.
     Hwint ? slave (line 6566) is similar to hwint ? master, except that it must reen-
able both the master and slave controllers, since both of them are disabled by
receipt of an interrupt by the slave.
     Now let us move on to look at save (line 6622), which we have already men-
tioned. Its name describes one of its functions, which is to save the context of the
interrupted process on the stack provided by the CPU, which is a stackframe

within the process table. Save uses the variable ? k ? reenter to count and deter-
mine the level of nesting of interrupts. If a process was executing when the cur-
rent interrupt occurred, the
    mov     esp, k ? stktop
instruction on line 6635 switches to the kernel stack, and the following instruction
pushes the address of ? restart. If an interrupt could occur while the kernel stack
were already in use the address of restart1 would be pushed instead (line 6642).
Of course, an interrupt is not allowed here, but the mechanism is here to handle
exceptions. In either case, with a possibly different stack in use from the one that
was in effect upon entry, and with the return address in the routine that called it
buried beneath the registers that have just been pushed, an ordinary return instruc-
tion is not adequate for returning to the caller. The
    jmp   RETADR-P ? STACKBASE(eax)

instructions that terminate the two exit points of save, at line 6638 and line 6643
use the address that was pushed when save was called.
     Reentrancy in the kernel causes many problems, and eliminating it resulted in
simplification of code in several places. In MINIX 3 the ? k ? reenter variable still
has a purpose—although ordinary interrupts cannot occur while kernel code is
executing exceptions are still possible. For now, the thing to keep in mind is that
the jump on line 6634 will never occur in normal operation. It is, however, neces-
sary for dealing with exceptions.
     As an aside, we must admit that the elimination of reentrancy is a case where
programming got ahead of documentation in the development of MINIX 3. In
some ways documentation is harder than programming—the compiler or the pro-
gram will eventually reveal errors in a program. There is no such mechanism to
correct comments in source code. There is a rather long comment at the start of
mpx386.s which is, unfortunately, incorrect. The part of the comment on lines
6310 to 6315 should say that a kernel reentry can occur only when an exception is
detected.
     The next procedure in mpx386.s is ? s ? call, which begins on line 6649.
Before looking at its internal details, look at how it ends. It does not end with a
ret or jmp instruction. In fact, execution continues at ? restart (line 6681).
  S ? call is the system call counterpart of the interrupt-handling mechanism. Con-
trol arrives at ? s ? call following a software interrupt, that is, execution of an int
<nnn> instruction. Software interrupts are treated like hardware interrupts, except
of course the index into the Interrupt Descriptor Table is encoded into the nnn part
of an int <nnn> instruction, rather than being supplied by an interrupt controller
chip. Thus, when ? s ? call is entered, the CPU has already switched to a stack
inside the process table (supplied by the Task State Segment), and several regis-
ters have already been pushed onto this stack. By falling through to ? restart, the
call to ? s ? call ultimately terminates with an iretd instruction, and, just as with a
SEC. 2.6             IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                                     175
hardware interrupt, this instruction will start whatever process is pointed to by
proc ? ptr at that point. Figure 2-40 compares the handling of a hardware interrupt
and a system call using the software interrupt mechanism.

 Device:
    Send electrical signal to interrupt controller.

 Controller:                                          Caller:
    1. Interrupt CPU.                                     1. Put message pointer and destination of
    2. Send digital identification of interrupting           message into CPU registers.
       device.                                            2. Execute software interrupt instruction.

 Kernel:                                              Kernel:
    1. Save registers.                                   1. Save registers.
    2. Send notification message to driver               2. Send and/or receive message.
    3. Restart a process (probably the driver)           3. Restart a process (not necessarily the
                                                            calling process).

                          (a)                                                 (b)

Figure 2-40. (a) How a hardware interrupt is processed. (b) How a system call
          is made.

     Let us now look at some details of ? s ? call. The alternate label, ? p ? s ? call, is
a vestige of the 16-bit version of MINIX 3, which has separate routines for pro-
tected mode and real mode operation. In the 32-bit version all calls to either label
end up here. A programmer invoking a MINIX 3 system call writes a function call
in C that looks like any other function call, whether to a locally defined function
or to a routine in the C library. The library code supporting a system call sets up a
message, loads the address of the message and the process id of the destination
into CPU registers, and then invokes an int SYS386 ? VECTOR instruction. As
described above, the result is that control passes to the start of ? s ? call, and
several registers have already been pushed onto a stack inside the process table.
All interrupts are disabled, too, as with a hardware interrupt.
     The first part of the ? s ? call code resembles an inline expansion of save and
saves the additional registers that must be preserved. Just as in save, a
    mov       esp, k ? stktop
instruction then switches to the kernel stack. (The similarity of a software inter-
rupt to a hardware interrupt extends to both disabling all interrupts). Following
this comes a call to ? sys ? call (line 6672), which we will discuss in the next sec-
tion. For now we just say that it causes a message to be delivered, and that this in

turn causes the scheduler to run. Thus, when ? sys ? call returns, it is probable that
proc ? ptr will be pointing to a different process from the one that initiated the sys-
tem call. Then execution falls through to restart.
    We have seen that ? restart (line 6681) is reached in several ways:
      1. By a call from main when the system starts.
      2. By a jump from hwint ? master or hwint ? slave after a hardware interrupt.
      3. By falling through from ? s ? call after a system call.
Fig. 2-41 is a simplified summary of how control passes back and forth between
processes and the kernel via ? restart.

                cold boot                              process
                                                       or task

                                        restart()

                      User    Kernel   service(int)                    syscall()
                      space   space

                                         save()

                                    external interrupt           software interrupt
                                (from hardware or clock)           (system call)

Figure 2-41. Restart is the common point reached after system startup, inter-
           rupts, or system calls. The most deserving process (which may be and often is a
           different process from the last one interrupted) runs next. Not shown in this di-
           agram are interrupts that occur while the kernel itself is running.

     In every case interrupts are disabled when ? restart is reached. By line 6690
the next process to run has been definitively chosen, and with interrupts disabled
it cannot be changed. The process table was carefully constructed so it begins
with a stack frame, and the instruction on this line,
    mov esp, ( ? proc ? ptr)
points the CPU’s stack pointer register at the stack frame. The
    lldt     P ? LDT ? SEL(esp)
instruction then loads the processor’s local descriptor table register from the stack
frame. This prepares the processor to use the memory segments belonging to the
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                           177
next process to be run. The following instruction sets the address in the next proc-
ess’ process table entry to that where the stack for the next interrupt will be set up,
and the following instruction stores this address into the TSS.
     The first part of ? restart would not be necessary if an interrupt occured when
kernel code (including interrupt service code) were executing, since the kernel
stack would be in use and termination of the interrupt service would allow the ker-
nel code to continue. But, in fact, the kernel is not reentrant in MINIX 3, and ordi-
nary interrupts cannot occur this way. However, disabling interrupts does not dis-
able the ability of the processor to detect exceptions. The label restart1 (line
6694) marks the point where execution resumes if an exception occurs while exe-
cuting kernel code (something we hope will never happen). At this point
k ? reenter is decremented to record that one level of possibly nested interrupts has
been disposed of, and the remaining instructions restore the processor to the state
it was in when the next process executed last. The penultimate instruction modi-
fies the stack pointer so the return address that was pushed when save was called
is ignored. If the last interrupt occurred when a process was executing, the final
instruction, iretd, completes the return to execution of whatever process is being
allowed to run next, restoring its remaining registers, including its stack segment
and stack pointer. If, however, this encounter with the iretd came via restart1, the
kernel stack in use is not a stackframe, but the kernel stack, and this is not a return
to an interrupted process, but the completion of handling an exception that
occurred while kernel code was executing. The CPU detects this when the code
segment descriptor is popped from the stack during execution of the iretd, and the
complete action of the iretd in this case is to retain the kernel stack in use.
     Now it is time to say something more about exceptions. An exception is
caused by various error conditions internal to the CPU. Exceptions are not always
bad. They can be used to stimulate the operating system to provide a service, such
as providing more memory for a process to use, or swapping in a currently
swapped-out memory page, although such services are not implemented in MINIX
3. They also can be caused by programming errors. Within the kernel an excep-
tion is very serious, and grounds to panic. When an exception occurs in a user
program the program may need to be terminated, but the operating system should
be able to continue. Exceptions are handled by the same mechanism as interrupts,
using descriptors in the interrupt descriptor table. These entries in the table point
to the sixteen exception handler entry points, beginning with ? divide ? error and
ending with ? copr ? error, found near the end of mpx386.s, on lines 6707 to 6769.
These all jump to exception (line 6774) or errexception (line 6785) depending
upon whether the condition pushes an error code onto the stack or not. The han-
dling here in the assembly code is similar to what we have already seen, registers
are pushed and the C routine ? exception (note the underscore) is called to handle
the event. The consequences of exceptions vary. Some are ignored, some cause
panics, and some result in sending signals to processes. We will examine ? excep-
tion in a later section.

    One other entry point is handled like an interrupt: ? level0 ? call (line 6714). It
is used when code must be run with privilege level 0, the most privileged level.
The entry point is here in mpx386.s with the interrupt and exception entry points
because it too is invoked by execution of an int <nnn> instruction. Like the
exception routines, it calls save, and thus the code that is jumped to eventually
will terminate with a ret that leads to ? restart. Its usage will be described in a la-
ter section, when we encounter some code that needs privileges normally not
available, even to the kernel.
    Finally, some data storage space is reserved at the end of the assembly
language file. Two different data segments are defined here. The
    .sect .rom
declaration at line 6822 ensures that this storage space is allocated at the very
beginning of the kernel’s data segment and that it is the start of a read-only sec-
tion of memory. The compiler puts a magic number here so boot can verify that
the file it loads is a valid kernel image. When compiling the complete system
various string constants will be stored following this. The other data storage area
defined at the
    .sect .bss
(line 6825) declaration reserves space in the kernel’s normal uninitialized variable
area for the kernel stack, and above that some space is reserved for variables used
by the exception handlers. Servers and ordinary processes have stack space
reserved when an executable file is linked and depend upon the kernel to properly
set the stack segment descriptor and the stack pointer when they are executed. The
kernel has to do this for itself.

2.6.9 Interprocess Communication in MINIX 3

     Processes in MINIX 3 communicate by messages, using the rendezvous princi-
ple. When a process does a send, the lowest layer of the kernel checks to see if
the destination is waiting for a message from the sender (or from ANY sender). If
so, the message is copied from the sender’s buffer to the receiver’s buffer, and
both processes are marked as runnable. If the destination is not waiting for a mes-
sage from the sender, the sender is marked as blocked and put onto a queue of
processes waiting to send to the receiver.
     When a process does a receive, the kernel checks to see if any process is
queued trying to send to it. If so, the message is copied from the blocked sender to
the receiver, and both are marked as runnable. If no process is queued trying to
send to it, the receiver blocks until a message arrives.
     In MINIX 3, with components of the operating system running as totally sep-
arate processes, sometimes the rendezvous method is not quite good enough. The
notify primitive is provided for precisely these occasions. A notify sends a bare-
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                           179
bones message. The sender is not blocked if the destination is not waiting for a
message. The notify is not lost, however. The next time the destination does a
receive pending notifications are delivered before ordinary messages. Notifica-
tions can be used in situations where using ordinary messages could cause
deadlocks. Earlier we pointed out that a situation where process A blocks sending
a message to process B and process B blocks sending a message to process A must
be avoided. But if one of the messages is a nonblocking notification there is no
problem.
    In most cases a notification informs the recipient of its origin, and little more.
Sometimes that is all that is needed, but there are two special cases where a notifi-
cation conveys some additional information. In any case, the destination process
can send a message to the source of the notification to request more information.
    The high-level code for interprocess communication is found in proc.c. The
kernel’s job is to translate either a hardware interrupt or a software interrupt into a
message. The former are generated by hardware and the latter are the way a
request for system services, that is, a system call, is communicated to the kernel.
These cases are similar enough that they could have been handled by a single
function, but it was more efficient to create specialized functions.
    One comment and two macro definitions near the beginning of this file
deserve mention. For manipulating lists, pointers to pointers are used extensively,
and a comment on lines 7420 to 7436 explains their advantages and use. Two
useful macros are defined. BuildMess (lines 7458 to 7471), although its name
implies more generality, is used only for constructing the messages used by notify.
The only function call is to get ? uptime, which reads a variable maintained by the
clock task so the notification can include a timestamp. The apparent calls to a
function named priv are expansions of another macro, defined in priv.h,
    #define priv(rp)     ((rp)->p ? priv)
The other macro, CopyMess, is a programmer-friendly interface to the assembly
language routine cp ? mess in klib386.s.
     More should be said about BuildMess. The priv macro is used for two special
cases. If the origin of a notification is HARDWARE, it carries a payload, a copy
of the destination process’ bitmap of pending interrupts. If the origin is SYSTEM,
the payload is the bitmap of pending signals. Because these bitmaps are available
in the priv table slot of the destination process, they can be accessed at any time.
Notifications can be delivered later if the destination process is not blocked wait-
ing for them at the time they are sent. For ordinary messages this would require
some kind of buffer in which an undelivered message could be stored. To store a
notification all that is required is a bitmap in which each bit corresponds to a proc-
ess that can send a notification. When a notification cannot be sent the bit cor-
responding to the sender is set in the recipient’s bitmap. When a receive is done
the bitmap is checked and if a bit is found to have been set the message is regen-
erated. The bit tells the origin of the message, and if the origin is HARDWARE or

SYSTEM, the additional content is added. The only other item needed is the time-
stamp, which is added when the message is regenerated. For the purposes for
which they are used, timestamps do not need to show when a notification was first
attempted, the time of delivery is sufficient.
     The first function in proc.c is sys ? call (line 7480). It converts a software
interrupt (the int SYS386 ? VECTOR instruction by which a system call is initiated)
into a message. There are a wide range of possible sources and destinations, and
the call may require either sending or receiving or both sending and receiving a
message. A number of tests must be made. On lines 7480 and 7481 the function
code SEND), RECEIVE, etc.,) and the flags are extracted from the first argument
of the call. The first test is to see if the calling process is allowed to make the
call. Iskerneln, used on line 7501, is a macro defined in proc.h (line 5584). The
next test is to see that the specified source or destination is a valid process. Then
a check is made that the message pointer points to a valid area of memory. MINIX
3 privileges define which other processes any given process is allowed to send to,
and this is tested next (lines 7537 to 7541). Finally, a test is made to verify that
the destination process is running and has not initiated a shutdown (lines 7543 to
7547). After all the tests have been passed one of the functions mini ? send,
mini ? receive, or mini ? notify is called to do the real work. If the function was
ECHO the CopyMess macro is used, with identical source and destination. ECHO
is meant only for testing, as mentioned earlier.
     The errors tested for in sys ? call are unlikely, but the tests are easily done, as
ultimately they compile into code to perform comparisons of small integers. At
this most basic level of the operating system testing for even the most unlikely
errors is advisable. This code is likely to be executed many times each second
during every second that the computer system on which it runs is active.
     The functions mini ? send, mini ? rec, and mini ? notify are the heart of the nor-
mal message passing mechanism of MINIX 3 and deserve careful study.
     Mini ? send (line 7591) has three parameters: the caller, the process to be sent
to, and a pointer to the buffer where the message is. After all the tests performed
by sys ? call, only one more is necessary, which is to detect a send deadlock. The
test on lines 7606 to 7610 verifies that the caller and destination are not trying to
send to each other. The key test in mini ? send is on lines 7615 and 7616. Here a
check is made to see if the destination is blocked on a receive, as shown by the
RECEIVING bit in the p ? rts ? flags field of its process table entry. If it is waiting,
then the next question is: ‘‘Who is it waiting for?’’ If it is waiting for the sender,
or for ANY, the CopyMess macro is used to copy the message and the receiver is
unblocked by resetting its RECEIVING bit. Then enqueue is called to give the
receiver an opportunity to run (line 7620).
     If, on the other hand, the receiver is not blocked, or is blocked but waiting for
a message from someone else, the code on lines 7623 to 7632 is executed to block
and dequeue the sender. All processes wanting to send to a given destination are
strung together on a linked list, with the destination’s p ? callerq field pointing to
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                            181
the process table entry of the process at the head of the queue. The example of
Fig. 2-42(a) shows what happens when process 3 is unable to send to process 0. If
process 4 is subsequently also unable to send to process 0, we get the situation of
Fig. 2-42(b).

                    4                                  p_q_link = 0
                    3    p_q_link = 0                    p_q_link
                    2
                    1
                    0     p_caller_q                    p_caller_q

                             (a)                            (b)

Figure 2-42. Queueing of processes trying to send to process 0.

    Mini ? receive (line 7642) is called by sys ? call when its function parameter is
RECEIVE or BOTH. As we mentioned earlier, notifications have a higher priority
than ordinary messages. However, a notification will never be the right reply to a
send, so the bitmaps are checked to see if there are pending notifications only if
the SENDREC ? BUSY flag is not set. If a notification is found it is marked as no
longer pending and delivered (lines 7670 to 7685). Delivery uses both the Build-
Mess and CopyMess macros defined near the top of proc.c.
    One might have thought that, because a timestamp is part of a notify message,
it would convey useful information, for instance, if the recipient had been unable
to do a receive for a while the timestamp would tell how long it had been
undelivered. But the notification message is generated (and timestamped) at the
time it is delivered, not at the time it was sent. There is a purpose behind con-
structing the notification messages at the time of delivery, however. The code is
unnecessary to save notification messages that cannot be delivered immediately.
All that is necessary is to set a bit to remember that a notification should be gen-
erated when delivery becomes possible. You cannot get more economical storage
than that: one bit per pending notification.
    It is also the case that the current time is usually what is needed. For instance,
notification is used to deliver a SYN ? ALARM message to the process manager,
and if the timestamp were not generated when the message was delivered the PM
would need to ask the kernel for the correct time before checking its timer queue.
    Note that only one notification is delivered at a time, mini ? send returns on
line 7684 after delivery of a notification. But the caller is not blocked, so it is free
to do another receive immediately after getting the notification. If there are no
notifications, the caller queues are checked to see if a message of any other type is
pending (lines 7690 to 7699. If such a message is found it is delivered by the

CopyMess macro and the originator of the message is then unblocked by the call
to enqueue on line 7694. The caller is not blocked in this case.
     If no notifications or other messages were available, the caller will be blocked
by the call to dequeue on line 7708.
     Mini ? notify (line 7719) is used to effectuate a notification. It is similar to
mini ? send, and can be discussed quickly. If the recipient of a message is blocked
and waiting to receive, the notification is generated by BuildMess and delivered.
The recipient’s RECEIVING flag is turned off and it is then enqueue-ed (lines
7738 to 7743). If the recipient is not waiting a bit is set in its s ? notify ? pending
map, which indicates that a notification is pending and identifies the sender. The
sender then continues its own work, and if another notification to the same reci-
pient is needed before an earlier one has been received, the bit in the recipient’s
bitmap is overwritten—effectively, multiple notifications from the same sender
are merged into a single notification message. This design eliminates the need for
buffer management while offering asynchronous message passing.
     When mini ? notify is called because of a software interrupt and a subsequent
call to sys ? call, interrupts will be disabled at the time. But the clock or system
task, or some other task that might be added to MINIX 3 in the future might need
to send a notification at a time when interrupts are not disabled. Lock ? notify (line
7758) is a safe gateway to mini ? notify. It checks k ? reenter to see if interrupts are
already disabled, and if they are, it just calls mini ? notify right away. If interrupts
are enabled they are disabled by a call to lock, mini ? notify is called, and then
interrupts are reenabled by a call to unlock.

2.6.10 Scheduling in MINIX 3

     MINIX 3 uses a multilevel scheduling algorithm. Processes are given initial
priorities that are related to the structure shown in Fig. 2-29, but there are more
layers and the priority of a process may change during its execution. The clock
and system tasks in layer 1 of Fig. 2-29 receive the highest priority. The device
drivers of layer 2 get lower priority, but they are not all equal. Server processes in
layer 3 get lower priorities than drivers, but some less than others. User processes
start with less priority than any of the system processes, and initially are all equal,
but the nice command can raise or lower the priority of a user process.
     The scheduler maintains 16 queues of runnable processes, although not all of
them may be used at a particular moment. Fig. 2-43 shows the queues and the
processes that are in place at the instant the kernel completes initialization and
begins to run, that is, at the call to restart at line 7252 in main.c. The array
rdy ? head has one entry for each queue, with that entry pointing to the process at
the head of the queue. Similarly, rdy ? tail is an array whose entries point to the
last process on each queue. Both of these arrays are defined with the EXTERN
macro in proc.h (lines 5595 and 5596). The initial queueing of processes during
system startup is determined by the image table in table.c (lines 6095 to 6109).
SEC. 2.6          IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                               183

                 rdy_head                                          rdy_tail

           15    IDLE_Q         IDLE                              IDLE_Q      15

                     .                                                .
                     .                                                .
                     .                                                .
           7     USER_Q          init                             USER_Q       7

                     .                                                .
                     .                                                .
                     .                                                .
           4                            fs                                     4

           3                            rs   pm                                3

           2                       disk      log      mem                      2

           1                        tty                                        1

           0     TASK_Q           system      clock               TASK_Q       0

Figure 2-43. The scheduler maintains sixteen queues, one per priority level.
        Shown here is the initial queuing of processes as MINIX 3 starts up.

     Scheduling is round robin in each queue. If a running process uses up its
quantum it is moved to the tail of its queue and given a new quantum. However,
when a blocked process is awakened, it is put at the head of its queue if it had any
part of its quantum left when it blocked. It is not given a complete new quantum,
however; it gets only what it had left when it blocked. The existence of the array
rdy ? tail makes adding a process to the end of a queue efficient. Whenever a run-
ning process becomes blocked, or a runnable process is killed by a signal, that
process is removed from the scheduler’s queues. Only runnable processes are
queued.
     Given the queue structures just described, the scheduling algorithm is simple:
find the highest priority queue that is not empty and pick the process at the head
of that queue. The IDLE process is always ready, and is in the lowest priority
queue. If all the higher priority queues are empty, IDLE is run.
     We saw a number of references to enqueue and dequeue in the last section.
Now let us look at them. Enqueue is called with a pointer to a process table entry
as its argument (line 7787). It calls another function, sched, with pointers to vari-
ables that determine which queue the process should be on and whether it is to be
added to the head or the tail of that queue. Now there are three possibilities.
These are classic data structures examples. If the chosen queue is empty, both
rdy ? head and rdy ? tail are made to point to the process being added, and the link

field, p ? nextready, gets the special pointer value that indicates nothing follows,
NIL ? PROC. If the process is being added to the head of a queue, its p ? nextready
gets the current value of rdy ? head, and then rdy ? head is pointed to the new proc-
ess. If the process is being added to the tail of a queue, the p ? nextready of the
current occupant of the tail is pointed to the new process, as is rdy ? tail. The
p ? nextready of the newly-ready process then is pointed to NIL ? PROC. Finally,
pick ? proc is called to determine which process will run next.
     When a process must be made unready dequeue line 7823 is called. A proc-
ess must be running in order to block, so the process to be removed is likely to be
at the head of its queue. However, a signal could have been sent to a process that
was not running. So the queue is traversed to find the victim, with a high likeli-
hood it will be found at the head. When it is found all pointers are adjusted
appropriately to take it out of the chain. If it was running, pick ? proc must also be
called.
     One other point of interest is found in this function. Because tasks that run in
the kernel share a common hardware-defined stack area, it is a good idea to check
the integrity of their stack areas occasionally. At the beginning of dequeue a test
is made to see if the process being removed from the queue is one that operates in
kernel space. If it is, a check is made to see that the distinctive pattern written at
the end of its stack area has not been overwritten (lines 7835 to 7838).
     Now we come to sched, which picks which queue to put a newly-ready proc-
ess on, and whether to put it on the head or the tail of that queue. Recorded in the
process table for each process are its quantum, the time left on its quantum, its
priority, and the maximum priority it is allowed. On lines 7880 to 7885 a check is
made to see if the entire quantum was used. If not, it will be restarted with what-
ever it had left from its last turn. If the quantum was used up, then a check is
made to see if the process had two turns in a row, with no other process having
run. This is taken as a sign of a possible infinite, or at least, excessively long,
loop, and a penalty of +1 is assigned. However, if the entire quantum was used
but other processes have had a chance to run, the penalty value becomes −1. Of
course, this does not help if two or more processes are executing in a loop
together. How to detect that is an open problem.
     Next the queue to use is determined. Queue 0 is highest priority; queue 15 is
lowest. One could argue it should be the other way around, but this way is con-
sistent with the traditional ‘‘nice’’ values used by UNIX, where a positive ‘‘nice’’
means a process runs with lower priority. Kernel processes (the clock and system
tasks) are immune, but all other processes may have their priority reduced, that is,
be moved to a higher-numbered queue, by adding a positive penalty. All proc-
esses start with their maximum priority, so a negative penalty does not change
anything until positive penalties have been assigned. There is also a lower bound
on priority, ordinary processes never can be put on the same queue as IDLE.
     Now we come to pick ? proc (line 7910). This function’s major job is to set
next ? ptr. Any change to the queues that might affect the choice of which process
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                          185
to run next requires pick ? proc to be called again. Whenever the current process
blocks, pick ? proc is called to reschedule the CPU. In essence, pick ? proc is the
scheduler.
    Pick ? proc is simple. Each queue is tested. TASK ? Q is tested first, and if a
process on this queue is ready, pick ? proc sets proc ? ptr and returns immediately.
Otherwise, the next lower priority queue is tested, all the way down to IDLE ? Q.
The pointer bill ? ptr is changed to charge the user process for the CPU time it is
about to be given (line 7694). This assures that the last user process to run is
charged for work done on its behalf by the system.
    The remaining procedures in proc.c are lock ? send, lock ? enqueue, and
lock ? dequeue. These all provide access to their basic functions using lock and
unlock, in the same way we discussed for lock ? notify.
    In summary, the scheduling algorithm maintains multiple priority queues.
The first process on the highest priority queue is always run next. The clock task
monitors the time used by all processes. If a user process uses up its quantum, it
is put at the end of its queue, thus achieving a simple round-robin scheduling
among the competing user processes. Tasks, drivers, and servers are expected to
run until they block, and are given large quanta, but if they run too long they may
also be preempted. This is not expected to happen very often, but it is a mechan-
ism to prevent a high-priority process with a problem from locking up the system.
A process that prevents other processes from running may also be moved to a
lower priority queue temporarily.

2.6.11 Hardware-Dependent Kernel Support

     Several functions written in C are nevertheless hardware specific. To facili-
tate porting MINIX 3 to other systems these functions are segregated in the files to
be discussed in this section, exception.c, i8259.c, and protect.c, rather than being
included in the same files with the higher-level code they support.
     Exception.c contains the exception handler, exception (line 8012), which is
called (as ? exception) by the assembly language part of the exception handling
code in mpx386.s. Exceptions that originate from user processes are converted to
signals. Users are expected to make mistakes in their own programs, but an ex-
ception originating in the operating system indicates something is seriously wrong
and causes a panic. The array ex ? data (lines 8022 to 8040) determines the error
message to be printed in case of panic, or the signal to be sent to a user process for
each exception. Earlier Intel processors do not generate all the exceptions, and the
third field in each entry indicates the minimum processor model that is capable of
generating each one. This array provides an interesting summary of the evolution
of the Intel family of processors upon which MINIX 3 has been implemented. On
line 8065 an alternate message is printed if a panic results from an interrupt that
would not be expected from the processor in use.

Hardware-Dependent Interrupt Support

     The three functions in i8259.c are used during system initialization to initial-
ize the Intel 8259 interrupt controller chips. The macro on line 8119 defines a
dummy function (the real one is needed only when MINIX 3 is compiled for a 16-
bit Intel platform). Intr ? init (line 8124) initializes the controllers. Two steps
ensure that no interrupts will occur before all the initialization is complete. First
intr ? disable is called at line 8134. This is a C language call to an assembly
language function in the library that executes a single instruction, cli, which dis-
ables the CPU’s response to interrupts. Then a sequence of bytes is written to
registers on each interrupt controller, the effect of which is to inhibit response of
the controllers to external input. The byte written at line 8145 is all ones, except
for a zero at the bit that controls the cascade input from the slave controller to the
master controller (see Fig. 2-39). A zero enables an input, a one disables. The
byte written to the secondary controller at line 8151 is all ones.
     A table stored in the i8259 interrupt controller chip generates an 8-bit index
that the CPU uses to find the correct interrupt gate descriptor for each possible
interrupt input (the signals on the right-hand side of Fig. 2-39). This is initialized
by the BIOS when the computer starts up, and these values can almost all be left
in place. As drivers that need interrupts start up, changes can be made where
necessary. Each driver can then request that a bit be reset in the interrupt con-
troller chip to enable its own interrupt input. The argument mine to intr ? init is
used to determine whether MINIX 3 is starting up or shutting down. This function
can be used both to initialize at startup and to restore the BIOS settings when
MINIX 3 shuts down.
     After initialization of the hardware is complete, the last step in intr ? init is to
copy the BIOS interrupt vectors to the MINIX 3 vector table.
     The second function in 8259.c is put ? irq ? handler (line 8162). At initializa-
tion put ? irq ? handler is called for each process that must respond to an interrupt.
This puts the address of the handler routine into the interrupt table, irq ? handlers,
defined as EXTERN in glo.h. With modern computers 15 interrupt lines is not
always enough (because there may be more than 15 I/O devices) so two I/O
devices may need to share an interrupt line. This will not occur with any of the
basic devices supported by MINIX 3 as described in this text, but when network
interfaces, sound cards, or more esoteric I/O devices must be supported they may
need to share interrupt lines. To allow for this, the interrupt table is not just a
table of addresses. Irq ? handlers[NR ? IRQ ? VECTORS] is an array of pointers to
irq ? hook structs, a type defined in kernel/type.h. These structures contain a field
which is a pointer to another structure of the same type, so a linked list can be
built, starting with one of the elements of irq ? handlers. Put ? irq ? handler adds an
entry to one of these lists. The most important element of such an entry is a
pointer to an interrupt handler, the function to be executed when an interrupt is
generated, for example, when requested I/O has completed.
SEC. 2.6          IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                             187
     Some details of put ? irq ? handler deserve mention. Note the variable id
which is set to 1 just before the beginning of the while loop that scans through the
linked list (lines 8176 to 8180). Each time through the loop id is shifted left 1 bit.
The test on line 8181 limits the length of the chain to the size of id, or 32 handlers
for a 32-bit system. In the normal case the scan will result in finding the end of
the chain, where a new handler can be linked. When this is done, id is also stored
in the field of the same name in the new item on the chain. Put ? irq ? handler also
sets a bit in the global variable irq ? use, to record that a handler exists for this
IRQ.
     If you fully understand the MINIX 3 design goal of putting device drivers in
user-space, the preceding discussion of how interrupt handlers are called will have
left you slightly confused. The interrupt handler addresses stored in the hook
structures cannot be useful unless they point to functions within the kernel’s
address space. The only interrupt-driven device in the kernel’s address space is
the clock. What about device drivers that have their own address spaces?
     The answer is, the system task handles it. Indeed, that is the answer to most
questions regarding communication between the kernel and processes in user-
space. A user space device driver that is to be interrupt driven makes a sys ? irqctl
call to the system task when it needs to register as an interrupt handler. The sys-
tem task then calls put ? irq ? handler, but instead of the address of an interrupt
handler in the driver’s address space, the address of generic ? handler, part of the
system task, is stored in the interrupt handler field. The process number field in
the hook structure is used by generic ? handler to locate the priv table entry for the
driver, and the bit in the driver’s pending interrupts bitmap corresponding to the
interrupt is set. Then generic ? handler sends a notification to the driver. The
notification is identified as being from HARDWARE, and the pending interrupts
bitmap for the driver is included in the message. Thus, if a driver must respond to
interrupts from more than one source, it can learn which one is responsible for the
current notification. In fact, since the bitmap is sent, one notification provides in-
formation on all pending interrupts for the driver. Another field in the hook struc-
ture is a policy field, which determines whether the interrupt is to be reenabled
immediately, or whether it should remain disabled. In the latter case, it will be up
to the driver to make a sys ? irqenable kernel call when service of the current inter-
rupt is complete.
     One of the goals of MINIX 3 design is to support run-time reconfiguration of
I/O devices. The next function, rm ? irq ? handler, removes a handler, a necessary
step if a device driver is to be removed and possibly replaced by another. Its
action is just the opposite of put ? irq ? handler.
     The last function in this file, intr?handle (line 8221), is called from the
hwint ? master and hwint ? slave macros we saw in mpx386.s. The element of the
array of bitmaps irq ? actids which corresponds the interrupt being serviced is used
to keep track of the current status of each handler in a list. For each function in
the list, intr ? handle sets the corresponding bit in irq ? actids, and calls the handler.

If a handler has nothing to do or if it completes its work immediately, it returns
‘‘true’’ and the corresponding bit in irq ? actids is cleared. The entire bitmap for
an interrupt, considered as an integer, is tested near the end of the hwint ? master
and hwint ? slave macros to determine if that interrupt can be reenabled before
another process is restarted.

Intel Protected Mode Support

     Protect.c contains routines related to protected mode operation of Intel pro-
cessors. The Global Descriptor Table (GDT), Local Descriptor Tables
(LDTs), and the Interrupt Descriptor Table, all located in memory, provide pro-
tected access to system resources. The GDT and IDT are pointed to by special
registers within the CPU, and GDT entries point to LDTs. The GDT is available
to all processes and holds segment descriptors for memory regions used by the
operating system. Normally, there is one LDT for each process, holding segment
descriptors for the memory regions used by the process. Descriptors are 8-byte
structures with a number of components, but the most important parts of a seg-
ment descriptor are the fields that describe the base address and the limit of a
memory region. The IDT is also composed of 8-byte descriptors, with the most
important part being the address of the code to be executed when the correspond-
ing interrupt is activated.
     Cstart in start.c calls prot ? init (line 8368), which sets up the GDT on lines
8421 to 8438. The IBM PC BIOS requires that it be ordered in a certain way, and
all the indices into it are defined in protect.h. Space for an LDT for each process
is allocated in the process table. Each contains two descriptors, for a code seg-
ment and a data segment—recall we are discussing here segments as defined by
the hardware; these are not the same as the segments managed by the operating
system, which considers the hardware-defined data segment to be further divided
into data and stack segments. On lines 8444 to 8450 descriptors for each LDT are
built in the GDT. The functions init ? dataseg and init ? codeseg build these
descriptors. The entries in the LDTs themselves are initialized when a process’
memory map is changed (i.e., when an exec system call is made).
     Another processor data structure that needs initialization is the Task State
Segment (TSS). The structure is defined at the start of this file (lines 8325 to
8354) and provides space for storage of processor registers and other information
that must be saved when a task switch is made. MINIX 3 uses only the fields that
define where a new stack is to be built when an interrupt occurs. The call to
init ? dataseg on line 8460 ensures that it can be located using the GDT.
     To understand how MINIX 3 works at the lowest level, perhaps the most
important thing is to understand how exceptions, hardware interrupts, or int <nnn>
instructions lead to the execution of the various pieces of code that has been writ-
ten to service them. These events are processed by means of the interrupt gate
SEC. 2.6            IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                                 189
descriptor table. The array gate ? table (lines 8383 to 8418), is initialized by the
compiler with the addresses of the routines that handle exceptions and hardware
interrupts and then is used in the loop at lines 8464 to 8468 to initialize this table,
using calls to the int ? gate function.
     There are good reasons for the way the data are structured in the descriptors,
based on details of the hardware and the need to maintain compatibility between
advanced processors and the 16-bit 286 processor. Fortunately, we can usually
leave these details to Intel’s processor designers. For the most part, the C lang-
uage allows us to avoid the details. However, in implementing a real operating
system the details must be faced at some point. Figure 2-44 shows the internal
structure of one kind of segment descriptor. Note that the base address, which C
programs can refer to as a simple 32-bit unsigned integer, is split into three parts,
two of which are separated by a number of 1-, 2-, and 4-bit quantities. The limit
is a 20-bit quantity stored as separate 16-bit and 4-bit chunks. The limit is inter-
preted as either a number of bytes or a number of 4096-byte pages, based on the
value of the G (granularity) bit. Other descriptors, such as those used to specify
how interrupts are handled, have different, but equally complex structures. We
discuss these structures in more detail in Chap. 4.
   
                                    Limit
      Base 24-31       G D 0                 P DPL S     Type            Base 16-23   4
                                    16-19
 
                   Base 0-15                                Limit 0-15                0

                                                                                      Relative
                                         32 Bits
                                                                                      address

Figure 2-44. The format of an Intel segment descriptor.

     Most of the other functions defined in protect.c are devoted to converting
between variables used in C programs and the rather ugly forms these data take in
the machine readable descriptors such as the one in Fig. 2-44. Init ? codeseg (line
8477) and init ? dataseg (line 8493) are similar in operation and are used to con-
vert the parameters passed to them into segment descriptors. They each, in turn,
call the next function, sdesc (line 8508), to complete the job. This is where the
messy details of the structure shown in Fig. 2-44 are dealt with. Init ? codeseg and
init ? data ? seg are not used just at system initialization. They are also called by
the system task whenever a new process is started up, in order to allocate the
proper memory segments for the process to use. Seg2phys (line 8533), called only
from start.c, performs an operation which is the inverse of that of sdesc, extract-
ing the base address of a segment from a segment descriptor. Phys2seg (line
8556), is no longer needed, the sys ? segctl kernel call now handles access to
remote memory segments, for instance, memory in the PC’s reserved area
between 640K and 1M. Int ? gate (line 8571) performs a similar function to
init ? codeseg and init ? dataseg in building entries for the interrupt descriptor table.

     Now we come to a function in protect.c, enable ? iop (line 8589), that can per-
form a dirty trick. It changes the privilege level for I/O operations, allowing the
current process to execute instructions which read and write I/O ports. The des-
cription of the purpose of the function is more complicated than the function
itself, which just sets two bits in the word in the stack frame entry of the calling
process that will be loaded into the CPU status register when the process is next
executed. A function to undo this is not needed, as it will apply only to the calling
process. This function is not currently used and no method is provided for a user
space function to activate it.
     The final function in protect.c is alloc ? segments (line 8603). It is called by
do ? newmap. It is also called by the main routine of the kernel during initializa-
tion. This definition is very hardware dependent. It takes the segment assignments
that are recorded in a process table entry and manipulates the registers and de-
scriptors the Pentium processor uses to support protected segments at the
hardware level. Multiple assignments like those on lines 8629 to 8633 are a
feature of the C language.

2.6.12 Utilities and the Kernel Library

     Finally, the kernel has a library of support functions written in assembly
language that are included by compiling klib.s and a few utility programs, written
in C, in the file misc.c. Let us first look at the assembly language files. Klib.s
(line 8700) is a short file similar to mpx.s, which selects the appropriate machine-
specific version based upon the definition of WORD ? SIZE. The code we will dis-
cuss is in klib386.s (line 8800). This contains about two dozen utility routines that
are in assembly code, either for efficiency or because they cannot be written in C
at all.
       Monitor (line 8844) makes it possible to return to the boot monitor. From the
point of view of the boot monitor, all of MINIX 3 is just a subroutine, and when
MINIX 3 is started, a return address to the monitor is left on the monitor’s stack.
  Monitor just has to restore the various segment selectors and the stack pointer
that was saved when MINIX 3 was started, and then return as from any other sub-
routine.
     Int86 (line 8864) supports BIOS calls. The BIOS is used to provide alterna-
tive disk drivers which are not described here. Int86 transfers control to the boot
monitor, which manages a transfer from protected mode to real mode to execute a
BIOS call, then back to protected mode for the return to 32-bit MINIX 3. The boot
monitor also returns the number of clock ticks counted during the BIOS call.
How this is used will be seen in the discussion of the clock task.
     Although ? phys ? copy (see below) could have been used for copying mes-
sages, ? cp ? mess (line 8952), a faster specialized procedure, has been provided for
that purpose. It is called by
    cp ? mess(source, src ? clicks, src ? offset, dest ? clicks, dest ? offset);
SEC. 2.6         IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCESSES IN MINIX 3                          191
where source is the sender’s process number, which is copied into the m ? source
field of the receiver’s buffer. Both the source and destination addresses are speci-
fied by giving a click number, typically the base of the segment containing the
buffer, and an offset from that click. This form of specifying the source and desti-
nation is more efficient than the 32-bit addresses used by ? phys ? copy.
       Exit, ?? exit, and ??? exit (lines 9006 to 9008) are defined because some
library routines that might be used in compiling MINIX 3 make calls to the stan-
dard C function exit. An exit from the kernel is not a meaningful concept; there is
nowhere to go. Consequently, the standard exit cannot be used here. The solution
here is to enable interrupts and enter an endless loop. Eventually, an I/O opera-
tion or the clock will cause an interrupt and normal system operation will resume.
The entry point for ??? main (line 9012) is another attempt to deal with a com-
piler action which, while it might make sense while compiling a user program,
does not have any purpose in the kernel. It points to an assembly language ret
(return from subroutine) instruction.
       Phys ?insw (line 9022), ? phys ?insb (line 9047), ? phys ?outsw (line 9072),
and ? phys ?outsb (line 9098), provide access to I/O ports, which on Intel hardware
occupy a separate address space from memory and use different instructions from
memory reads and writes. The I/O instructions used here, ins, insb, outs, and
outsb, are designed to work efficiently with arrays (strings), and either 16-bit
words or 8-bit bytes. The additional instructions in each function set up all the
parameters needed to move a given number of bytes or words between a buffer,
addressed physically, and a port. This method provides the speed needed to ser-
vice disks, which must be serviced more rapidly than could be done with simpler
byte- or word-at-a-time I/O operations.
     A single machine instruction can enable or disable the CPU’s response to all
interrupts. ? Enable ? irq (line 9126) and ? disable ? irq (line 9162) are more com-
plicated. They work at the level of the interrupt controller chips to enable and dis-
able individual hardware interrupts.
       Phys ? copy (line 9204) is called in C by
    phys ? copy(source ? address, destination ? address, bytes);
and copies a block of data from anywhere in physical memory to anywhere else.
Both addresses are absolute, that is, address 0 really means the first byte in the
entire address space, and all three parameters are unsigned longs.
     For security, all memory to be used by a program should be wiped clean of
any data remaining from a program that previously occupied that memory. This is
done by the MINIX 3 exec call, ultimately using the next function in klib386.s,
phys ? memset (line 9248).
     The next two short functions are specific to Intel processors. ? Mem ? rdw
(line 9291) returns a 16-bit word from anywhere in memory. The result is zero-
extended into the 32-bit eax register. The ? reset function (line 9307) resets the
processor. It does this by loading the processor’s interrupt descriptor table register

with a null pointer and then executing a software interrupt. This has the same
effect as a hardware reset.
     The idle ? task (line 9318) is called when there is nothing else to do. It is writ-
ten as an endless loop, but it is not just a busy loop (which could have been used
to have the same effect). Idle ? task takes advantage of the availability of a hlt
instruction, which puts the processor into a power-conserving mode until an inter-
rupt is received. However, hlt is a privileged instruction and executing hlt when
the current privilege level is not 0 will cause an exception. So idle ? task pushes
the address of a subroutine containing a hlt and then calls level0 (line 9322). This
function retrieves the address of the halt subroutine, and copies it to a reserved
storage area (declared in glo.h and actually reserved in table.c).
       Level0 treats whatever address is preloaded to this area as the functional part
of an interrupt service routine to be run with the most privileged permission level,
level zero.
     The last two functions are read ? tsc and read ? flags. The former reads a CPU
register which executes an assembly language instruction known as rdtsc, read
time stamp counter. This counts CPU cycles and is intended for benchmarking or
debugging. This instruction is not supported by the MINIX 3 assembler, and is
generated by coding the opcode in hexadecimal. Finally, read ? flags reads the
processor flags and returns them as a C variable. The programmer was tired and
the comment about the purpose of this function is incorrect.
     The last file we will consider in this chapter is utility.c which provides three
important functions. When something goes really, really wrong in the kernel,
panic (line 9429) is invoked. It prints a message and calls prepare ? shutdown.
When the kernel needs to print a message it cannot use the standard library printf,
so a special kprintf is defined here (line 9450). The full range of formatting
options available in the library version are not needed here, but much of the func-
tionality is available. Because the kernel cannot use the file system to access a
file or a device, it passes each character to another function, kputc (line 9525),
which appends each character to a buffer. Later, when kputc receives the
END ? OF ? KMESS code it informs the process which handles such messages.
This is defined in include/minix/config.h, and can be either the log driver or the
console driver. If it is the log driver the message will be passed on to the console
as well.

2.7 THE SYSTEM TASK IN MINIX 3

    A consequence of making major system components independent processes
outside the kernel is that they are forbidden from doing actual I/O, manipulating
kernel tables and doing other things operating system functions normally do. For
example, the fork system call is handled by the process manager. When a new
SEC. 2.7                  THE SYSTEM TASK IN MINIX 3                              193
process is created, the kernel must know about it, in order to schedule it. How can
the process manager tell the kernel?
     The solution to this problem is to have a kernel offer a set of services to the
drivers and servers. These services, which are not available to ordinary user proc-
esses, allow the drivers and servers to do actual I/O, access kernel tables, and do
other things they need to, all without being inside the kernel.
     These special services are handled by the system task, which is shown in
layer 1 in Fig. 2-29. Although it is compiled into the kernel binary program, it is
really a separate process and is scheduled as such. The job of the system task is to
accept all the requests for special kernel services from the drivers and servers and
carry them out. Since the system task is part of the kernel’s address space, it
makes sense to study it here.
     Earlier in this chapter we saw an example of a service provided by the system
task. In the discussion of interrupt handling we described how a user-space
device driver uses sys ? irqctl to send a message to the system task to ask for instal-
lation of an interrupt handler. A user-space driver cannot access the kernel data
structure where addresses of interrupt service routines are placed, but the system
task is able to do this. Furthermore, since the interrupt service routine must also
be in the kernel’s address space, the address stored is the address of a function
provided by the system task, generic ? handler. This function responds to an inter-
rupt by sending a notification message to the device driver.
     This is a good place to clarify some terminology. In a conventional operating
system with a monolithic kernel, the term system call is used to refer to all calls
for services provided by the kernel. In a modern UNIX-like operating system the
POSIX standard describes the system calls available to processes. There may be
some nonstandard extensions to POSIX, of course, and a programmer taking
advantage of a system call will generally reference a function defined in the C
libraries, which may provide an easy-to-use programming interface. Also, some-
times separate library functions that appear to the programmer to be distinct ‘‘sys-
tem calls’’ actually use the same access to the kernel.
     In MINIX 3 the landscape is different; components of the operating system run
in user space, although they have special privileges as system processes. We will
still use the name ‘‘system call’’ for any of the POSIX-defined system calls (and a
few MINIX extensions) listed in Fig. 1-9, but user processes do not request ser-
vices directly of the kernel. In MINIX 3 system calls by user processes are
transformed into messages to server processes. Server processes communicate
with each other, with device drivers, and with the kernel by messages. The sub-
ject of this section, the system task, receives all requests for kernel services.
Loosely speaking, we could call these requests system calls, but to be more exact
we will refer to them as kernel calls. Kernel calls cannot be made by user proc-
esses. In many cases a system call that originates with a user process results in a
kernel call with a similar name being made by a server. This is always because
some part of the service being requested can only be dealt with by the kernel. For

instance a fork system call by a user process goes to the process manager, which
does some of the work. But a fork requires changes in the kernel part of the proc-
ess table, and to complete the action the process manager makes a sys ? fork call to
the system task, which can manipulate data in kernel space. Not all kernel calls
have such a clear connection to a single system call. For instance, there is a
sys ? devio kernel call to read or write I/O ports. This kernel call comes from a
device driver. More than half of all the system calls listed in Fig. 1-9 could result
in a device driver being activated and making one or more sys ? devio calls.
     Technically speaking, a third category of calls (besides system calls and ker-
nel calls) should be distinguished. The message primitives used for interprocess
communication such as send, receive, and notify can be thought of as system-
call-like. We have probably called them that in various places in this book—after
all, they do call the system. But they should properly be called something dif-
ferent from both system calls and kernel calls. Other terms may be used. IPC
primitive is sometimes used, as well as trap, and both of these may be found in
some comments in the source code. You can think of a message primitive as
being like the carrier wave in a radio communications system. Modulation is usu-
ally needed to make a radio wave useful; the message type and other components
of a message structure allow the message call to convey information. In a few
cases an unmodulated radio wave is useful; for instance, a radio beacon to guide
airplanes to an airport. This is analogous to the notify message primitive, which
conveys little information other than its origin.

2.7.1 Overview of the System Task

     The system task accepts 28 kinds of messages, shown in Fig. 2-45. Each of
these can be considered a kernel call, although, as we shall see, in some cases
there are multiple macros defined with different names that all result in just one of
the message types shown in the figure. And in some other cases more than one of
the message types in the figure are handled by a single procedure that does the
work.
     The main program of the system task is structured like other tasks. After
doing necessary initialization it runs in a loop. It gets a message, dispatches to the
appropriate service procedure, and then sends a reply. A few general support
functions are found in the main file, system.c, but the main loop dispatches to a
procedure in a separate file in the kernel/system/ directory to process each kernel
call. We will see how this works and the reason for this organization when we
discuss the implementation of the system task.
     First we will briefly describe the function of each kernel call. The message
types in Fig. 2-45 fall into several categories. The first few are involved with
process management. Sys ? fork, sys ? exec, sys ? exit, and sys ? trace are obviously
closely related to standard POSIX system calls. Although nice is not a POSIX-
required system call, the command ultimately results in a sys ? nice kernel call to
SEC. 2.7                                                                                           THE SYSTEM TASK IN MINIX 3                                                                                                                                                                                                          195

                                                                                
      Message type ?                                                                                                                         From     ?                                                                                  Meaning       ?
                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                           sys ? fork
                                                                                    
                                                                                PM                                                                        ? A process has forked                                                                           ?
        sys ? exec                                                             ? PM                                                                        ? Set stack pointer after EXEC call                                                               ?
                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                       
                                                           sys ? exit             ? PM                                                                        ? A process has exited                                                                             ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                
                                                                                          
                                                           sys   nice                ?                                                    PM                     ?                                                    Set scheduling priority                        ?
                                                                                           
                                                           sys ? privctl               ? RS                                                                        ? Set or change privileges                                                                          ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                           sys ? trace                    ? PM
                                                                                                                                                                        Carry out an operation of the PTRACE call                                                          ?
                  sys ? kill                                                               ? PM,FS, TTY                                                                ? Send signal to a process after KILL call                                                            ?
                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                           sys ? getksig                      ? PM
                                                                                                                                                                            PM is checking for pending signals                                                                   ?
                     sys ? endksig                                                             ? PM                                                                        ? PM has finished processing signal                                                                     ?
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                           sys ? sigsend                          ? PM
                                                                                                                                                                                Send a signal to a process                                                                             ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                           sys ? sigreturn                           ? PM
                                                                                                                                                                                   Cleanup after completion of a signal                                                                    ?
                           sys ? irqctl                                                               ? Drivers                                                                   ? Enable, disable, or configure interrupt                                                                  ?
                           
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                           sys ? devio
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           Drivers                                                                   ? Read from or write to an I/O port                                                                         ?
                               sys ? sdevio                                                               ? Drivers                                                                   ? Read or write string from/to I/O port                                                                      ?
                               
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                           sys ? vdevio                                      ? Drivers
                                                                                                                                                                                           Carry out a vector of I/O requests                                                                          ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                           sys ? int86
                                                                                                                  Drivers
                                                                                                                                                                                              Do a real-mode BIOS call                                                                                     ?
                                                                                                                   
                                                           sys ? newmap                                          ? PM                                                                        ? Set up a process memory map                                                                                   ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                           sys ? segctl                                             ? Drivers
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Add segment and get selector (far data access) ?
                                          sys ? memset                                                               ? PM                                                                        ? Write char to memory area                                                                                     ?
                                          
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                           sys ? umap                                                   ? Drivers
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Convert virtual address to physical address                                                                    ?
                                             sys ? vircopy                                                               ? FS, Drivers                                                               ? Copy using pure virtual addressing                                                                              ?
                                             
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                            
                                                           sys ? physcopy                                                   ? Drivers                                                                   ? Copy using physical addressing                                                                                   ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                           sys ? virvcopy
                                                                                                                                 Any                                                                       ? Vector of VCOPY requests                                                                                          ?
                                                                                                                                
                                                           sys ? physvcopy ? Any                                                                                                                            ? Vector of PHYSCOPY requests                                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                           sys ? times                                                            ? PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Get uptime and process times                                                                                        ?
                                                       sys ? setalarm                                                              ? PM, FS, Drivers ? Schedule a synchronous alarm                                                                                                                                                    ?
                                                       
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                           sys ? abort
                                                                                                                                        PM, TTY                                                                   ? Panic: MINIX is unable to continue                                                                                     ?
                                                          sys ? getinfo                                                                ? Any                                                                       ? Request system information                                                                                              ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Figure 2-45. The message types accepted by the system task. ‘‘Any’’ means any
                           system process; user processes cannot call the system task directly.

change the priority of a process. The only one of this group that is likely to be
unfamiliar is sys ? privctl. It is used by the reincarnation server (RS), the MINIX 3
component responsible for converting processes started as ordinary user processes
into system processes. Sys ? privctl changes the privileges of a process, for
instance, to allow it to make kernel calls. Sys ? privctl is used when drivers and
servers that are not part of the boot image are started by the /etc/rc script. MINIX

3 drivers also can be started (or restarted) at any time; privilege changes are
needed whenever this is done.
     The next group of kernel calls are related to signals. Sys ? kill is related to the
user-accessible (and misnamed) system call kill. The others in this group,
sys ? getksig, sys ? endksig, sys ? sigsend, and sys ? sigreturn are all used by the
process manager to get the kernel’s help in handling signals.
     The sys ? irqctl, sys ? devio, sys ? sdevio, and sys ? vdevio kernel calls are unique
to MINIX 3. These provide the support needed for user-space device drivers. We
mentioned sys ? irqctl at the start of this section. One of its functions is to set a
hardware interrupt handler and enable interrupts on behalf of a user-space driver.
Sys ? devio allows a user-space driver to ask the system task to read or write from
an I/O port. This is obviously essential; it also should be obvious that it involves
more overhead than would be the case if the driver were running in kernel space.
The next two kernel calls offer a higher level of I/O device support. Sys ? sdevio
can be used when a sequence of bytes or words, i.e., a string, is to be read from or
written to a single I/O address, as might be the case when accessing a serial port.
Sys ? vdevio is used to send a vector of I/O requests to the system task. By a vec-
tor is meant a series of (port, value) pairs. Earlier in this chapter, we described
the intr ? init function that initializes the Intel i8259 interrupt controllers. On lines
8140 to 8152 a series of instructions writes a series of byte values. For each of
the two i8259 chips, there is a control port that sets the mode and another port that
receives a sequence of four bytes in the initialization sequence. Of course, this
code executes in the kernel, so no support from the system task is needed. But if
this were being done by a user-space process a single message passing the address
to a buffer containing 10 (port, value) pairs would be much more efficient than 10
messages each passing one port address and a value to be written.
     The next three kernel calls shown in Fig. 2-45 involve memory in distinct
ways. The first, sys ? newmap, is called by the process manager when the mem-
ory used by a process changes, so the kernel’s part of the process table can be
updated. Sys ? segctl and sys ? memset provide a safe way to provide a process
with access to memory outside its own data space. The memory area from
0xa0000 to 0xfffff is reserved for I/O devices, as we mentioned in the discussion
of startup of the MINIX 3 system. Some devices use part of this memory region
for I/O—for instance, video display cards expect to have data to be displayed
written into memory on the card which is mapped here. Sys ? segctl is used by a
device driver to obtain a segment selector that will allow it to address memory in
this range. The other call, sys ? memset, is used when a server wants to write data
into an area of memory that does not belong to it. It is used by the process mana-
ger to zero out memory when a new process is started, to prevent the new process
from reading data left by another process.
     The next group of kernel calls is for copying memory. Sys ? umap converts
virtual addresses to physical addresses. Sys ? vircopy and sys ? physcopy copy re-
gions of memory, using either virtual or physical addresses. The next two calls,
SEC. 2.7                  THE SYSTEM TASK IN MINIX 3                              197
sys ? virvcopy and sys ? physvcopy are vector versions of the previous two. As
with vectored I/O requests, these allow making a request to the system task for a
series of memory copy operations.
     Sys ? times obviously has to do with time, and corresponds to the POSIX times
system call. Sys ? setalarm is related to the POSIX alarm system call, but the rela-
tion is a distant one. The POSIX call is mostly handled by the process manager,
which maintains a queue of timers on behalf of user processes. The process man-
ager uses a sys ? setalarm kernel call when it needs to have a timer set on its be-
half in the kernel. This is done only when there is a change at the head of the
queue managed by the PM, and does not necessarily follow every alarm call from
a user process.
     The final two kernel calls listed in Fig. 2-45 are for system control.
Sys ? abort can originate in the process manager, after a normal request to shut-
down the system or after a panic. It can also originate from the tty device driver,
in response to a user pressing the Ctrl-Alt-Del key combination.
     Finally, sys ? getinfo is a catch-all that handles a diverse range of requests for
information from the kernel. If you search through the MINIX 3 C source files you
will, in fact, find very few references to this call by its own name. But if you
extend your search to the header directories you will find no less than 13 macros
in include/minix/syslib.h that give another name to Sys ? getinfo. An example is
    sys ? getkinfo(dst)    sys ? getinfo(GET ? KINFO, dst, 0,0,0)
which is used to return the kinfo structure (defined in include/minix/type.h on lines
2875 to 2893) to the process manager for use during system startup. The same
information may be needed at other times. For instance, the user command ps
needs to know the location of the kernel’s part of the process table to display
information about the status of all processes. It asks the PM, which in turn uses
the sys ? getkinfo variant of sys ? getinfo to get the information.
     Before we leave this overview of kernel call types, we should mention that
sys ? getinfo is not the only kernel call that is invoked by a number of different
names defined as macros in include/minix/syslib.h. For example, the sys ? sdevio
call is usually invoked by one of the macros sys ? insb, sys ? insw, sys ? outsb, or
sys ? outsw. The names were devised to make it easy to see whether the operation
is input or output, with data types byte or word. Similarly, the sys ? irqctl call is
usually invoked by a macro like sys ? irqenable, sys ? irqdisable , or one of several
others. Such macros make the meaning clearer to a person reading the code.
They also help the programmer by automatically generating constant arguments.

2.7.2 Implementation of the System Task

    The system task is compiled from a header, system.h, and a C source file,
system.c, in the main kernel/ directory. In addition there is a specialized library
built from source files in a subdirectory, kernel/system/. There is a reason for this

organization. Although MINIX 3 as we describe it here is a general-purpose oper-
ating system, it is also potentially useful for special purposes, such as embedded
support in a portable device. In such cases a stripped-down version of the operat-
ing system might be adequate. For instance, a device without a disk might not
need a file system. We saw in kernel/config.h that compilation of kernel calls can
be selectively enabled and disabled. Having the code that supports each kernel
call linked from the library as the last stage of compilation makes it easier to build
a customized system.
     Putting support for each kernel call in a separate file simplifies maintenance
of the software. But there is some redundancy between these files, and listing all
of them would add 40 pages to the length of this book. Thus we will list in Ap-
pendix B and describe in the text only a few of the files in the kernel/system/
directory. However, all the files are on the CD-ROM and the MINIX 3 Web site.
     We will begin by looking at the header file, kernel/system.h (line 9600). It
provides prototypes for functions corresponding to most of the kernel calls listed
in Fig. 2-45. In addition there is a prototype for do ? unused, the function that is
invoked if an unsupported kernel call is made. Some of the message types in
Fig. 2-45 correspond to macros defined here. These are on lines 9625 to 9630.
These are cases where one function can handle more than one call.
     Before looking at the code in system.c, note the declaration of the call vector
call ? vec, and the definition of the macro map on lines 9745 to 9749. Call ? vec is
an array of pointers to functions, which provides a mechanism for dispatching to
the function needed to service a particular message by using the message type,
expressed as a number, as an index into the array. This is a technique we will see
used elsewhere in MINIX 3. The map macro is a convenient way to initialize such
an array. The macro is defined in such a way that trying to expand it with an
invalid argument will result in declaring an array with a negative size, which is, of
course, impossible, and will cause a compiler error.
     The top level of the system task is the procedure sys ? task. After a call to ini-
tialize an array of pointers to functions, sys ? task runs in a loop. It waits for a
message, makes a few tests to validate the message, dispatches to the function that
handles the call that corresponds to the message type, possibly generating a reply
message, and repeats the cycle as long as MINIX 3 is running (lines 9768 to 9796).
The tests consists of a check of the priv table entry for the caller to determine that
it is allowed to make this type of call and making sure that this type of call is
valid. The dispatch to the function that does the work is done on line 9783. The
index into the call ? vec array is the call number, the function called is the one
whose address is in that cell of the array, the argument to the function is a pointer
to the message, and the return value is a status code. A function may return a
EDONTREPLY status, meaning no reply message is required, otherwise a reply
message is sent at line 9792.
     As you may have noticed in Fig. 2-43, when MINIX 3 starts up the system task
is at the head of the highest priority queue, so it makes sense that the system
SEC. 2.7                  THE SYSTEM TASK IN MINIX 3                               199
task’s initialize function initializes the array of interrupt hooks and the list of
alarm timers (lines 9808 to 9815). In any case, as we noted earlier, the system
task is used to enable interrupts on behalf of user-space drivers that need to
respond to interrupts, so it makes sense to have it prepare the table. The system
task is used to set up timers when synchronous alarms are requested by other sys-
tem processes, so initializing the timer lists is also appropriate here.
      Continuing with initialization, on lines 9822 to 9824 all slots in the call ? vec
array are filled with the address of the procedure do ? unused, called if an unsup-
ported kernel call is made. Then the rest of the file lines 9827 to 9867, consists of
multiple expansions of the map macro, each one of which installs the address of a
function into the proper slot in call ? vec.
      The rest of system.c consists of functions that are declared PUBLIC and that
may be used by more than one of the routines that service kernel calls, or by other
parts of the kernel. For instance, the first such function, get ? priv (line 9872), is
used by do ? privctl, which supports the sys ? privctl kernel call. It is also called by
the kernel itself while constructing process table entries for processes in the boot
image. The name is a perhaps a bit misleading. Get ? priv does not retrieve infor-
mation about privileges already assigned, it finds an available priv structure and
assigns it to the caller. There are two cases—system processes each get their own
entry in the priv table. If one is not available then the process cannot become a
system process. User processes all share the same entry in the table.
      Get ? randomness (line 9899) is used to get seed numbers for the random
number generator, which is a implemented as a character device in MINIX 3. The
newest Pentium-class processors include an internal cycle counter and provide an
assembly language instruction that can read it. This is used if available, otherwise
a function is called which reads a register in the clock chip.
      Send ? sig generates a notification to a system process after setting a bit in the
s ? sig ? pending bitmap of the process to be signaled. The bit is set on line 9942.
Note that because the s ? sig ? pending bitmap is part of a priv structure, this
mechanism can only be used to notify system processes. All user processes share
a common priv table entry, and therefore fields like the s ? sig ? pending bitmap
cannot be shared and are not used by user processes. Verification that the target is
a system process is made before send ? sig is called. The call comes either as a
result of a sys ? kill kernel call, or from the kernel when kprintf is sending a string
of characters. In the former case the caller determines whether or not the target is
a system process. In the latter case the kernel only prints to the configured output
process, which is either the console driver or the log driver, both of which are sys-
tem processes.
      The next function, cause ? sig (line 9949), is called to send a signal to a user
process. It is used when a sys ? kill kernel call targets a user process. It is here in
system.c because it also may be called directly by the kernel in response to an
exception triggered by the user process. As with send ? sig a bit must be set in the
recipient’s bitmap for pending signals, but for user processes this is not in the priv

table, it is in the process table. The target process must also be made not ready by
a call to lock ? dequeue, and its flags (also in the process table) updated to indicate
it is going to be signaled. Then a message is sent—but not to the target process.
The message is sent to the process manager, which takes care of all of the aspects
of signaling a process that can be dealt with by a user-space system process.
     Next come three functions which all support the sys ? umap kernel call. Proc-
esses normally deal with virtual addresses, relative to the base of a particular seg-
ment. But sometimes they need to know the absolute (physical) address of a re-
gion of memory, for instance, if a request is going to be made for copying be-
tween memory regions belonging to two different segments. There are three ways
a virtual memory address might be specified. The normal one for a process is
relative to one of the memory segments, text, data, or stack, assigned to a process
and recorded in its process table slot. Requesting conversion of virtual to physical
memory in this case is done by a call to umap ? local (line 9983).
     The second kind of memory reference is to a region of memory that is outside
the text, data, or stack areas allocated to a process, but for which the process has
some responsibility. Examples of this are a video driver or an Ethernet driver,
where the video or Ethernet card might have a region of memory mapped in the
region from 0xa0000 to 0xfffff which is reserved for I/O devices. Another exam-
ple is the memory driver, which manages the ramdisk and also can provide access
to any part of the memory through the devices /dev/mem and /dev/kmem.
Requests for conversion of such memory references from virtual to physical are
handled by umap ? remote (line 10025).
     Finally, a memory reference may be to memory that is used by the BIOS.
This is considered to include both the lowest 2 KB of memory, below where
MINIX 3 is loaded, and the region from 0x90000 to 0xfffff, which includes some
RAM above where MINIX 3 is loaded plus the region reserved for I/O devices.
This could also be handled by umap ? remote, but using the third function,
umap ? bios (line 10047), ensures that a check will be made that the memory being
referenced is really in this region.
     The last function defined in system.c is virtual ? copy (line 10071). Most of
this function is a C switch which uses one of the three umap ? * functions just
described to convert virtual addresses to physical addresses. This is done for both
the source and destination addresses. The actual copying is done (on line 10121)
by a call to the assembly language routine phys ? copy in klib386.s.

2.7.3 Implementation of the System Library

    Each of the functions with a name of the form do ? xyz has its source code in a
file in a subdirectory, kernel/system/do ? xyz.c. In the kernel/ directory the
Makefile contains a line
    cd system && $(MAKE) –$(MAKEFLAGS) $@
SEC. 2.7                   THE SYSTEM TASK IN MINIX 3                               201
which causes all of the files in kernel/system/ to be compiled into a library,
system.a in the main kernel/ directory. When control returns to the main kernel
directory another line in the Makefile cause this local library to be searched first
when the kernel object files are linked.
     We have listed two files from the kernel/system/ directory in Appendix B.
These were chosen because they represent two general classes of support that the
system task provides. One category of support is access to kernel data structures
on behalf of any user-space system process that needs such support. We will
describe system/do ? setalarm.c as an example of this category. The other general
category is support for specific system calls that are mostly managed by user-
space processes, but which need to carry out some actions in kernel space. We
have chosen system/do ? exec.c as our example.
     The sys ? setalarm kernel call is somewhat similar to sys ? irqenable, which we
mentioned in the discussion of interrupt handling in the kernel. Sys ? irqenable
sets up an address to an interrupt handler to be called when an IRQ is activated.
The handler is a function within the system task, generic ? handler. It generates a
notify message to the device driver process that should respond to the interrupt.
System/do ? setalarm.c (line 10200) contains code to manage timers in a way simi-
lar to how interrupts are managed. A sys ? setalarm kernel call initializes a timer
for a user-space system process that needs to receive a synchronous alarm, and it
provides a function to be called to notify the user-space process when the timer
expires. It can also ask for cancellation of a previously scheduled alarm by pass-
ing zero in the expiration time field of its request message. The operation is
simple—on lines 10230 to 10232 information from the message is extracted. The
most important items are the time when the timer should go off and the process
that needs to know about it. Every system process has its own timer structure in
the priv table. On lines 10237 to 10239 the timer structure is located and the proc-
ess number and the address of a function, cause ? alarm, to be executed when the
timer expires, are entered.
     If the timer was already active, sys ? setalarm returns the time remaining in its
reply message. A return value of zero means the timer is not active. There are
several possibilities to be considered. The timer might previously have been
deactivated—a timer is marked inactive by storing a special value, TMR ? NEVER
in its exp ? time field . As far as the C code is concerned this is just a large integer,
so an explicit test for this value is made as part of checking whether the expiration
time has passed. The timer might indicate a time that has already passed. This is
unlikley to happen, but it is easy to check. The timer might also indicate a time in
the future. In either of the first two cases the reply value is zero, otherwise the
time remaining is returned (lines 10242 to 10247).
     Finally, the timer is reset or set. At this level this is done putting the desired
expiration time into the correct field of the timer structure and calling another
function to do the work. Of course, resetting the timer does not require storing a
value. We will see the functions reset and set soon, their code is in the source file

for the clock task. But since the system task and the clock task are both compiled
into the kernel image all functions declared PUBLIC are accessible.
     There is one other function defined in do ? setalarm.c. This is cause ? alarm,
the watchdog function whose address is stored in each timer, so it can be called
when the timer expires. It is simplicity itself—it generates a notify message to the
process whose process number is also stored in the timer structure. Thus the syn-
chronous alarm within the kernel is converted into a message to the system proc-
ess that asked for an alarm.
     As an aside, note that when we talked about the initialization of timers a few
pages back (and in this section as well) we referred to synchronous alarms re-
quested by system processes. If that did not make complete sense at this point,
and if you are wondering what is a synchronous alarm or what about timers for
nonsystem processes, these questions will be dealt with in the next section, when
we discuss the clock task. There are so many interconnected parts in an operating
system that it is almost impossible to order all topics in a way that does not occa-
sionally require a reference to a part that has not been already been explained.
This is particularly true when discussing implementation. If we were not dealing
with a real operating system we could probably avoid bringing up messy details
like this. For that matter, a totally theoretical discussion of operating system prin-
ciples would probably never mention a system task. In a theory book we could
just wave our arms and ignore the problems of giving operating system com-
ponents in user space limited and controlled access to privileged resources like
interrupts and I/O ports.
     The last file in the kernel/system/ directory which we will discuss in detail is
do ? exec.c (line 10300). Most of the work of the exec system call is done within
the process manager. The process manager sets up a stack for a new program that
contains the arguments and the environment. Then it passes the resulting stack
pointer to the kernel using sys ? exec, which is handled by do ? exec (line 10618).
The stack pointer is set in the kernel part of the process table, and if the process
being exec-ed is using an extra segment the assembly language phys ? memset
function defined in klib386.s is called to erase any data that might be left over
from previous use of that memory region (line 10330).
     An exec call causes a slight anomaly. The process invoking the call sends a
message to the process manager and blocks. With other system calls, the resulting
reply would unblock it. With exec there is no reply, because the newly loaded
core image is not expecting a reply. Therefore, do ? exec unblocks the process
itself on line 10333 The next line makes the new image ready to run, using the
lock ? enqueue function that protects against a possible race condition. Finally, the
command string is saved so the process can be identified when the user invokes
the ps command or presses a function key to display data from the process table.
     To finish our discussion of the system task, we will look at its role in handling
a typical operating service, providing data in response to a read system call.
When a user does a read call, the file system checks its cache to see if it has the
SEC. 2.7                                 THE SYSTEM TASK IN MINIX 3                             203
block needed. If not, it sends a message to the appropriate disk driver to load it
into the cache. Then the file system sends a message to the system task telling it
to copy the block to the user process. In the worst case, eleven messages are
needed to read a block; in the best case, four messages are needed. Both cases are
shown in Fig. 2-46. In Fig. 2-46 (a), message 3 asks the system task to execute
I/O instructions; 4 is the ACK. When a hardware interrupt occurs the system task
tells the waiting driver about this event with message 5. Messages 6 and 7 are a
request to copy the data to the FS cache and the reply, message 8 tells the FS the
data is ready, and messages 9 and 10 are a request to copy the data from the cache
to the user, and the reply. Finally message 11 is the reply to the user. In Fig. 2-46
(b), the data is already in the cache, messages 2 and 3 are the request to copy it to
the user and the reply. These messages are a source of overhead in MINIX 3 and
are the price paid for the highly modular design.

                     User                                                      User

                               11                                          1          4
                 1

                         FS                                                    FS
            2
                          8
                                                                                                3
                                     9                                                     2
                                             10
           Disk device driver                                         Disk device driver
                               6
                         4     5
                     3                   7

     Interrupt                      System task               Interrupt               System task

                         (a)                                                   (b)

Figure 2-46. (a) Worst case for reading a block requires eleven messages.
        (b) Best case for reading a block requires four messages.

     Kernel calls to request copying of data are probably the most heavily used
ones in MINIX 3. We have already seen the part of the system task that ultimately
does the work, the function virtual ? copy. One way to deal with some of the inef-
ficiency of the message passing mechanism is to pack multiple requests into a
message. The sys ? virvcopy and sys ? physvcopy kernel calls do this. The content

of a message that invokes one of these call is a pointer to a vector specifying mul-
tiple blocks to be copied between memory locations. Both are supported by
do ? vcopy, which executes a loop, extracting source and destination addresses and
block lengths and calling phys ? copy repeatedly until all the copies are complete.
We will see in the next chapter that disk devices have a similar ability to handle
multiple transfers based on a single request.

2.8 THE CLOCK TASK IN MINIX 3
    Clocks (also called timers) are essential to the operation of any timesharing
system for a variety of reasons. For example, they maintain the time of day and
prevent one process from monopolizing the CPU. The MINIX 3 clock task has
some resemblance to a device driver, in that it is driven by interrupts generated by
a hardware device. However, the clock is neither a block device, like a disk, nor a
character device, like a terminal. In fact, in MINIX 3 an interface to the clock is
not provided by a file in the /dev/ directory. Furthermore, the clock task executes
in kernel space and cannot be accessed directly by user-space processes. It has
access to all kernel functions and data, but user-space processes can only access it
via the system task. In this section we will first a look at clock hardware and
software in general, and then we will see how these ideas are applied in MINIX 3.

2.8.1 Clock Hardware

    Two types of clocks are used in computers, and both are quite different from
the clocks and watches used by people. The simpler clocks are tied to the 110- or
220-volt power line, and cause an interrupt on every voltage cycle, at 50 or 60 Hz.
These are essentially extinct in modern PCs.
    The other kind of clock is built out of three components: a crystal oscillator, a
counter, and a holding register, as shown in Fig. 2-47. When a piece of quartz
crystal is properly cut and mounted under tension, it can be made to generate a
periodic signal of very high accuracy, typically in the range of 5 to 200 MHz,
depending on the crystal chosen. At least one such circuit is usually found in any
computer, providing a synchronizing signal to the computer’s various circuits.
This signal is fed into the counter to make it count down to zero. When the
counter gets to zero, it causes a CPU interrupt. Computers whose advertised
clock rate is higher than 200 MHz normally use a slower clock and a clock multi-
plier circuit.
    Programmable clocks typically have several modes of operation. In one-shot
mode, when the clock is started, it copies the value of the holding register into the
counter and then decrements the counter at each pulse from the crystal. When the
counter gets to zero, it causes an interrupt and stops until it is explicitly started
again by the software. In square-wave mode, after getting to zero and causing the
SEC. 2.8                         THE CLOCK TASK IN MINIX 3                                      205

            Crystal oscillator

                                                     Counter is decremented at each pulse

                                                     Holding register is used to load the counter

Figure 2-47. A programmable clock.

interrupt, the holding register is automatically copied into the counter, and the
whole process is repeated again indefinitely. These periodic interrupts are called
clock ticks.
     The advantage of the programmable clock is that its interrupt frequency can
be controlled by software. If a 1-MHz crystal is used, then the counter is pulsed
every microsecond. With 16-bit registers, interrupts can be programmed to occur
at intervals from 1 microsecond to 65.536 milliseconds. Programmable clock
chips usually contain two or three independently programmable clocks and have
many other options as well (e.g., counting up instead of down, interrupts disabled,
and more).
     To prevent the current time from being lost when the computer’s power is
turned off, most computers have a battery-powered backup clock, implemented
with the kind of low-power circuitry used in digital watches. The battery clock
can be read at startup. If the backup clock is not present, the software may ask the
user for the current date and time. There is also a standard protocol for a
networked system to get the current time from a remote host. In any case the time
is then translated into the number of seconds since 12 A.M. Universal Coordi-
nated Time (UTC) (formerly known as Greenwich Mean Time) on Jan. 1, 1970,
as UNIX and MINIX 3 do, or since some other benchmark. Clock ticks are
counted by the running system, and every time a full second has passed the real
time is incremented by one count. MINIX 3 (and most UNIX systems) do not take
into account leap seconds, of which there have been 23 since 1970. This is not
considered a serious flaw. Usually, utility programs are provided to manually set
the system clock and the backup clock and to synchronize the two clocks.
     We should mention here that all but the earliest IBM-compatible computers
have a separate clock circuit that provides timing signals for the CPU, internal
data busses, and other components. This is the clock that is meant when people
speak of CPU clock speeds, measured in Megahertz on the earliest personal com-
puters, and in Gigahertz on modern systems. The basic circuitry of quartz crys-
tals, oscillators and counters is the same, but the requirements are so different that
modern computers have independent clocks for CPU control and timekeeping.

2.8.2 Clock Software

    All the clock hardware does is generate interrupts at known intervals. Every-
thing else involving time must be done by the software, the clock driver. The
exact duties of the clock driver vary among operating systems, but usually include
most of the following:
      1. Maintaining the time of day.
      2. Preventing processes from running longer than they are allowed to.
      3. Accounting for CPU usage.
      4. Handling the alarm system call made by user processes.
      5. Providing watchdog timers for parts of the system itself.
      6. Doing profiling, monitoring, and statistics gathering.
     The first clock function, maintaining the time of day (also called the real
time) is not difficult. It just requires incrementing a counter at each clock tick, as
mentioned before. The only thing to watch out for is the number of bits in the
time-of-day counter. With a clock rate of 60 Hz, a 32-bit counter will overflow in
just over 2 years. Clearly the system cannot store the real time as the number of
ticks since Jan. 1, 1970 in 32 bits.
     Three approaches can be taken to solve this problem. The first way is to use a
64-bit counter, although doing so makes maintaining the counter more expensive
since it has to be done many times a second. The second way is to maintain the
time of day in seconds, rather than in ticks, using a subsidiary counter to count
ticks until a whole second has been accumulated. Because 232 seconds is more
than 136 years, this method will work until well into the twenty-second century.
     The third approach is to count ticks, but to do that relative to the time the sys-
tem was booted, rather than relative to a fixed external moment. When the backup
clock is read or the user types in the real time, the system boot time is calculated
from the current time-of-day value and stored in memory in any convenient form.
When the time of day is requested, the stored time of day is added to the counter
to get the current time of day. All three approaches are shown in Fig. 2-48.
             64 bits                         32 bits                              32 bits

       Time of day in ticks                                                   Counter in ticks

                                        Time of day       Number of ticks
                                        in seconds       in current second
                                                                              System boot time
                                                                                 in seconds
               (a)                                     (b)                          (c)

Figure 2-48. Three ways to maintain the time of day.
SEC. 2.8                  THE CLOCK TASK IN MINIX 3                              207
     The second clock function is preventing processes from running too long.
Whenever a process is started, the scheduler should initialize a counter to the
value of that process’ quantum in clock ticks. At every clock interrupt, the clock
driver decrements the quantum counter by 1. When it gets to zero, the clock driver
calls the scheduler to set up another process.
     The third clock function is doing CPU accounting. The most accurate way to
do it is to start a second timer, distinct from the main system timer, whenever a
process is started. When that process is stopped, the timer can be read out to tell
how long the process has run. To do things right, the second timer should be saved
when an interrupt occurs and restored afterward.
     A less accurate, but much simpler, way to do accounting is to maintain a
pointer to the process table entry for the currently running process in a global vari-
able. At every clock tick, a field in the current process’ entry is incremented. In
this way, every clock tick is ‘‘charged’’ to the process running at the time of the
tick. A minor problem with this strategy is that if many interrupts occur during a
process’ run, it is still charged for a full tick, even though it did not get much
work done. Properly accounting for the CPU during interrupts is too expensive
and is rarely done.
     In MINIX 3 and many other systems, a process can request that the operating
system give it a warning after a certain interval. The warning is usually a signal,
interrupt, message, or something similar. One application requiring such warnings
is networking, in which a packet not acknowledged within a certain time interval
must be retransmitted. Another application is computer-aided instruction, where a
student not providing a response within a certain time is told the answer.
     If the clock driver had enough clocks, it could set a separate clock for each
request. This not being the case, it must simulate multiple virtual clocks with a
single physical clock. One way is to maintain a table in which the signal time for
all pending timers is kept, as well as a variable giving the time of the next one.
Whenever the time of day is updated, the driver checks to see if the closest signal
has occurred. If it has, the table is searched for the next one to occur.
     If many signals are expected, it is more efficient to simulate multiple clocks
by chaining all the pending clock requests together, sorted on time, in a linked list,
as shown in Fig. 2-49. Each entry on the list tells how many clock ticks following
the previous one to wait before causing a signal. In this example, signals are pend-
ing for 4203, 4207, 4213, 4215, and 4216.
     In Fig. 2-49, a timer has just expired. The next interrupt occurs in 3 ticks, and
3 has just been loaded. On each tick, Next signal is decremented. When it gets to
0, the signal corresponding to the first item on the list is caused, and that item is
removed from the list. Then Next signal is set to the value in the entry now at the
head of the list, in this example, 4. Using absolute times rather than relative times
is more convenient in many cases, and that is the approach used by MINIX 3.
     Note that during a clock interrupt, the clock driver has several things to do.
These things include incrementing the real time, decrementing the quantum and

                                     Current time       Next signal
                   Clock                  4200               3
                  header

                           3          4             6        2          1 X

Figure 2-49. Simulating multiple timers with a single clock.

checking for 0, doing CPU accounting, and decrementing the alarm counter.
However, each of these operations has been carefully arranged to be very fast
because they have to be repeated many times a second.
     Parts of the operating system also need to set timers. These are called watch-
dog timers. When we study the hard disk driver, we will see that a wakeup call is
scheduled each time the disk controller is sent a command, so an attempt at
recovery can be made if the command fails completely. Floppy disk drivers use
timers to wait for the disk motor to get up to speed and to shut down the motor if
no activity occurs for a while. Some printers with a movable print head can print
at 120 characters/sec (8.3 msec/character) but cannot return the print head to the
left margin in 8.3 msec, so the terminal driver must delay after typing a carriage
return.
     The mechanism used by the clock driver to handle watchdog timers is the
same as for user signals. The only difference is that when a timer goes off,
instead of causing a signal, the clock driver calls a procedure supplied by the
caller. The procedure is part of the caller’s code. This presented a problem in the
design of MINIX 3, since one of the goals was to remove drivers from the kernel’s
address space. The short answer is that the system task, which is in kernel space,
can set alarms on behalf of some user-space processes, and then notify them when
a timer goes off. We will elaborate on this mechanism further on.
     The last thing in our list is profiling. Some operating systems provide a
mechanism by which a user program can have the system build up a histogram of
its program counter, so it can see where it is spending its time. When profiling is a
possibility, at every tick the driver checks to see if the current process is being
profiled, and if so, computes the bin number (a range of addresses) corresponding
to the current program counter. It then increments that bin by one. This mechan-
ism can also be used to profile the system itself.

2.8.3 Overview of the Clock Driver in MINIX 3

    The MINIX 3 clock driver is contained in the file kernel/clock.c. It can be
considered to have three functional parts. First, like the device drivers that we
will see in the next chapter, there is a task mechanism which runs in a loop, wait-
ing for messages and dispatching to subroutines that perform the action requested
SEC. 2.8                  THE CLOCK TASK IN MINIX 3                             209
in each message. However, this structure is almost vestigial in the clock task.
The message mechanism is expensive, requiring all the overhead of a context
switch. So for the clock this is used only when there is a substantial amount of
work to be done. Only one kind of message is received, there is only one subrou-
tine to service the message, and a reply message is not sent when the job is done.
     The second major part of the clock software is the interrupt handler that is
activated 60 times each second. It does basic timekeeping, updating a variable
that counts clock ticks since the system was booted. It compares this with the
time for the next timer expiration. It also updates counters that register how much
of the quantum of the current process has been used and how much total time the
current process has used. If the interrupt handler detects that a process has used
its quantum or that a timer has expired it generates the message that goes to the
main task loop. Otherwise no message is sent. The strategy here is that for each
clock tick the handler does as little as necessary, as fast as possible. The costly
main task is activated only when there is substantial work to do.
     The third general part of the clock software is a collection of subroutines that
provide general support, but which are not called in response to clock interrupts,
either by the interrupt handler or by the main task loop. One of these subroutines
is coded as PRIVATE, and is called before the main task loop is entered. It initial-
izes the clock, which entails writing data to the clock chip to cause it to generate
interrupts at the desired intervals. The initialization routine also puts the address
of the interrupt handler in the right place to be found when the clock chip triggers
the IRQ 8 input to the interrupt controller chip, and then enables that input to
respond.
     The rest of the subroutines in clock.c are declared PUBLIC, and can be called
from anywhere in the kernel binary. In fact none of them are called from clock.c
itself. They are mostly called by the system task in order to service system calls
related to time. These subroutines do such things as reading the time-since-boot
counter, for timing with clock-tick resolution, or reading a register in the clock
chip itself, for timing that requires microsecond resolution. Other subroutines are
used to set and reset timers. Finally, a subroutine is provided to be called when
MINIX 3 shuts down. This one resets the hardware timer parameters to those
expected by the BIOS.

The Clock Task

     The main loop of the clock task accepts only a single kind of message,
HARD ? INT, which comes from the interrupt handler. Anything else is an error.
Furthermore, it does not receive this message for every clock tick interrupt,
although the subroutine called each time a message is received is named
do ? clocktick. A message is received, and do ? clocktick is called only if process
scheduling is needed or a timer has expired.

The Clock Interrupt Handler

     The interrupt handler runs every time the counter in the clock chip reaches
zero and generates an interrupt. This is where the basic timekeeping work is
done. In MINIX 3 the time is kept using the method of Fig. 2-48(c). However, in
clock.c only the counter for ticks since boot is maintained; records of the boot
time are kept elsewhere. The clock software supplies only the current tick count
to aid a system call for the real time. Further processing is done by one of the
servers. This is consistent with the MINIX 3 strategy of moving functionality to
processes that run in user space.
     In the interrupt handler the local counter is updated for each interrupt
received. When interrupts are disabled ticks are lost. In some cases it is possible
to correct for this effect. A global variable is available for counting lost ticks, and
it is added to the main counter and then reset to zero each time the handler is
activated. In the implementation section we will see an example of how this is
used.
     The handler also affects variables in the process table, for billing and process
control purposes. A message is sent to the clock task only if the current time has
passed the expiration time of the next scheduled timer or if the quantum of the
running process has been decremented to zero. Everything done in the interrupt
service is a simple integer operation—arithmetic, comparison, logical AND/OR,
or assignment—which a C compiler can translate easily into basic machine opera-
tions. At worst there are five additions or subtractions and six comparisons, plus a
few logical operations and assignments in completing the interrupt service. In
particular there is no subroutine call overhead.

Watchdog Timers

    A few pages back we left hanging the question of how user-space processes
can be provided with watchdog timers, which ordinarily are thought of as user-
supplied procedures that are part of the user’s code and are executed when a timer
expires. Clearly, this can not be done in MINIX 3. But we can use a synchronous
alarm to bridge the gap from the kernel to user space.
    This is a good time to explain what is meant by a synchronous alarm. A sig-
nal may arrive or a conventional watchdog may be activated without any relation
to what part of a process is currently executing, so these mechanisms are asyn-
chronous. A synchronous alarm is delivered as a message, and thus can be
received only when the recipient has executed receive. So we say it is synchro-
nous because it will be received only when the receiver expects it. If the notify
method is used to inform a recipient of an alarm, the sender does not have to
block, and the recipient does not have to be concerned with missing the alarm.
Messages from notify are saved if the recipient is not waiting. A bitmap is used,
with each bit representing a possible source of a notification.
SEC. 2.8                   THE CLOCK TASK IN MINIX 3                              211
     Watchdog timers take advantage of the timer ? t type s ? alarm ? timer field that
exists in each element of the priv table. Each system process has a slot in the priv
table. To set a timer, a system process in user space makes a sys ? setalarm call,
which is handled by the system task. The system task is compiled in kernel space,
and thus can initialize a timer on behalf of the calling process. Initialization
entails putting the address of a procedure to execute when the timer expires into
the correct field, and then inserting the timer into a list of timers, as in Fig. 2-49.
     The procedure to execute has to be in kernel space too, of course. No prob-
lem. The system task contains a watchdog function, cause ? alarm, which gen-
erates a notify when it goes off, causing a synchronous alarm for the user. This
alarm can invoke the user-space watchdog function. Within the kernel binary this
is a true watchdog, but for the process that requested the timer, it is a synchronous
alarm. It is not the same as having the timer execute a procedure in the target’s
address space. There is a bit more overhead, but it is simpler than an interrupt.
     What we wrote above was qualified: we said that the system task can set
alarms on behalf of some user-space processes. The mechanism just described
works only for system processes. Each system process has a copy of the priv
structure, but a single copy is shared by all non-system (user) processes. The
parts of the priv table that cannot be shared, such as the bitmap of pending notifi-
cations and the timer, are not usable by user processes. The solution is this: the
process manager manages timers on behalf of user processes in a way similar to
the way the system task manages timers for system processes. Every process has
a timer ? t field of its own in the process manager’s part of the process table.
     When a user process makes an alarm system call to ask for an alarm to be set,
it is handled by the process manager, which sets up the timer and inserts it into its
list of timers. The process manager asks the system task to send it a notification
when the first timer in the PM’s list of timers is scheduled to expire. The process
manager only has to ask for help when the head of its chain of timers changes,
either because the first timer has expired or has been cancelled, or because a new
request has been received that must go on the chain before the current head. This
is used to support the POSIX-standard alarm system call. The procedure to exe-
cute is within the address space of the process manager. When executed, the user
process that requested the alarm is sent a signal, rather than a notification.

Millisecond Timing

    A procedure is provided in clock.c that provides microsecond resolution tim-
ing. Delays as short as a few microseconds may be needed by various I/O
devices. There is no practical way to do this using alarms and the message pass-
ing interface. The counter that is used for generating the clock interrupts can be
read directly. It is decremented approximately every 0.8 microseconds, and
reaches zero 60 times a second, or every 16.67 milliseconds. To be useful for I/O
timing it would have to be polled by a procedure running in kernel-space, but

much work has gone into moving drivers out of kernel-space. Currently this func-
tion is used only as a source of randomness for the random number generator.
More use might be made of it on a very fast system, but this is a future project

Summary of Clock Services

    Figure 2-50 summarizes the various services provided directly or indirectly by
clock.c. There are several functions declared PUBLIC that can be called from the
kernel or the system task. All other services are available only indirectly, by sys-
tem calls ultimately handled by the system task. Other system processes can ask
the system task directly, but user processes must ask the process manager, which
also relies on the system task.
                                                                                                
                         Service      ?                      Access      ? Response ?                               Clients  ?
                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                
                   get?uptime
                                                                                  
                                            Function call ? Ticks                       ? Kernel or system task                  ?
     set?timer                             ? Function call ? None                        ? Kernel or system task                   ?
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                     
                   reset?timer                ? Function call ? None                        ? Kernel or system task                    ?
                                                                                                                                          
                   read?clock                    ? Function call ? Count
                                                                                                 Kernel or system task                     ?
                                                                                         
                   clock?stop                     ? Function call ? None                        ? Kernel or system task                      ?
                                                                                                                                                
                   Synchronous alarm ? System call ? Notification ? Server or driver, via system task ?
                                                                                            
               POSIX alarm                           ? System call ? Signal                        ? User process, via PM                        ?
               
                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                
                   Time                                 ?? System call ?? Message                     ?? Any process, via PM                         ??

Figure 2-50. The time-related services supported by the clock driver.

     The kernel or the system task can get the current uptime, or set or reset a
timer without the overhead of a message. The kernel or the system task can also
call read ? clock, which reads the counter in the timer chip, to get time in units of
approximately 0.8 microseconds. The clock ? stop function is intended to be
called only when MINIX 3 shuts down. It restores the BIOS clock rate. A system
process, either a driver or a server, can request a synchronous alarm, which causes
activation of a watchdog function in kernel space and a notification to the request-
ing process. A POSIX-alarm is requested by a user process by asking the process
manager, which then asks the system task to activate a watchdog. When the timer
expires, the system task notifies the process manager, and the process manager
delivers a signal to the user process.

2.8.4 Implementation of the Clock Driver in MINIX 3

    The clock task uses no major data structures, but several variables are used to
keep track of time. The variable realtime (line 10462) is basic—it counts all
clockticks. A global variable, lost ? ticks, is defined in glo.h (line 5333). This
SEC. 2.8                   THE CLOCK TASK IN MINIX 3                               213
variable is provided for the use of any function that executes in kernel space that
might disable interrupts long enough that one or more clock ticks could be lost. It
currently is used by the int86 function in klib386.s. Int86 uses the boot monitor to
manage the transfer of control to the BIOS, and the monitor returns the number of
clock ticks counted while the BIOS call was busy in the ecx register just before
the return to the kernel. This works because, although the clock chip is not
triggering the MINIX 3 clock interrupt handler when the BIOS request is handled,
the boot monitor can keep track of the time with the help of the BIOS.
     The clock driver accesses several other global variables. It uses proc ? ptr,
prev ? ptr, and bill ? ptr to reference the process table entry for the currently run-
ning process, the process that ran previously, and the process that gets charged for
time. Within these process table entries it accesses various fields, including
p ? user ? time and p ? sys ? time for accounting and p ? ticks ? left for counting down
the quantum of a process.
     When MINIX 3 starts up, all the drivers are called. Most of them do some ini-
tialization then try to get a message and block. The clock driver, clock ? task (line
10468), does that too. First it calls init ? clock to initialize the programmable clock
frequency to 60 Hz. When a message is received, it calls do ? clocktick if the mes-
sage was a HARD ? INT (line 10486). Any other kind of message is unexpected
and treated as an error.
     Do ? clocktick (line 10497) is not called on each tick of the clock, so its name
is not an exact description of its function. It is called when the interrupt handler
has determined there might be something important to do. One of the conditions
that results in running do ? clocktick is the current process using up all of its quan-
tum. If the process is preemptable (the system and clock tasks are not) a call to
lock ? dequeue followed immediately by a call to lock ? enqueue (lines 10510 to
10512) removes the process from its queue, then makes it ready again and
reschedules it. The other thing that activates do ? clocktick is expiration of a
watchdog timer. Timers and linked lists of timers are used so much in MINIX 3
that a library of functions to support them was created. The library function
tmrs ? exptimers called on line 10517 runs the watchdog functions for all expired
timers and deactivates them.
     Init ? clock (line 10529) is called only once, when the clock task is started.
There are several places one could point to and say, ‘‘This is where MINIX 3 starts
running.’’ This is a candidate; the clock is essential to a preemptive multitasking
system. Init ? clock writes three bytes to the clock chip that set its mode and set
the proper count into the master register. Then it registers its process number,
IRQ, and handler address so interrupts will be directed properly. Finally, it
enables the interrupt controller chip to accept clock interrupts.
     The next function, clock ? stop, undoes the initialization of the clock chip. It is
declared PUBLIC and is not called from anywhere in clock.c. It is placed here
because of the obvious similarity to init ? clock. It is only called by the system
task when MINIX 3 is shut down and control is to be returned to the boot monitor.

     As soon as (or, more accurately, 16.67 milliseconds after) init ? clock runs, the
first clock interrupt occurs, and clock interrupts repeat 60 times a second as long
as MINIX 3 runs. The code in clock ? handler (line 10556) probably runs more fre-
quently than any other part of the MINIX 3 system. Consequently, clock ? handler
was built for speed. The only subroutine calls are on line 10586; they are only
needed if running on an obsolete IBM PS/2 system. The update of the current
time (in ticks) is done on lines 10589 to 10591. Then user and accounting times
are updated.
     Decisions were made in the design of the handler that might be questioned.
Two tests are done on line 10610 and if either condition is true the clock task is
notified. The do ? clocktick function called by the clock task repeats both tests to
decide what needs to be done. This is necessary because the notify call used by
the handler cannot pass any information to distinguish different conditions. We
leave it to the reader to consider alternatives and how they might be evaluated.
     The rest of clock.c contains utility functions we have already mentioned.
Get ? uptime (line 10620) just returns the value of realtime, which is visible only
to functions in clock.c. Set ? timer and reset ? timer use other functions from the
timer library that take care of all the details of manipulating a chain of timers.
Finally, read ? clock reads and returns the current count in the clock chip’s count-
down register.

2.9 SUMMARY
     To hide the effects of interrupts, operating systems provide a conceptual
model consisting of sequential processes running in parallel. Processes can com-
municate with each other using interprocess communication primitives, such as
semaphores, monitors, or messages. These primitives are used to ensure that no
two processes are ever in their critical sections at the same time. A process can be
running, runnable, or blocked and can change state when it or another process
executes one of the interprocess communication primitives.
     Interprocess communication primitives can be used to solve such problems as
the producer-consumer, dining philosophers, and reader-writer. Even with these
primitives, care has to be taken to avoid errors and deadlocks. Many scheduling
algorithms are known, including round-robin, priority scheduling, multilevel
queues, and policy-driven schedulers.
     MINIX 3 supports the process concept and provides messages for interprocess
communication. Messages are not buffered, so a send succeeds only when the
receiver is waiting for it. Similarly, a receive succeeds only when a message is
already available. If either operation does not succeed, the caller is blocked.
MINIX 3 also provides a nonblocking supplement to messages with a notify primi-
tive. An attempt to send a notify to a receiver that is not waiting results in a bit
being set, which triggers notification when a receive is done later.
SEC. 2.9                              SUMMARY                                        215
     As an example of the message flow, consider a user doing a read. The user
process sends a message to the FS requesting it. If the data are not in the FS’
cache, the FS asks the driver to read it from the disk. Then the FS blocks waiting
for the data. When the disk interrupt happens, the system task is notified, allow-
ing it to reply to the disk driver, which then replies to the FS. At this point, the FS
asks the system task to copy the data from its cache, where the newly requested
block has been placed, to the user. These steps are illustrated in Fig. 2-46.
     Process switching may follow an interrupt. When a process is interrupted, a
stack is created within the process table entry of the process, and all the informa-
tion needed to restart it is put on the new stack. Any process can be restarted by
setting the stack pointer to point to its process table entry and initiating a sequence
of instructions to restore the CPU registers, culminating with an iretd instruction.
The scheduler decides which process table entry to put into the stack pointer.
     Interrupts cannot occur when the kernel itself is running. If an exception
occurs when the kernel is running, the kernel stack, rather than a stack within the
process table, is used. When an interrupt has been serviced, a process is restarted.
     The MINIX 3 scheduling algorithm uses multiple priority queues. System
processes normally run in the highest priority queues and user processes in lower
priority queues, but priorities are assigned on a process-by-process basis. A proc-
ess stuck in a loop may have its priority temporarily reduced; the priority can be
restored when other processes have had a chance to run. The nice command can
be used to change the priority of a process within defined limits. Processes are
run round robin for a quantum that can vary per process. However, after a process
has blocked and becomes ready again it will be put on the head of its queue with
just the unused part of its quantum. This is intended to give faster response to
processes doing I/O. Device drivers and servers are allowed a large quantum, as
they are expected to run until they block. However, even system processes can be
preempted if they run too long.
     The kernel image includes a system task which facilitates communication of
user-space processes with the kernel. It supports the servers and device drivers by
performing privileged operations on their behalf. In MINIX 3, the clock task is
also compiled with the kernel. It is not a device driver in the ordinary sense.
User-space processes cannot access the clock as a device.

                                    PROBLEMS

 1. Why is multiprogramming central to the operation of a modern operating system?
 2. What are the three main states that a process can be in? Describe the meaning of each
    one briefly.

 3. Suppose that you were to design an advanced computer architecture that did process
    switching in hardware, instead of having interrupts. What information would the CPU
    need? Describe how the hardware process switching might work.
 4. On all current computers, at least part of the interrupt handlers are written in assembly
    language. Why?
 5. Redraw Fig. 2-2 adding two new states: New and Terminated. When a process is
    created, it is initially in the New state. When it exits, it is in the Terminated state.
 6. In the text it was stated that the model of Fig. 2-6(a) was not suited to a file server
    using a cache in memory. Why not? Could each process have its own cache?
 7. What is the fundamental difference between a process and a thread?
 8. In a system with threads, is there normally one stack per thread or one stack per proc-
    ess? Explain.
 9. What is a race condition?
10. Give an example of a race condition that could possibly occur when buying airplane
    tickets for two people to go on a trip together.
11. Write a shell script that produces a file of sequential numbers by reading the last
    number in the file, adding 1 to it, and then appending to the file. Run one instance of
    the script in the background and one in the foreground, each accessing the same file.
    How long does it take before a race condition manifests itself? What is the critical
    section? Modify the script to prevent the race (Hint: use
         ln file file.lock

    to lock the data file).
12. Is a statement like
         ln file file.lock

    an effective locking mechanism for a user program like the scripts used in the previ-
    ous problem? Why (or why not)?
13. Does the busy waiting solution using the turn variable (Fig. 2-10) work when the two
    processes are running on a shared-memory multiprocessor, that is, two CPUs, sharing
    a common memory?
14. Consider a computer that does not have a TEST AND SET LOCK instruction but does
    have an instruction to swap the contents of a register and a memory word in a single
    indivisible action. Can that be used to write a routine enter ? region such as the one
    found in Fig. 2-12?
15. Give a sketch of how an operating system that can disable interrupts could implement
    semaphores.
16. Show how counting semaphores (i.e., semaphores that can hold an arbitrarily large
    value) can be implemented using only binary semaphores and ordinary machine
    instructions.
CHAP. 2                                 PROBLEMS                                         217
17. In Sec. 2.2.4, a situation with a high-priority process, H, and a low-priority process, L,
    was described, which led to H looping forever. Does the same problem occur if
    round-robin scheduling is used instead of priority scheduling? Discuss.
18. Synchronization within monitors uses condition variables and two special operations,
    WAIT and SIGNAL. A more general form of synchronization would be to have a sin-
    gle primitive, WAITUNTIL , that had an arbitrary Boolean predicate as parameter.
    Thus, one could say, for example,
    WAITUNTIL x < 0 or y + z < n
    The SIGNAL primitive would no longer be needed. This scheme is clearly more gen-
    eral than that of Hoare or Brinch Hansen, but it is not used. Why not? (Hint: think
    about the implementation.)
19. A fast food restaurant has four kinds of employees: (1) order takers, who take
    customer’s orders; (2) cooks, who prepare the food; (3) packaging specialists, who
    stuff the food into bags; and (4) cashiers, who give the bags to customers and take
    their money. Each employee can be regarded as a communicating sequential process.
    What form of interprocess communication do they use? Relate this model to proc-
    esses in MINIX 3.
20. Suppose that we have a message-passing system using mailboxes. When sending to a
    full mailbox or trying to receive from an empty one, a process does not block.
    Instead, it gets an error code back. The process responds to the error code by just try-
    ing again, over and over, until it succeeds. Does this scheme lead to race conditions?
21. In the solution to the dining philosophers problem (Fig. 2-20), why is the state variable
    set to HUNGRY in the procedure take ? forks?
22. Consider the procedure put ? forks in Fig. 2-20. Suppose that the variable state[i] was
    set to THINKING after the two calls to test, rather than before. How would this
    change affect the solution for the case of 3 philosophers? For 100 philosophers?
23. The readers and writers problem can be formulated in several ways with regard to
    which category of processes can be started when. Carefully describe three different
    variations of the problem, each one favoring (or not favoring) some category of proc-
    esses. For each variation, specify what happens when a reader or a writer becomes
    ready to access the data base, and what happens when a process is finished using the
    data base.
24. The CDC 6600 computers could handle up to 10 I/O processes simultaneously using
    an interesting form of round-robin scheduling called processor sharing. A process
    switch occurred after each instruction, so instruction 1 came from process 1, instruc-
    tion 2 came from process 2, etc. The process switching was done by special hardware,
    and the overhead was zero. If a process needed T sec to complete in the absence of
    competition, how much time would it need if processor sharing was used with n proc-
    esses?
25. Round- robin schedulers normally maintain a list of all runnable processes, with each
    process occurring exactly once in the list. What would happen if a process occurred
    twice in the list? Can you think of any reason for allowing this?

26. Measurements of a certain system have shown that the average process runs for a time
    T before blocking on I/O. A process switch requires a time S, which is effectively
    wasted (overhead). For round-robin scheduling with quantum Q, give a formula for
    the CPU efficiency for each of the following:
    (a) Q = ∞
    (b) Q > T
    (c) S < Q < T
    (d) Q = S
    (e) Q nearly 0
27. Five jobs are waiting to be run. Their expected run times are 9, 6, 3, 5, and X. In what
    order should they be run to minimize average response time? (Your answer will
    depend on X.)
28. Five batch jobs A through E, arrive at a computer center at almost the same time.
    They have estimated running times of 10, 6, 2, 4, and 8 minutes. Their (externally
    determined) priorities are 3, 5, 2, 1, and 4, respectively, with 5 being the highest prior-
    ity. For each of the following scheduling algorithms, determine the mean process tur-
    naround time. Ignore process switching overhead.
    (a) Round robin.
    (b) Priority scheduling.
    (c) First-come, first-served (run in order 10, 6, 2, 4, 8).
    (d) Shortest job first.
    For (a), assume that the system is multiprogrammed, and that each job gets its fair
    share of the CPU. For (b) through (d) assume that only one job at a time runs, until it
    finishes. All jobs are completely CPU bound.
29. A process running on CTSS needs 30 quanta to complete. How many times must it be
    swapped in, including the very first time (before it has run at all)?
30. The aging algorithm with a = 1/2 is being used to predict run times. The previous four
    runs, from oldest to most recent, are 40, 20, 40, and 15 msec. What is the prediction
    of the next time?
31. In Fig. 2-25 we saw how three-level scheduling works in a batch system. Could this
    idea be applied to an interactive system without newly-arriving jobs? How?
32. Suppose that the threads of Fig. 2-28(a) are run in the order: one from A, one from B,
    one from A, one from B, etc. How many possible thread sequences are there for the
    first four times scheduling is done?
33. A soft real-time system has four periodic events with periods of 50, 100, 200, and 250
    msec each. Suppose that the four events require 35, 20, 10, and x msec of CPU time,
    respectively. What is the largest value of x for which the system is schedulable?
34. During execution, MINIX 3 maintains a variable proc ? ptr that points to the process
    table entry for the current process. Why?
35. MINIX 3 does not buffer messages. Explain how this design decision causes problems
    with clock and keyboard interrupts.
CHAP. 2                                PROBLEMS                                         219
36. When a message is sent to a sleeping process in MINIX 3, the procedure ready is called
    to put that process on the proper scheduling queue. This procedure starts out by disa-
    bling interrupts. Explain.
37. The MINIX 3 procedure mini ? rec contains a loop. Explain what it is for.
38. MINIX 3 essentially uses the scheduling method in Fig. 2-43, with different priorities
    for classes. The lowest class (user processes) has round-robin scheduling, but the
    tasks and servers always are allowed to run until they block. Is it possible for proc-
    esses in the lowest class to starve? Why (or why not)?
39. Is MINIX 3 suitable for real-time applications, such as data logging? If not, what could
    be done to make it so?
40. Assume that you have an operating system that provides semaphores. Implement a
    message system. Write the procedures for sending and receiving messages.
41. A student majoring in anthropology and minoring in computer science has embarked
    on a research project to see if African baboons can be taught about deadlocks. He
    locates a deep canyon and fastens a rope across it, so the baboons can cross hand-
    over-hand. Several baboons can cross at the same time, provided that they are all
    going in the same direction. If eastward moving and westward moving baboons ever
    get onto the rope at the same time, a deadlock will result (the baboons will get stuck in
    the middle) because it is impossible for one baboon to climb over another one while
    suspended over the canyon. If a baboon wants to cross the canyon, he must check to
    see that no other baboon is currently crossing in the opposite direction. Write a pro-
    gram using semaphores that avoids deadlock. Do not worry about a series of eastward
    moving baboons holding up the westward moving baboons indefinitely.
42. Repeat the previous problem, but now avoid starvation. When a baboon that wants to
    cross to the east arrives at the rope and finds baboons crossing to the west, he waits
    until the rope is empty, but no more westward moving baboons are allowed to start
    until at least one baboon has crossed the other way.
43. Solve the dining philosophers problem using monitors instead of semaphores.
44. Add code to the MINIX 3 kernel to keep track of the number of messages sent from
    process (or task) i to process (or task) j. Print this matrix when the F4 key is hit.
45. Modify the MINIX 3 scheduler to keep track of how much CPU time each user process
    has had recently. When no task or server wants to run, pick the user process that has
    had the smallest share of the CPU.
46. Modify MINIX 3 so that each process can explicitly set the scheduling priority of its
    children using a new system call setpriority with parameters pid and priority.
47. Modify the hwint ? master and hwint ? slave macros in mpx386.s so the operations now
    performed by the save function are performed inline. What is the cost in code size?
    Can you measure an increase in performance?
48. Explain all of the items displayed by the MINIX 3 sysenv command on your MINIX 3
    system. If you do not have access to a running MINIX 3 system, explain the items in
    Fig. 2-37.

49. In the discussion of initialization of the process table we mentioned that some C com-
    pilers may generate slightly better code if you add a constant to the array instead of
    the index. Write a pair of short C programs to test this hypothesis.
50. Modify MINIX 3 to collect statistics about messages sent by whom to whom and write
    a program to collect and print these statistics in a useful way.
