                                      4
           MEMORY MANAGEMENT

     Memory is an important resource that must be carefully managed. While the
average home computer nowadays has two thousand times as much memory as
the IBM 7094 (the largest computer in the world in the early 1960s), programs
and the data they are expected to handle have also grown tremendously. To para-
phrase Parkinson’s law, ‘‘Programs and their data expand to fill the memory avail-
able to hold them.’’ In this chapter we will study how operating systems manage
memory.
     Ideally, what every programmer would like is an infinitely large, infinitely
fast memory that is also nonvolatile, that is, does not lose its contents when the
electric power fails. While we are at it, why not also ask for it to be inexpensive,
too? Unfortunately technology cannot turn such dreams into memories. Conse-
quently, most computers have a memory hierarchy, with a small amount of very
fast, expensive, volatile cache memory, hundreds of megabytes of medium-speed,
medium-price, volatile main memory (RAM), and tens or hundreds of gigabytes
of slow, cheap, nonvolatile disk storage. It is the job of the operating system to
coordinate how these memories are used.
     The part of the operating system that manages the memory hierarchy is usu-
ally called the memory manager. Its job is to keep track of which parts of mem-
ory are in use and which parts are not in use, to allocate memory to processes
when they need it and deallocate it when they are done, and to manage swapping
between main memory and disk when main memory is too small to hold all the
processes. In most systems (but not MINIX 3), it is in the kernel.

     In this chapter we will investigate a number of different memory management
schemes, ranging from very simple to highly sophisticated. We will start at the
beginning and look first at the simplest possible memory management system and
then gradually progress to more and more elaborate ones.
     As we pointed out in Chap. 1, history tends to repeat itself in the computer
world: minicomputer software was initially like mainframe software and personal
computer software was initially like minicomputer software. The cycle is now re-
peating itself with palmtops, PDAs, and embedded systems. In these systems,
simple memory management schemes are still in use. For this reason, they are
still worth studying.

4.1 BASIC MEMORY MANAGEMENT

    Memory management systems can be divided into two basic classes: those
that move processes back and forth between main memory and disk during execu-
tion (swapping and paging), and those that do not. The latter are simpler, so we
will study them first. Later in the chapter we will examine swapping and paging.
Throughout this chapter the reader should keep in mind that swapping and paging
are largely artifacts caused by the lack of sufficient main memory to hold all pro-
grams and data at once. If main memory ever gets so large that there is truly
enough of it, the arguments in favor of one kind of memory management scheme
or another may become obsolete.
    On the other hand, as mentioned above, software seems to grow as fast as
memory, so efficient memory management may always be needed. In the 1980s,
there were many universities that ran a timesharing system with dozens of (more-
or-less satisfied) users on a 4 MB VAX. Now Microsoft recommends having at
least 128 MB for a single-user Windows XP system. The trend toward multi-
media puts even more demands on memory, so good memory management is
probably going to be needed for the next decade at least.

4.1.1 Monoprogramming without Swapping or Paging

    The simplest possible memory management scheme is to run just one program
at a time, sharing the memory between that program and the operating system.
Three variations on this theme are shown in Fig. 4-1. The operating system may
be at the bottom of memory in RAM (Random Access Memory), as shown in
Fig. 4-1(a), or it may be in ROM (Read-Only Memory) at the top of memory, as
shown in Fig. 4-1(b), or the device drivers may be at the top of memory in a ROM
and the rest of the system in RAM down below, as shown in Fig. 4-1(c). The first
model was formerly used on mainframes and minicomputers but is rarely used
any more. The second model is used on some palmtop computers and embedded
SEC. 4.1                  BASIC MEMORY MANAGEMENT                                     375
systems. The third model was used by early personal computers (e.g., running
MS-DOS ), where the portion of the system in the ROM is called the BIOS (Basic
Input Output System).
                          0xFFF …
                                         Operating                   Device
                                         system in               drivers in ROM
                                           ROM
               User
             program                                                  User
                                                                    program
                                            User
                                          program
             Operating                                             Operating
             system in                                             system in
               RAM                                                   RAM
                          0                           0                           0
                (a)                         (b)                       (c)

Figure 4-1. Three simple ways of organizing memory with an operating system
        and one user process. Other possibilities also exist.

    When the system is organized in this way, only one process at a time can be
running. As soon as the user types a command, the operating system copies the
requested program from disk to memory and executes it. When the process fin-
ishes, the operating system displays a prompt character and waits for a new com-
mand. When it receives the command, it loads a new program into memory,
overwriting the first one.

4.1.2 Multiprogramming with Fixed Partitions

     Except on very simple embedded systems, monoprogramming is hardly used
any more. Most modern systems allow multiple processes to run at the same time.
Having multiple processes running at once means that when one process is
blocked waiting for I/O to finish, another one can use the CPU. Thus multipro-
gramming increases the CPU utilization. Network servers always have the ability
to run multiple processes (for different clients) at the same time, but most client
(i.e., desktop) machines also have this ability nowadays.
     The easiest way to achieve multiprogramming is simply to divide memory up
into n (possibly unequal) partitions. This partitioning can, for example, be done
manually when the system is started up.
     When a job arrives, it can be put into the input queue for the smallest partition
large enough to hold it. Since the partitions are fixed in this scheme, any space in
a partition not used by a job is wasted while that job runs. In Fig. 4-2(a) we see
how this system of fixed partitions and separate input queues looks.
     The disadvantage of sorting the incoming jobs into separate queues becomes
apparent when the queue for a large partition is empty but the queue for a small

            Multiple
         input queues
                                      800K
                        Partition 4                                    Partition 4
                                      700K

                        Partition 3                Single              Partition 3
                                                input queue

                                      400K

                        Partition 2                                    Partition 2

                                      200K
                        Partition 1                                    Partition 1
                                      100K
                        Operating                                      Operating
                         system                                         system
                                      0
                            (a)                                            (b)

Figure 4-2. (a) Fixed memory partitions with separate input queues for each
        partition. (b) Fixed memory partitions with a single input queue.

partition is full, as is the case for partitions 1 and 3 in Fig. 4-2(a). Here small jobs
have to wait to get into memory, even though plenty of memory is free. An alter-
native organization is to maintain a single queue as in Fig. 4-2(b). Whenever a
partition becomes free, the job closest to the front of the queue that fits in it could
be loaded into the empty partition and run. Since it is undesirable to waste a large
partition on a small job, a different strategy is to search the whole input queue
whenever a partition becomes free and pick the largest job that fits. Note that the
latter algorithm discriminates against small jobs as being unworthy of having a
whole partition, whereas usually it is desirable to give the smallest jobs (often
interactive jobs) the best service, not the worst.
     One way out is to have at least one small partition around. Such a partition
will allow small jobs to run without having to allocate a large partition for them.
     Another approach is to have a rule stating that a job that is eligible to run may
not be skipped over more than k times. Each time it is skipped over, it gets one
point. When it has acquired k points, it may not be skipped again.
     This system, with fixed partitions set up by the operator in the morning and
not changed thereafter, was used by OS/360 on large IBM mainframes for many
years. It was called MFT (Multiprogramming with a Fixed number of Tasks or
OS/MFT). it is simple to understand and equally simple to implement: incoming
jobs are queued until a suitable partition is available, at which time the job is
loaded into that partition and run until it terminates. However, nowadays, few, if
any, operating systems, support this model, even on mainframe batch systems.
SEC. 4.1                 BASIC MEMORY MANAGEMENT                                   377

4.1.3 Relocation and Protection

     Multiprogramming introduces two essential problems that must be solved—
relocation and protection. Look at Fig. 4-2. From the figure it is clear that dif-
ferent jobs will be run at different addresses. When a program is linked (i.e., the
main program, user-written procedures, and library procedures are combined into
a single address space), the linker must know at what address the program will
begin in memory.
     For example, suppose that the first instruction is a call to a procedure at abso-
lute address 100 within the binary file produced by the linker. If this program is
loaded in partition 1 (at address 100K), that instruction will jump to absolute
address 100, which is inside the operating system. What is needed is a call to
100K + 100. If the program is loaded into partition 2, it must be carried out as a
call to 200K + 100, and so on. This problem is known as the relocation problem.
     One possible solution is to actually modify the instructions as the program is
loaded into memory. Programs loaded into partition 1 have 100K added to each
address, programs loaded into partition 2 have 200K added to addresses, and so
forth. To perform relocation during loading like this, the linker must include in
the binary program a list or bitmap telling which program words are addresses to
be relocated and which are opcodes, constants, or other items that must not be
relocated. OS/MFT worked this way.
     Relocation during loading does not solve the protection problem. A malicious
program can always construct a new instruction and jump to it. Because programs
in this system use absolute memory addresses rather than addresses relative to a
register, there is no way to stop a program from building an instruction that reads
or writes any word in memory. In multiuser systems, it is highly undesirable to let
processes read and write memory belonging to other users.
     The solution that IBM chose for protecting the 360 was to divide memory into
blocks of 2-KB bytes and assign a 4-bit protection code to each block. The PSW
(Program Status Word) contained a 4-bit key. The 360 hardware trapped any
attempt by a running process to access memory whose protection code differed
from the PSW key. Since only the operating system could change the protection
codes and key, user processes were prevented from interfering with one another
and with the operating system itself.
     An alternative solution to both the relocation and protection problems is to
equip the machine with two special hardware registers, called the base and limit
registers. When a process is scheduled, the base register is loaded with the ad-
dress of the start of its partition, and the limit register is loaded with the length of
the partition. Every memory address generated automatically has the base register
contents added to it before being sent to memory. Thus if the base register con-
tains the value 100K, a CALL 100 instruction is effectively turned into a CALL
100K + 100 instruction, without the instruction itself being modified. Addresses
are also checked against the limit register to make sure that they do not attempt to

address memory outside the current partition. The hardware protects the base and
limit registers to prevent user programs from modifying them.
     A disadvantage of this scheme is the need to perform an addition and a com-
parison on every memory reference. Comparisons can be done fast, but additions
are slow due to carry propagation time unless special addition circuits are used.
     The CDC 6600—the world’s first supercomputer—used this scheme. The
Intel 8088 CPU used for the original IBM PC used a slightly weaker version of
this scheme—base registers, but no limit registers. Few computers use it now.

4.2 SWAPPING
     With a batch system, organizing memory into fixed partitions is simple and
effective. Each job is loaded into a partition when it gets to the head of the queue.
It stays in memory until it has finished. As long as enough jobs can be kept in
memory to keep the CPU busy all the time, there is no reason to use anything
more complicated.
     With timesharing systems or graphics-oriented personal computers, the situa-
tion is different. Sometimes there is not enough main memory to hold all the cur-
rently active processes, so excess processes must be kept on disk and brought in to
run dynamically.
     Two general approaches to memory management can be used, depending (in
part) on the available hardware. The simplest strategy, called swapping, consists
of bringing in each process in its entirety, running it for a while, then putting it
back on the disk. The other strategy, called virtual memory, allows programs to
run even when they are only partially in main memory. Below we will study
swapping; in Sec. 4.3 we will examine virtual memory.
     The operation of a swapping system is illustrated in Fig. 4-3. Initially, only
process A is in memory. Then processes B and C are created or swapped in from
disk. In Fig. 4-3(d) A is swapped out to disk. Then D comes in and B goes out.
Finally A comes in again. Since A is now at a different location, addresses con-
tained in it must be relocated, either by software when it is swapped in or (more
likely) by hardware during program execution.
     The main difference between the fixed partitions of Fig. 4-2 and the variable
partitions of Fig. 4-3 is that the number, location, and size of the partitions vary
dynamically in the latter as processes come and go, whereas they are fixed in the
former. The flexibility of not being tied to a fixed number of partitions that may
be too large or too small improves memory utilization, but it also complicates
allocating and deallocating memory, as well as keeping track of it.
     When swapping creates multiple holes in memory, it is possible to combine
them all into one big one by moving all the processes downward as far as possi-
ble. This technique is known as memory compaction. It is usually not done
because it requires a lot of CPU time. For example, on a 1-GB machine that can
 SEC. 4.2                                SWAPPING                                      379

     
     
      
                                          Time

    
   
                                 C            C            C            C            C
   

   
                    B            B            B            B
                                                                                     A

     A              A            A
                                                           D            D            D
  Operating
   system
     (a)
                Operating
                 system
                   (b)
                             Operating
                              system
                                (c)
                                          Operating
                                           system
                                             (d)
                                                       Operating
                                                        system
                                                          (e)
                                                                    Operating
                                                                     system
                                                                       (f)
                                                                                 Operating
                                                                                  system
                                                                                     (g)

Figure 4-3. Memory allocation changes as processes come into memory and
           leave it. The shaded regions are unused memory.

 copy at a rate of 2 GB/sec (0.5 nsec/byte) it takes about 0.5 sec to compact all of
 memory. That may not seem like much time, but it would be noticeably disrup-
 tive to a user watching a video stream.
      A point that is worth making concerns how much memory should be allocated
 for a process when it is created or swapped in. If processes are created with a
 fixed size that never changes, then the allocation is simple: the operating system
 allocates exactly what is needed, no more and no less.
      If, however, processes’ data segments can grow, for example, by dynamically
 allocating memory from a heap, as in many programming languages, a problem
 occurs whenever a process tries to grow. If a hole is adjacent to the process, it
 can be allocated and the process can be allowed to grow into the hole. On the
 other hand, if the process is adjacent to another process, the growing process will
 either have to be moved to a hole in memory large enough for it, or one or more
 processes will have to be swapped out to create a large enough hole. If a process
 cannot grow in memory and the swap area on the disk is full, the process will
 have to wait or be killed.
      If it is expected that most processes will grow as they run, it is probably a
 good idea to allocate a little extra memory whenever a process is swapped in or
 moved, to reduce the overhead associated with moving or swapping processes that
 no longer fit in their allocated memory. However, when swapping processes to
 disk, only the memory actually in use should be swapped; it is wasteful to swap
 the extra memory as well. In Fig. 4-4(a) we see a memory configuration in which
 space for growth has been allocated to two processes.
      If processes can have two growing segments, for example, the data segment
 being used as a heap for variables that are dynamically allocated and released and

                                                     B-Stack
                          Room for growth
                                                                   Room for growth

                                                     B-Data
  
               B          Actually in use
                                                    B-Program

                                                     A-Stack

 
                          Room for growth
                                                                   Room for growth

                                                     A-Data
               A          Actually in use
                                                    A-Program

           Operating                                Operating
            system                                   system

              (a)                                      (b)

Figure 4-4. (a) Allocating space for a growing data segment. (b) Allocating
        space for a growing stack and a growing data segment.

a stack segment for the normal local variables and return addresses, an alternative
arrangement suggests itself, namely that of Fig. 4-4(b). In this figure we see that
each process illustrated has a stack at the top of its allocated memory that is grow-
ing downward, and a data segment just beyond the program text that is growing
upward. The memory between them can be used for either segment. If it runs
out, either the process will have to be moved to a hole with sufficient space,
swapped out of memory until a large enough hole can be created, or killed.

4.2.1 Memory Management with Bitmaps

    When memory is assigned dynamically, the operating system must manage it.
In general terms, there are two ways to keep track of memory usage: bitmaps and
free lists. In this section and the next one we will look at these two methods in
turn.
    With a bitmap, memory is divided up into allocation units, perhaps as small as
a few words and perhaps as large as several kilobytes. Corresponding to each
allocation unit is a bit in the bitmap, which is 0 if the unit is free and 1 if it is
occupied (or vice versa). Figure 4-5 shows part of memory and the corresponding
bitmap.
    The size of the allocation unit is an important design issue. The smaller the
allocation unit, the larger the bitmap. However, even with an allocation unit as
small as 4 bytes, 32 bits of memory will require only 1 bit of the map. A memory
SEC. 4.2                                 SWAPPING                                         381
  
  
  
     A                       B          C                    D             E
                     8                   16                       24

 
                                              (a)

 11111000                P   0   5          H       5   3         P    8   6    P 14 4
 11111111
 11001111
                         H 18 2             P 20 6                P 26 3        H 29 3    X
 11111000

                  Hole Starts Length                         Process
                       at 18    2
      (b)                                                   (c)

Figure 4-5. (a) A part of memory with five processes and three holes. The tick
         marks show the memory allocation units. The shaded regions (0 in the bitmap)
         are free. (b) The corresponding bitmap. (c) The same information as a list.

of 32n bits will use n map bits, so the bitmap will take up only 1/33 of memory. If
the allocation unit is chosen large, the bitmap will be smaller, but appreciable
memory may be wasted in the last unit of the process if the process size is not an
exact multiple of the allocation unit.
     A bitmap provides a simple way to keep track of memory words in a fixed
amount of memory because the size of the bitmap depends only on the size of
memory and the size of the allocation unit. The main problem with it is that when
it has been decided to bring a k unit process into memory, the memory manager
must search the bitmap to find a run of k consecutive 0 bits in the map. Searching
a bitmap for a run of a given length is a slow operation (because the run may
straddle word boundaries in the map); this is an argument against bitmaps.

4.2.2 Memory Management with Linked Lists

     Another way of keeping track of memory is to maintain a linked list of allo-
cated and free memory segments, where a segment is either a process or a hole
between two processes. The memory of Fig. 4-5(a) is represented in Fig. 4-5(c)
as a linked list of segments. Each entry in the list specifies a hole (H) or process
(P), the address at which it starts, the length, and a pointer to the next entry.
     In this example, the segment list is kept sorted by address. Sorting this way
has the advantage that when a process terminates or is swapped out, updating the
list is straightforward. A terminating process normally has two neighbors (except
when it is at the very top or very bottom of memory). These may be either proc-
esses or holes, leading to the four combinations shown in Fig. 4-6. In Fig. 4-6(a)
updating the list requires replacing a P by an H. In Fig. 4-6(b) and also in Fig. 4-

6(c), two entries are coalesced into one, and the list becomes one entry shorter. In
Fig. 4-6(d), three entries are merged and two items are removed from the list.
Since the process table slot for the terminating process will normally point to the
list entry for the process itself, it may be more convenient to have the list as a
double-linked list, rather than the single-linked list of Fig. 4-5(c). This structure
makes it easier to find the previous entry and to see if a merge is possible.

    
     
                     Before X terminates                   After X terminates
               (a)    A      X      B       becomes         A             B

               (b)    A      X              becomes         A
    
   
               (c)           X      B       becomes                       B

               (d)           X              becomes

Figure 4-6. Four neighbor combinations for the terminating process, X.

     When the processes and holes are kept on a list sorted by address, several
algorithms can be used to allocate memory for a newly created process (or an
existing process being swapped in from disk). We assume that the memory mana-
ger knows how much memory to allocate. The simplest algorithm is first fit. The
process manager scans along the list of segments until it finds a hole that is big
enough. The hole is then broken up into two pieces, one for the process and one
for the unused memory, except in the statistically unlikely case of an exact fit.
First fit is a fast algorithm because it searches as little as possible.
     A minor variation of first fit is next fit. It works the same way as first fit,
except that it keeps track of where it is whenever it finds a suitable hole. The next
time it is called to find a hole, it starts searching the list from the place where it
left off last time, instead of always at the beginning, as first fit does. Simulations
by Bays (1977) show that next fit gives slightly worse performance than first fit.
     Another well-known algorithm is best fit. Best fit searches the entire list and
takes the smallest hole that is adequate. Rather than breaking up a big hole that
might be needed later, best fit tries to find a hole that is close to the actual size
needed.
     As an example of first fit and best fit, consider Fig. 4-5 again. If a block of
size 2 is needed, first fit will allocate the hole at 5, but best fit will allocate the
hole at 18.
     Best fit is slower than first fit because it must search the entire list every time
it is called. Somewhat surprisingly, it also results in more wasted memory than
first fit or next fit because it tends to fill up memory with tiny, useless holes. First
fit generates larger holes on the average.
     To get around the problem of breaking up nearly exact matches into a process
and a tiny hole, one could think about worst fit, that is, always take the largest
SEC. 4.2                              SWAPPING                                      383
available hole, so that the hole broken off will be big enough to be useful. Simu-
lation has shown that worst fit is not a very good idea either.
      All four algorithms can be speeded up by maintaining separate lists for
processes and holes. In this way, all of them devote their full energy to inspecting
holes, not processes. The inevitable price that is paid for this speedup on alloca-
tion is the additional complexity and slowdown when deallocating memory, since
a freed segment has to be removed from the process list and inserted into the hole
list.
      If distinct lists are maintained for processes and holes, the hole list may be
kept sorted on size, to make best fit faster. When best fit searches a list of holes
from smallest to largest, as soon as it finds a hole that fits, it knows that the hole is
the smallest one that will do the job, hence the best fit. No further searching is
needed, as it is with the single list scheme. With a hole list sorted by size, first fit
and best fit are equally fast, and next fit is pointless.
      When the holes are kept on separate lists from the processes, a small optimi-
zation is possible. Instead of having a separate set of data structures for maintain-
ing the hole list, as is done in Fig. 4-5(c), the holes themselves can be used. The
first word of each hole could be the hole size, and the second word a pointer to the
following entry. The nodes of the list of Fig. 4-5(c), which require three words
and one bit (P/H), are no longer needed.
      Yet another allocation algorithm is quick fit, which maintains separate lists
for some of the more common sizes requested. For example, it might have a table
with n entries, in which the first entry is a pointer to the head of a list of 4-KB
holes, the second entry is a pointer to a list of 8-KB holes, the third entry a pointer
to 12-KB holes, and so on. Holes of say, 21 KB, could either be put on the 20-KB
list or on a special list of odd-sized holes. With quick fit, finding a hole of the
required size is extremely fast, but it has the same disadvantage as all schemes
that sort by hole size, namely, when a process terminates or is swapped out, find-
ing its neighbors to see if a merge is possible is expensive. If merging is not done,
memory will quickly fragment into a large number of small holes into which no
processes fit.

4.3 VIRTUAL MEMORY
     Many years ago people were first confronted with programs that were too big
to fit in the available memory. The solution usually adopted was to split the pro-
gram into pieces, called overlays. Overlay 0 would start running first. When it
was done, it would call another overlay. Some overlay systems were highly com-
plex, allowing multiple overlays in memory at once. The overlays were kept on
the disk and swapped in and out of memory by the operating system, dynamically,
as needed.
     Although the actual work of swapping overlays in and out was done by the sys-
tem, the decision of how to split the program into pieces had to be done by the

programmer. Splitting up large programs into small, modular pieces was time
consuming and boring. It did not take long before someone thought of a way to
turn the whole job over to the computer.
     The method that was devised has come to be known as virtual memory
(Fotheringham, 1961). The basic idea behind virtual memory is that the combined
size of the program, data, and stack may exceed the amount of physical memory
available for it. The operating system keeps those parts of the program currently
in use in main memory, and the rest on the disk. For example, a 512-MB program
can run on a 256-MB machine by carefully choosing which 256 MB to keep in
memory at each instant, with pieces of the program being swapped between disk
and memory as needed.
     Virtual memory can also work in a multiprogramming system, with bits and
pieces of many programs in memory at once. While a program is waiting for part
of itself to be brought in, it is waiting for I/O and cannot run, so the CPU can be
given to another process, the same way as in any other multiprogramming system.

4.3.1 Paging

   Most virtual memory systems use a technique called paging, which we will
now describe. On any computer, there exists a set of memory addresses that pro-
grams can produce. When a program uses an instruction like
    MOV REG,1000

it does this to copy the contents of memory address 1000 to REG (or vice versa,
depending on the computer). Addresses can be generated using indexing, base
registers, segment registers, and other ways.

                                  The CPU sends virtual
                      CPU         addresses to the MMU
                     package

              CPU
                                 Memory                        Disk
                                management     Memory        controller
                                   unit

                                                                          Bus

                    The MMU sends physical
                    addresses to the memory

Figure 4-7. The position and function of the MMU. Here the MMU is shown
        as being a part of the CPU chip because it commonly is nowadays. However,
        logically it could be a separate chip and was in years gone by.
SEC. 4.3                          VIRTUAL MEMORY                                385
     These program-generated addresses are called virtual addresses and form the
virtual address space. On computers without virtual memory, the virtual address
is put directly onto the memory bus and causes the physical memory word with
the same address to be read or written. When virtual memory is used, the virtual
addresses do not go directly to the memory bus. Instead, they go to an MMU
(Memory Management Unit) that maps the virtual addresses onto the physical
memory addresses as illustrated in Fig. 4-7.
     A very simple example of how this mapping works is shown in Fig. 4-8. In
this example, we have a computer that can generate 16-bit addresses, from 0 up to
64K. These are the virtual addresses. This computer, however, has only 32 KB
of physical memory, so although 64-KB programs can be written, they cannot be
loaded into memory in their entirety and run. A complete copy of a program’s
memory image, up to 64 KB, must be present on the disk, however, so that pieces
can be brought in as needed.
     The virtual address space is divided up into units called pages. The corre-
sponding units in the physical memory are called page frames. The pages and
page frames are always the same size. In this example they are 4 KB, but page
sizes from 512 bytes to 1 MB have been used in real systems. With 64 KB of vir-
tual address space and 32 KB of physical memory, we get 16 virtual pages and 8
page frames. Transfers between RAM and disk are always in units of a page.
     When the program tries to access address 0, for example, using the instruction
    MOV REG,0

virtual address 0 is sent to the MMU. The MMU sees that this virtual address falls
in page 0 (0 to 4095), which according to its mapping is page frame 2 (8192 to
12287). It thus transforms the address to 8192 and outputs address 8192 onto the
bus. The memory knows nothing at all about the MMU and just sees a request for
reading or writing address 8192, which it honors. Thus, the MMU has effectively
mapped all virtual addresses between 0 and 4095 onto physical addresses 8192 to
12287.
    Similarly, an instruction
    MOV REG,8192

is effectively transformed into
    MOV REG,24576

because virtual address 8192 is in virtual page 2 and this page is mapped onto
physical page frame 6 (physical addresses 24576 to 28671). As a third example,
virtual address 20500 is 20 bytes from the start of virtual page 5 (virtual addresses
20480 to 24575) and maps onto physical address 12288 + 20 = 12308.
    By itself, this ability to map the 16 virtual pages onto any of the eight page
frames by setting the MMU’s map appropriately does not solve the problem that

                        Virtual
                       address
                         space
                      60K-64K      X
                      56K-60K      X      Virtual page
                      52K-56K      X
                      48K-52K      X
                      44K-48K      7
                      40K-44K      X
                                                         Physical
                      36K-40K      5                     memory
                      32K-36K      X                     address
                      28K-32K      X                     28K-32K
                      24K-28K      X                     24K-28K
                      20K-24K      3                     20K-24K
                      16K-20K      4                     16K-20K
                      12K-16K      0                     12K-16K
                        8K-12K     6                     8K-12K
                         4K-8K     1                     4K-8K
                         0K-4K     2                        0K-4K

                                                         Page frame

Figure 4-8. The relation between virtual addresses and physical memory ad-
        dresses is given by the page table.

the virtual address space is larger than the physical memory. Since we have only
eight physical page frames, only eight of the virtual pages in Fig. 4-8 are mapped
onto physical memory. The others, shown as crosses in the figure, are not map-
ped. In the actual hardware, a present/absent bit keeps track of which pages are
physically present in memory.
    What happens if the program tries to use an unmapped page, for example, by
using the instruction
    MOV REG,32780

which is byte 12 within virtual page 8 (starting at 32768)? The MMU notices that
the page is unmapped (indicated by a cross in the figure) and causes the CPU to
trap to the operating system. This trap is called a page fault. The operating sys-
tem picks a little-used page frame and writes its contents back to the disk. It then
fetches the page just referenced into the page frame just freed, changes the map,
and restarts the trapped instruction.
    For example, if the operating system decided to evict page frame 1, it would
load virtual page 8 at physical address 4K and make two changes to the MMU
map. First, it would mark virtual page 1’s entry as unmapped, to trap any future
accesses to virtual addresses between 4K and 8K. Then it would replace the cross
SEC. 4.3                            VIRTUAL MEMORY                                    387
in virtual page 8’s entry with a 1, so that when the trapped instruction is re-
executed, it will map virtual address 32780 onto physical address 4108.
    Now let us look inside the MMU to see how it works and why we have
chosen to use a page size that is a power of 2. In Fig. 4-9 we see an example of a
virtual address, 8196 (0010000000000100 in binary), being mapped using the
MMU map of Fig. 4-8. The incoming 16-bit virtual address is split into a 4-bit
page number and a 12-bit offset. With 4 bits for the page number, we can have 16
pages, and with 12 bits for the offset, we can address all 4096 bytes within a page.

                                                                           Outgoing
                      1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0                        physical
                                                                           address
                                                                           (24580)

                       15    000     0
                       14    000     0
                       13    000     0
                       12    000     0
                       11    111     1
                       10    000     0
                        9    101     1
                                                         12-bit offset
            Page        8    000     0
                                                         copied directly
            table       7    000     0                   from input
                        6    000     0                   to output
                        5    011     1
                        4    100     1
                        3    000     1
                        2    110     1        110
                        1    001     1
                                            Present/
                        0    010     1
                                            absent bit
                        Virtual page = 2 is used
                        as an index into the
                        page table                                         Incoming
                                                                           virtual
                                                                           address
                    0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0
                                                                           (8196)

Figure 4-9. The internal operation of the MMU with 16 4-KB pages.

     The page number is used as an index into the page table, yielding the number
of the page frame corresponding to that virtual page. If the present/absent bit is 0,
a trap to the operating system is caused. If the bit is 1, the page frame number
found in the page table is copied to the high-order 3 bits of the output register,
along with the 12-bit offset, which is copied unmodified from the incoming virtual
address. Together they form a 15-bit physical address. The output register is then
put onto the memory bus as the physical memory address.

4.3.2 Page Tables

     In the simplest case, the mapping of virtual addresses onto physical addresses
is as we have just described it. The virtual address is split into a virtual page
number (high-order bits) and an offset (low-order bits). For example, with a 16-
bit address and a 4-KB page size, the upper 4 bits could specify one of the 16 vir-
tual pages and the lower 12 bits would then specify the byte offset (0 to 4095)
within the selected page. However a split with 3 or 5 or some other number of
bits for the page is also possible. Different splits imply different page sizes.
     The virtual page number is used as an index into the page table to find the
entry for that virtual page. From the page table entry, the page frame number (if
any) is found. The page frame number is attached to the high-order end of the
offset, replacing the virtual page number, to form a physical address that can be
sent to the memory.
     The purpose of the page table is to map virtual pages onto page frames.
Mathematically speaking, the page table is a function, with the virtual page
number as argument and the physical frame number as result. Using the result of
this function, the virtual page field in a virtual address can be replaced by a page
frame field, thus forming a physical memory address.
     Despite this simple description, two major issues must be faced:

      1. The page table can be extremely large.

      2. The mapping must be fast.

The first point follows from the fact that modern computers use virtual addresses
of at least 32 bits. With, say, a 4-KB page size, a 32-bit address space has 1 mil-
lion pages, and a 64-bit address space has more than you want to contemplate.
With 1 million pages in the virtual address space, the page table must have 1 mil-
lion entries. And remember that each process needs its own page table (because it
has its own virtual address space).
     The second point is a consequence of the fact that the virtual-to-physical map-
ping must be done on every memory reference. A typical instruction has an
instruction word, and often a memory operand as well. Consequently, it is neces-
sary to make one, two, or sometimes more page table references per instruction.
If an instruction takes, say, 1 nsec, the page table lookup must be done in under
250 psec to avoid becoming a major bottleneck.
     The need for large, fast page mapping is a significant constraint on the way
computers are built. Although the problem is most serious with top-of-the-line
machines that must be very fast, it is also an issue at the low end as well, where
cost and the price/performance ratio are critical In this section and the following
ones, we will look at page table design in detail and show a number of hardware
solutions that have been used in actual computers.
SEC. 4.3                        VIRTUAL MEMORY                                   389
     The simplest design (at least conceptually) is to have a single page table con-
sisting of an array of fast hardware registers, with one entry for each virtual page,
indexed by virtual page number, as shown in Fig. 4-9. When a process is started
up, the operating system loads the registers with the process’ page table, taken
from a copy kept in main memory. During process execution, no more memory
references are needed for the page table. The advantages of this method are that it
is straightforward and requires no memory references during mapping. A disad-
vantage is that it is potentially expensive (if the page table is large). Also, having
to load the full page table at every context switch hurts performance.
     At the other extreme, the page table can be entirely in main memory. All the
hardware needs then is a single register that points to the start of the page table.
This design allows the memory map to be changed at a context switch by reload-
ing one register. Of course, it has the disadvantage of requiring one or more
memory references to read page table entries during the execution of each instruc-
tion. For this reason, this approach is rarely used in its most pure form, but below
we will study some variations that have much better performance.

Multilevel Page Tables

     To get around the problem of having to store huge page tables in memory all
the time, many computers use a multilevel page table. A simple example is
shown in Fig. 4-10. In Fig. 4-10(a) we have a 32-bit virtual address that is parti-
tioned into a 10-bit PT1 field, a 10-bit PT2 field, and a 12-bit Offset field. Since
offsets are 12 bits, pages are 4 KB, and there are a total of 220 of them.
     The secret to the multilevel page table method is to avoid keeping all the page
tables in memory all the time. In particular, those that are not needed should not
be kept around. Suppose, for example, that a process needs 12 megabytes, the
bottom 4 megabytes of memory for program text, the next 4 megabytes for data,
and the top 4 megabytes for the stack. In between the top of the data and the bot-
tom of the stack is a gigantic hole that is not used.
     In Fig. 4-10(b) we see how the two-level page table works in this example.
On the left we have the top-level page table, with 1024 entries, corresponding to
the 10-bit PT1 field. When a virtual address is presented to the MMU, it first
extracts the PT1 field and uses this value as an index into the top-level page table.
Each of these 1024 entries represents 4M because the entire 4-gigabyte (i.e., 32-
bit) virtual address space has been chopped into chunks of 1024 bytes.
     The entry located by indexing into the top-level page table yields the address
or the page frame number of a second-level page table. Entry 0 of the top-level
page table points to the page table for the program text, entry 1 points to the page
table for the data, and entry 1023 points to the page table for the stack. The other
(shaded) entries are not used. The PT2 field is now used as an index into the
selected second-level page table to find the page frame number for the page itself.

                                                                     Second-level
                                                                     page tables

                                                                                            Page
                                                                                            table for
                                                                                            the top
                                                                                            4M of
                                                                                            memory

                                        Top-level
                                       page table
                             1023

                                6
Bits   10      10    12
                                5
       PT1     PT2 Offset       4
                                3
              (a)               2
                                1
                                0

                                                            1023

                                                                 6
                                                                 5
                                                                 4
                                                                 3                         To
                                                                                           pages
                                                                 2
                                                                 1
                                                                 0

                                                           (b)

Figure 4-10. (a) A 32-bit address with two page table fields. (b) Two-level
             page tables.

     As an example, consider the 32-bit virtual address 0x00403004 (4,206,596
decimal), which is 12,292 bytes into the data. This virtual address corresponds to
PT 1 = 1, PT 2 = 2, and Offset = 4. The MMU first uses PT1 to index into the
top-level page table and obtain entry 1, which corresponds to addresses 4M to 8M.
It then uses PT2 to index into the second-level page table just found and extract
entry 3, which corresponds to addresses 12,288 to 16,383 within its 4M chunk
(i.e., absolute addresses 4,206,592 to 4,210,687). This entry contains the page
frame number of the page containing virtual address 0x00403004. If that page is
 SEC. 4.3                             VIRTUAL MEMORY                              391
 not in memory, the present/absent bit in the page table entry will be zero, causing
 a page fault. If the page is in memory, the page frame number taken from the
 second-level page table is combined with the offset (4) to construct a physical
 address. This address is put on the bus and sent to memory.
     The interesting thing to note about Fig. 4-10 is that although the address space
 contains over a million pages, only four page tables are actually needed: the top-
 level table, the second-level tables for 0 to 4M, 4M to 8M, and the top 4M. The
 present/absent bits in 1021 entries of the top-level page table are set to 0, forcing
 a page fault if they are ever accessed. Should this occur, the operating system
 will notice that the process is trying to reference memory that it is not supposed to
 and will take appropriate action, such as sending it a signal or killing it. In this
 example we have chosen round numbers for the various sizes and have picked
 PT1 equal to PT2 but in actual practice other values are also possible, of course.
     The two-level page table system of Fig. 4-10 can be expanded to three, four,
 or more levels. Additional levels give more flexibility, but it is doubtful that the
 additional complexity is worth it beyond two levels.

 Structure of a Page Table Entry

     Let us now turn from the structure of the page tables in the large, to the details
 of a single page table entry. The exact layout of an entry is highly machine
 dependent, but the kind of information present is roughly the same from machine
 to machine. In Fig. 4-11 we give a sample page table entry. The size varies from
 computer to computer, but 32 bits is a common size. The most important field is
 the page frame number. After all, the goal of the page mapping is to locate this
 value. Next to it we have the present/absent bit. If this bit is 1, the entry is valid
 and can be used. If it is 0, the virtual page to which the entry belongs is not
 currently in memory. Accessing a page table entry with this bit set to 0 causes a
 page fault.
                Caching
                disabled   Modified      Present/absent
   

                                                          Page frame number

                     Referenced Protection
 

Figure 4-11. A typical page table entry.

     The protection bits tell what kinds of access are permitted. In the simplest
 form, this field contains 1 bit, with 0 for read/write and 1 for read only. A more
 sophisticated arrangement is having 3 independent bits, one bit each for individu-
 ally enabling reading, writing, and executing the page.

    The modified and referenced bits keep track of page usage. When a page is
written to, the hardware automatically sets the modified bit. This bit is used when
the operating system decides to reclaim a page frame. If the page in it has been
modified (i.e., is ‘‘dirty’’), it must be written back to the disk. If it has not been
modified (i.e., is ‘‘clean’’), it can just be abandoned, since the disk copy is still
valid. The bit is sometimes called the dirty bit, since it reflects the page’s state.
    The referenced bit is set whenever a page is referenced, either for reading or
writing. Its value is to help the operating system choose a page to evict when a
page fault occurs. Pages that are not being used are better candidates than pages
that are, and this bit plays an important role in several of the page replacement
algorithms that we will study later in this chapter.
    Finally, the last bit allows caching to be disabled for the page. This feature is
important for pages that map onto device registers rather than memory. If the
operating system is sitting in a tight loop waiting for some I/O device to respond
to a command it was just given, it is essential that the hardware keep fetching the
word from the device, and not use an old cached copy. With this bit, caching can
be turned off. Machines that have a separate I/O space and do not use memory
mapped I/O do not need this bit.
    Note that the disk address used to hold the page when it is not in memory is
not part of the page table. The reason is simple. The page table holds only that
information the hardware needs to translate a virtual address to a physical address.
Information the operating system needs to handle page faults is kept in software
tables inside the operating system. The hardware does not need it.

4.3.3 TLBs—Translation Lookaside Buffers

     In most paging schemes, the page tables are kept in memory, due to their
large size. Potentially, this design has an enormous impact on performance. Con-
sider, for example, an instruction that copies one register to another. In the ab-
sence of paging, this instruction makes only one memory reference, to fetch the
instruction. With paging, additional memory references will be needed to access
the page table. Since execution speed is generally limited by the rate the CPU can
get instructions and data out of the memory, having to make two page table refer-
ences per memory reference reduces performance by 2/3. Under these conditions,
no one would use it.
     Computer designers have known about this problem for years and have come
up with a solution. Their solution is based on the observation that most programs
tend to make a large number of references to a small number of pages, and not the
other way around. Thus only a small fraction of the page table entries are heavily
read; the rest are barely used at all. This is an example of locality of reference, a
concept we will come back to in a later section.
     The solution that has been devised is to equip computers with a small hard-
ware device for rapidly mapping virtual addresses to physical addresses without
SEC. 4.3                                                        VIRTUAL MEMORY                                                                                                     393
going through the page table. The device, called a TLB (Translation Lookaside
Buffer) or sometimes an associative memory, is illustrated in Fig. 4-12. It is
usually inside the MMU and consists of a small number of entries, eight in this
example, but rarely more than 64. Each entry contains information about one
page, including the virtual page number, a bit that is set when the page is modi-
fied, the protection code (read/write/execute permissions), and the physical page
frame in which the page is located. These fields have a one-to-one correspon-
dence with the fields in the page table. Another bit indicates whether the entry is
valid (i.e., in use) or not.

                                                                                    
               Valid ? Virtual page ? Modified ? Protection ? Page frame ?
                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                        
                              1      ?                        140   ?                        1   ? RW                     ?                        31   ?
                1                      ?                       20     ?                      0    ?                 R X     ?                      38     ?
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                         
                              1            ?                  130         ?                  1        ? RW                      ?                  29         ?
                                                                                                                                                                 
                              1                               129
                                                                            
                                                                                             1           ? RW                       ?              62             ?
                                                                             
                              1                  ?             19               ?            0            ? R X                       ?            50               ?
                                                                                                                                                                       
                              1                                21
                                                                                
                                                                                             0               ? R X                        ?        45                   ?
                         1                             ?      860                     ?      1                ? RW                          ?      14                     ?
                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                    
                              1                            ?? 861                         ?? 1                   ?? RW                          ?? 75                         ??

Figure 4-12. A TLB to speed up paging.

     An example that might generate the TLB of Fig. 4-12 is a process in a loop
that spans virtual pages 19, 20, and 21, so these TLB entries have protection codes
for reading and executing. The main data currently being used (say, an array
being processed) are on pages 129 and 130. Page 140 contains the indices used in
the array calculations. Finally, the stack is on pages 860 and 861.
     Let us now see how the TLB functions. When a virtual address is presented
to the MMU for translation, the hardware first checks to see if its virtual page
number is present in the TLB by comparing it to all the entries simultaneously
(i.e., in parallel). If a valid match is found and the access does not violate the pro-
tection bits, the page frame is taken directly from the TLB, without going to the
page table. If the virtual page number is present in the TLB but the instruction is
trying to write on a read-only page, a protection fault is generated, the same way
as it would be from the page table itself.
     The interesting case is what happens when the virtual page number is not in
the TLB. The MMU detects the miss and does an ordinary page table lookup. It
then evicts one of the entries from the TLB and replaces it with the page table
entry just looked up. Thus if that page is used again soon, the second time around
it will result in a hit rather than a miss. When an entry is purged from the TLB,

the modified bit is copied back into the page table entry in memory. The other
values are already there. When the TLB is loaded from the page table, all the
fields are taken from memory.

Software TLB Management

     Up until now, we have assumed that every machine with paged virtual mem-
ory has page tables recognized by the hardware, plus a TLB. In this design, TLB
management and handling TLB faults are done entirely by the MMU hardware.
Traps to the operating system occur only when a page is not in memory.
     In the past, this assumption was true. However, many modern RISC ma-
chines, including the SPARC, MIPS, HP PA, and PowerPC, do nearly all of this
page management in software. On these machines, the TLB entries are explicitly
loaded by the operating system. When a TLB miss occurs, instead of the MMU
just going to the page tables to find and fetch the needed page reference, it just
generates a TLB fault and tosses the problem into the lap of the operating system.
The system must find the page, remove an entry from the TLB, enter the new one,
and restart the instruction that faulted. And, of course, all of this must be done in
a handful of instructions because TLB misses occur much more frequently than
page faults.
     Surprisingly enough, if the TLB is reasonably large (say, 64 entries) to reduce
the miss rate, software management of the TLB turns out to be acceptably effi-
cient. The main gain here is a much simpler MMU, which frees up a considerable
amount of area on the CPU chip for caches and other features that can improve
performance. Software TLB management is discussed by Uhlig et al. (1994).
     Various strategies have been developed to improve performance on machines
that do TLB management in software. One approach attacks both reducing TLB
misses and reducing the cost of a TLB miss when it does occur (Bala et al., 1994).
To reduce TLB misses, sometimes the operating system can use its intuition to
figure out which pages are likely to be used next and to preload entries for them in
the TLB. For example, when a client process sends a message to a server process
on the same machine, it is very likely that the server will have to run soon.
Knowing this, while processing the trap to do the send, the system can also check
to see where the server’s code, data, and stack pages are and map them in before
they can cause TLB faults.
     The normal way to process a TLB miss, whether in hardware or in software,
is to go to the page table and perform the indexing operations to locate the page
referenced. The problem with doing this search in software is that the pages hold-
ing the page table may not be in the TLB, which will cause additional TLB faults
during the processing. These faults can be reduced by maintaining a large (e.g.,
4-KB or larger) software cache of TLB entries in a fixed location whose page is
always kept in the TLB. By first checking the software cache, the operating sys-
tem can substantially reduce the number of TLB misses.
SEC. 4.3                       VIRTUAL MEMORY                                  395

4.3.4 Inverted Page Tables

     Traditional page tables of the type described so far require one entry per vir-
tual page, since they are indexed by virtual page number. If the address space
consists of 232 bytes, with 4096 bytes per page, then over 1 million page table
entries are needed. As a bare minimum, the page table will have to be at least 4
megabytes. On large systems, this size is probably doable.
     However, as 64-bit computers become more common, the situation changes
drastically. If the address space is now 264 bytes, with 4-KB pages, we need a
page table with 252 entries. If each entry is 8 bytes, the table is over 30 million
gigabytes. Tying up 30 million gigabytes just for the page table is not doable, not
now and not for years to come, if ever. Consequently, a different solution is
needed for 64-bit paged virtual address spaces.
     One such solution is the inverted page table. In this design, there is one
entry per page frame in real memory, rather than one entry per page of virtual
address space. For example, with 64-bit virtual addresses, a 4-KB page, and 256
MB of RAM, an inverted page table only requires 65,536 entries. The entry keeps
track of which (process, virtual page) is located in the page frame.
     Although inverted page tables save vast amounts of space, at least when the
virtual address space is much larger than the physical memory, they have a seri-
ous downside: virtual-to-physical translation becomes much harder. When proc-
ess n references virtual page p, the hardware can no longer find the physical page
by using p as an index into the page table. Instead, it must search the entire
inverted page table for an entry (n, p). Furthermore, this search must be done on
every memory reference, not just on page faults. Searching a 64K table on every
memory reference is definitely not a good way to make your machine blindingly
fast.
     The way out of this dilemma is to use the TLB. If the TLB can hold all of the
heavily used pages, translation can happen just as fast as with regular page tables.
On a TLB miss, however, the inverted page table has to be searched in software.
One feasible way to accomplish this search is to have a hash table hashed on the
virtual address. All the virtual pages currently in memory that have the same hash
value are chained together, as shown in Fig. 4-13. If the hash table has as many
slots as the machine has physical pages, the average chain will be only one entry
long, greatly speeding up the mapping. Once the page frame number has been
found, the new (virtual, physical) pair is entered into the TLB and the faulting
instruction restarted.
     Inverted page tables are currently used on IBM, Sun, and Hewlett-Packard
workstations and will become more common as 64-bit machines become wide-
spread. Inverted page tables are essential on this machines. Other approaches to
handling large virtual memories can be found in Huck and Hays (1993), Talluri
and Hill (1994), and Talluri et al. (1995). Some hardware issues in implementa-
tion of virtual memory are discussed by Jacob and Mudge (1998).

     Traditional page
     table with an entry
     for each of the 252
     pages
252 -1

                                    256-MB physical
                                    memory has 216
                                    4-KB page frames             Hash table
                               216 -1                   216 -1

    0                             0                        0
                  Indexed                                Indexed
                  by virtual                           by hash on             Virtual   Page
                    page                               virtual page           page      frame

Figure 4-13. Comparison of a traditional page table with an inverted page table.

4.4 PAGE REPLACEMENT ALGORITHMS
    When a page fault occurs, the operating system has to choose a page to re-
move from memory to make room for the page that has to be brought in. If the
page to be removed has been modified while in memory, it must be rewritten to
the disk to bring the disk copy up to date. If, however, the page has not been
changed (e.g., it contains program text), the disk copy is already up to date, so no
rewrite is needed. The page to be read in just overwrites the page being evicted.
    While it would be possible to pick a random page to evict at each page fault,
system performance is much better if a page that is not heavily used is chosen. If
a heavily used page is removed, it will probably have to be brought back in
quickly, resulting in extra overhead. Much work has been done on the subject of
page replacement algorithms, both theoretical and experimental. Below we will
describe some of the most important algorithms.
    It is worth noting that the problem of ‘‘page replacement’’ occurs in other
areas of computer design as well. For example, most computers have one or more
memory caches consisting of recently used 32-byte or 64-byte memory blocks.
When the cache is full, some block has to be chosen for removal. This problem is
precisely the same as page replacement except on a shorter time scale (it has to be
done in a few nanoseconds, not milliseconds as with page replacement). The rea-
son for the shorter time scale is that cache block misses are satisfied from main
memory, which has no seek time and no rotational latency.
    A second example is in a web browser. The browser keeps copies of previ-
ously accessed web pages in its cache on the disk. Usually, the maximum cache
size is fixed in advance, so the cache is likely to be full if the browser is used a
SEC. 4.4              PAGE REPLACEMENT ALGORITHMS                              397
lot. Whenever a web page is referenced, a check is made to see if a copy is in the
cache and if so, if the page on the web is newer. If the cached copy is up to date,
it is used; otherwise, a fresh copy is fetched from the Web. If the page is not in
the cache at all or a newer version is available, it is downloaded. If it is a newer
copy of a cached page it replaces the one in the cache. When the cache is full a
decision has to be made to evict some other page in the case of a new page or a
page that is larger than an older version. The considerations are similar to pages
of virtual memory, except for the fact that the Web pages are never modified in
the cache and thus are never written back to the web server. In a virtual memory
system, pages in main memory may be either clean or dirty.

4.4.1 The Optimal Page Replacement Algorithm

     The best possible page replacement algorithm is easy to describe but impossi-
ble to implement. It goes like this. At the moment that a page fault occurs, some
set of pages is in memory. One of these pages will be referenced on the very next
instruction (the page containing that instruction). Other pages may not be refer-
enced until 10, 100, or perhaps 1000 instructions later. Each page can be labeled
with the number of instructions that will be executed before that page is first
referenced.
     The optimal page algorithm simply says that the page with the highest label
should be removed. If one page will not be used for 8 million instructions and
another page will not be used for 6 million instructions, removing the former
pushes the page fault that will fetch it back as far into the future as possible.
Computers, like people, try to put off unpleasant events for as long as they can.
     The only problem with this algorithm is that it is unrealizable. At the time of
the page fault, the operating system has no way of knowing when each of the
pages will be referenced next. (We saw a similar situation earlier with the
shortest-job-first scheduling algorithm—how can the system tell which job is
shortest?) Still, by running a program on a simulator and keeping track of all page
references, it is possible to implement optimal page replacement on the second
run by using the page reference information collected during the first run.
     In this way it is possible to compare the performance of realizable algorithms
with the best possible one. If an operating system achieves a performance of, say,
only 1 percent worse than the optimal algorithm, effort spent in looking for a
better algorithm will yield at most a 1 percent improvement.
     To avoid any possible confusion, it should be made clear that this log of page
references refers only to the one program just measured and then with only one
specific input. The page replacement algorithm derived from it is thus specific to
that one program and input data. Although this method is useful for evaluating
page replacement algorithms, it is of no use in practical systems. Below we will
study algorithms that are useful on real systems.

4.4.2 The Not Recently Used Page Replacement Algorithm

     In order to allow the operating system to collect useful statistics about which
pages are being used and which ones are not, most computers with virtual mem-
ory have two status bits associated with each page. R is set whenever the page is
referenced (read or written). M is set when the page is written to (i.e., modified).
The bits are contained in each page table entry, as shown in Fig. 4-11. It is impor-
tant to realize that these bits must be updated on every memory reference, so it is
essential that they be set by the hardware. Once a bit has been set to 1, it stays 1
until the operating system resets it to 0 in software.
     If the hardware does not have these bits, they can be simulated as follows.
When a process is started up, all of its page table entries are marked as not in
memory. As soon as any page is referenced, a page fault will occur. The operat-
ing system then sets the R bit (in its internal tables), changes the page table entry
to point to the correct page, with mode READ ONLY, and restarts the instruction.
If the page is subsequently written on, another page fault will occur, allowing the
operating system to set the M bit as well and change the page’s mode to
READ/WRITE.
     The R and M bits can be used to build a simple paging algorithm as follows.
When a process is started up, both page bits for all its pages are set to 0 by the
operating system. Periodically (e.g., on each clock interrupt), the R bit is cleared,
to distinguish pages that have not been referenced recently from those that have
been.
     When a page fault occurs, the operating system inspects all the pages and
divides them into four categories based on the current values of their R and M
bits:

    Class 0: not referenced, not modified.
    Class 1: not referenced, modified.
    Class 2: referenced, not modified.
    Class 3: referenced, modified.

Although class 1 pages seem, at first glance, impossible, they occur when a class
3 page has its R bit cleared by a clock interrupt. Clock interrupts do not clear the
M bit because this information is needed to know whether the page has to be
rewritten to disk or not. Clearing R but not M leads to a class 1 page.
    The NRU (Not Recently Used) algorithm removes a page at random from the
lowest numbered nonempty class. Implicit in this algorithm is that it is better to
remove a modified page that has not been referenced in at least one clock tick
(typically 20 msec) than a clean page that is in heavy use. The main attraction of
NRU is that it is easy to understand, moderately efficient to implement, and gives
a performance that, while certainly not optimal, may be adequate.
SEC. 4.4               PAGE REPLACEMENT ALGORITHMS                                 399

4.4.3 The First-In, First-Out (FIFO) Page Replacement Algorithm
     Another low-overhead paging algorithm is the FIFO (First-In, First-Out)
algorithm. To illustrate how this works, consider a supermarket that has enough
shelves to display exactly k different products. One day, some company intro-
duces a new convenience food—instant, freeze-dried, organic yogurt that can be
reconstituted in a microwave oven. It is an immediate success, so our finite
supermarket has to get rid of one old product in order to stock it.
     One possibility is to find the product that the supermarket has been stocking
the longest (i.e., something it began selling 120 years ago) and get rid of it on the
grounds that no one is interested any more. In effect, the supermarket maintains a
linked list of all the products it currently sells in the order they were introduced.
The new one goes on the back of the list; the one at the front of the list is dropped.
     As a page replacement algorithm, the same idea is applicable. The operating
system maintains a list of all pages currently in memory, with the page at the head
of the list the oldest one and the page at the tail the most recent arrival. On a page
fault, the page at the head is removed and the new page added to the tail of the
list. When applied to stores, FIFO might remove mustache wax, but it might also
remove flour, salt, or butter. When applied to computers the same problem arises.
For this reason, FIFO in its pure form is rarely used.
4.4.4 The Second Chance Page Replacement Algorithm
     A simple modification to FIFO that avoids the problem of throwing out a
heavily used page is to inspect the R bit of the oldest page. If it is 0, the page is
both old and unused, so it is replaced immediately. If the R bit is 1, the bit is
cleared, the page is put onto the end of the list of pages, and its load time is
updated as though it had just arrived in memory. Then the search continues.
     The operation of this algorithm, called second chance, is shown in Fig. 4-14.
In Fig. 4-14(a) we see pages A through H kept on a linked list and sorted by the
time they arrived in memory.
     Suppose that a page fault occurs at time 20. The oldest page is A, which
arrived at time 0, when the process started. If A has the R bit cleared, it is evicted
from memory, either by being written to the disk (if it is dirty), or just abandoned
(if it is clean). On the other hand, if the R bit is set, A is put onto the end of the
list and its ‘‘load time’’ is reset to the current time (20). The R bit is also cleared.
The search for a suitable page continues with B.
     What second chance is doing is looking for an old page that has not been
referenced in the previous clock interval. If all the pages have been referenced,
second chance degenerates into pure FIFO. Specifically, imagine that all the
pages in Fig. 4-14(a) have their R bits set. One by one, the operating system
moves the pages to the end of the list, clearing the R bit each time it appends a
page to the end of the list. Eventually, it comes back to page A, which now has its
R bit cleared. At this point A is evicted. Thus the algorithm always terminates.

  Page loaded first
                                                                                   Most recently
                      0       3       7       8          12   14    15    18       loaded page
                      A       B       C       D          E    F     G      H

                                                   (a)

                                                                                   A is treated like a
                      3       7       8       12         14   15    18    20       newly loaded page
                      B       C       D       E          F    G     H      A

                                                   (b)

Figure 4-14. Operation of second chance. (a) Pages sorted in FIFO order. (b)
         Page list if a page fault occurs at time 20 and A has its R bit set. The numbers
         above the pages are their loading times.

4.4.5 The Clock Page Replacement Algorithm

     Although second chance is a reasonable algorithm, it is unnecessarily ineffi-
cient because it is constantly moving pages around on its list. A better approach
is to keep all the page frames on a circular list in the form of a clock, as shown in
Fig. 4-15. A hand points to the oldest page.

                                  A
                      L                   B

              K                                     C
                                                              When a page fault occurs,
                                                              the page the hand is
                                                              pointing to is inspected.
          J                                              D    The action taken depends
                                                              on the R bit:
                                                                R = 0: Evict the page
                                                                R = 1: Clear R and advance hand
              I                                     E

                      H                   F
                                  G

Figure 4-15. The clock page replacement algorithm.

     When a page fault occurs, the page being pointed to by the hand is inspected.
If its R bit is 0, the page is evicted, the new page is inserted into the clock in its
place, and the hand is advanced one position. If R is 1, it is cleared and the hand
is advanced to the next page. This process is repeated until a page is found with
R = 0. Not surprisingly, this algorithm is called clock. It differs from second
chance only in the implementation, not in the page selected.
SEC. 4.4              PAGE REPLACEMENT ALGORITHMS                              401

4.4.6 The Least Recently Used (LRU) Page Replacement Algorithm

     A good approximation to the optimal algorithm is based on the observation
that pages that have been heavily used in the last few instructions will probably be
heavily used again in the next few. Conversely, pages that have not been used for
ages will probably remain unused for a long time. This idea suggests a realizable
algorithm: when a page fault occurs, throw out the page that has been unused for
the longest time. This strategy is called LRU (Least Recently Used) paging.
     Although LRU is theoretically realizable, it is not cheap. To fully implement
LRU, it is necessary to maintain a linked list of all pages in memory, with the
most recently used page at the front and the least recently used page at the rear.
The difficulty is that the list must be updated on every memory reference. Find-
ing a page in the list, deleting it, and then moving it to the front is a very time-
consuming operation, even in hardware (assuming that such hardware could be
built).
     However, there are other ways to implement LRU with special hardware. Let
us consider the simplest way first. This method requires equipping the hardware
with a 64-bit counter, C, that is automatically incremented after each instruction.
Furthermore, each page table entry must also have a field large enough to contain
the counter. After each memory reference, the current value of C is stored in the
page table entry for the page just referenced. When a page fault occurs, the
operating system examines all the counters in the page table to find the lowest
one. That page is the least recently used.
     Now let us look at a second hardware LRU algorithm. For a machine with n
page frames, the LRU hardware can maintain a matrix of n × n bits, initially all
zero. Whenever page frame k is referenced, the hardware first sets all the bits of
row k to 1, then sets all the bits of column k to 0. At any instant, the row whose
binary value is lowest is the least recently used, the row whose value is next
lowest is next least recently used, and so forth. The workings of this algorithm
are given in Fig. 4-16 for four page frames and page references in the order
    0123210323
After page 0 is referenced, we have the situation of Fig. 4-16(a). After page 1 is
referenced, we have the situation of Fig. 4-16(b), and so forth.

4.4.7 Simulating LRU in Software

    Although both of the previous LRU algorithms are realizable in principle,
few, if any, machines have this hardware, so they are of little use to the operating
system designer who is making a system for a machine that does not have this
hardware. Instead, a solution that can be implemented in software is needed. One
possible software solution is called the NFU (Not Frequently Used) algorithm.

        Page                  Page                   Page                  Page                  Page
    0   1 2           3   0   1 2            3   0   1 2           3   0   1 2           3   0   1 2           3
0   0   1         1   1   0   0         1    1   0   0         0   1   0   0         0   0   0   0         0   0
1   0   0         0   0   1   0         1    1   1   0         0   1   1   0         0   0   1   0         0   0
2   0   0         0   0   0   0         0    0   1   1         0   1   1   1         0   0   1   1         0   1
3   0   0         0   0   0   0         0    0   0   0         0   0   1   1         1   0   1   1         0   0

            (a)                   (b)                    (c)                   (d)                   (e)

    0   0         0   0   0   1         1    1   0   1         1   0   0   1         0   0   0   1         0   0
    1   0         1   1   0   0         1    1   0   0         1   0   0   0         0   0   0   0         0   0
    1   0         0   1   0   0         0    1   0   0         0   0   1   1         0   1   1   1         0   0
    1   0         0   0   0   0         0    0   1   1         1   0   1   1         0   0   1   1         1   0

            (f)                   (g)                    (h)                   (i)                   (j)

Figure 4-16. LRU using a matrix when pages are referenced in the order 0, 1,
            2, 3, 2, 1, 0, 3, 2, 3.

It requires a software counter associated with each page, initially zero. At each
clock interrupt, the operating system scans all the pages in memory. For each
page, the R bit, which is 0 or 1, is added to the counter. In effect, the counters are
an attempt to keep track of how often each page has been referenced. When a
page fault occurs, the page with the lowest counter is chosen for replacement.
     The main problem with NFU is that it never forgets anything. For example,
in a multipass compiler, pages that were heavily used during pass 1 may still have
a high count well into later passes. In fact, if pass 1 happens to have the longest
execution time of all the passes, the pages containing the code for subsequent
passes may always have lower counts than the pass 1 pages. Thus the operating
system will remove useful pages instead of pages no longer in use.
     Fortunately, a small modification to NFU makes it able to simulate LRU quite
well. The modification has two parts. First, the counters are each shifted right 1
bit before the R bit is added in. Second, the R bit is added to the leftmost, rather
than the rightmost bit.
     Figure 4-17 illustrates how the modified algorithm, known as aging, works.
Suppose that after the first clock tick the R bits for pages 0 to 5 have the values 1,
0, 1, 0, 1, and 1, respectively (page 0 is 1, page 1 is 0, page 2 is 1, etc.). In other
words, between tick 0 and tick 1, pages 0, 2, 4, and 5 were referenced, setting
their R bits to 1, while the other ones remain 0. After the six corresponding
counters have been shifted and the R bit inserted at the left, they have the values
shown in Fig. 4-17(a). The four remaining columns show the values of the six
counters after the next four clock ticks, respectively.
SEC. 4.4                 PAGE REPLACEMENT ALGORITHMS                                           403

         R bits for          R bits for         R bits for          R bits for          R bits for
        pages 0-5,          pages 0-5,         pages 0-5,          pages 0-5,          pages 0-5,
        clock tick 0        clock tick 1       clock tick 2        clock tick 3        clock tick 4
       1 0 1 0 1 1       1 1 0 0 1 0         1 1 0 1 0 1         1 0 0 0 1 0         0 1 1 0 0 0

Page
   0    10000000            11000000            11100000            11110000               01111000

   1    00000000            10000000            11000000            01100000               10110000

   2    10000000            01000000            00100000            00100000               10001000

   3    00000000            00000000            10000000            01000000               00100000

   4    10000000            11000000            01100000            10110000               01011000

   5    10000000            01000000            10100000            01010000               00101000

            (a)                 (b)                (c)                 (d)                   (e)

Figure 4-17. The aging algorithm simulates LRU in software. Shown are six
         pages for five clock ticks. The five clock ticks are represented by (a) to (e).

     When a page fault occurs, the page whose counter is the lowest is removed. It
is clear that a page that has not been referenced for, say, four clock ticks will have
four leading zeros in its counter and thus will have a lower value than a counter
that has not been referenced for three clock ticks.
     This algorithm differs from LRU in two ways. Consider pages 3 and 5 in
Fig. 4-17(e). Neither has been referenced for two clock ticks; both were refer-
enced in the tick prior to that. According to LRU, if a page must be replaced, we
should choose one of these two. The trouble is, we do not know which of these
two was referenced last in the interval between tick 1 and tick 2. By recording
only one bit per time interval, we have lost the ability to distinguish references
early in the clock interval from those occurring later. All we can do is remove
page 3, because page 5 was also referenced two ticks earlier and page 3 was not
referenced then.
     The second difference between LRU and aging is that in aging the counters
have a finite number of bits, 8 bits in this example. Suppose that two pages each
have a counter value of 0. All we can do is pick one of them at random. In real-
ity, it may well be that one of the pages was last referenced 9 ticks ago and the
other was last referenced 1000 ticks ago. We have no way of seeing that. In
practice, however, 8 bits is generally enough if a clock tick is around 20 msec. If
a page has not been referenced in 160 msec, it probably is not that important.

4.5 DESIGN ISSUES FOR PAGING SYSTEMS
    In the previous sections we have explained how paging works and have given
a few of the basic page replacement algorithms and shown how to model them.
But knowing the bare mechanics is not enough. To design a system, you have to
know a lot more to make it work well. It is like the difference between knowing
how to move the rook, knight, and other pieces in chess, and being a good player.
In the following sections, we will look at other issues that operating system de-
signers must consider in order to get good performance from a paging system.

4.5.1 The Working Set Model
     In the purest form of paging, processes are started up with none of their pages
in memory. As soon as the CPU tries to fetch the first instruction, it gets a page
fault, causing the operating system to bring in the page containing the first instruc-
tion. Other page faults for global variables and the stack usually follow quickly.
After a while, the process has most of the pages it needs and settles down to run
with relatively few page faults. This strategy is called demand paging because
pages are loaded only on demand, not in advance.
     Of course, it is easy enough to write a test program that systematically reads
all the pages in a large address space, causing so many page faults that there is not
enough memory to hold them all. Fortunately, most processes do not work this
way. They exhibit a locality of reference, meaning that during any phase of exe-
cution, the process references only a relatively small fraction of its pages. Each
pass of a multipass compiler, for example, references only a fraction of the pages,
and a different fraction at that. The concept of locality of reference is widely
applicable in computer science, for a history see Denning (2005).
     The set of pages that a process is currently using is called its working set
(Denning, 1968a; Denning, 1980). If the entire working set is in memory, the
process will run without causing many faults until it moves into another execution
phase (e.g., the next pass of the compiler). If the available memory is too small to
hold the entire working set, the process will cause numerous page faults and run
slowly since executing an instruction takes a few nanoseconds and reading in a
page from the disk typically takes 10 milliseconds. At a rate of one or two in-
structions per 10 milliseconds, it will take ages to finish. A program causing page
faults every few instructions is said to be thrashing (Denning, 1968b).
     In a multiprogramming system, processes are frequently moved to disk (i.e.,
all their pages are removed from memory) to let other processes have a turn at the
CPU. The question arises of what to do when a process is brought back in again.
Technically, nothing need be done. The process will just cause page faults until
its working set has been loaded. The problem is that having 20, 100, or even 1000
page faults every time a process is loaded is slow, and it also wastes considerable
CPU time, since it takes the operating system a few milliseconds of CPU time to
process a page fault, not to mention a fair amount of disk I/O.
SEC. 4.5               DESIGN ISSUES FOR PAGING SYSTEMS                                     405
     Therefore, many paging systems try to keep track of each process’ working
set and make sure that it is in memory before letting the process run. This
approach is called the working set model (Denning, 1970). It is designed to
greatly reduce the page fault rate. Loading the pages before letting processes run
is also called prepaging. Note that the working set changes over time.
     It has long been known that most programs do not reference their address
space uniformly Instead the references tend to cluster on a small number of pages.
A memory reference may fetch an instruction, it may fetch data, or it may store
data. At any instant of time, t, there exists a set consisting of all the pages used by
the k most recent memory references. This set, w(k, t), is the working set.
Because a larger value of k means looking further into the past, the number of
pages counted as part of the working set cannot decrease as k is made larger. So
w(k, t) is a monotonically nondecreasing function of k. The limit of w(k, t) as k
becomes large is finite because a program cannot reference more pages than its
address space contains, and few programs will use every single page. Figure 4-18
depicts the size of the working set as a function of k.

      w(k,t)

                                           k

Figure 4-18. The working set is the set of pages used by the k most recent
        memory references. The function w(k, t) is the size of the working set at time t.

     The fact that most programs randomly access a small number of pages, but
that this set changes slowly in time explains the initial rapid rise of the curve and
then the slow rise for large k. For example, a program that is executing a loop
occupying two pages using data on four pages, may reference all six pages every
1000 instructions, but the most recent reference to some other page may be a mil-
lion instructions earlier, during the initialization phase. Due to this asymptotic
behavior, the contents of the working set is not sensitive to the value of k chosen.
To put it differently, there exists a wide range of k values for which the working
set is unchanged. Because the working set varies slowly with time, it is possible
to make a reasonable guess as to which pages will be needed when the program is
restarted on the basis of its working set when it was last stopped. Prepaging con-
sists of loading these pages before the process is allowed to run again.

    To implement the working set model, it is necessary for the operating system
to keep track of which pages are in the working set. One way to monitor this
information is to use the aging algorithm discussed above. Any page containing a
1 bit among the high order n bits of the counter is considered to be a member of
the working set. If a page has not been referenced in n consecutive clock ticks, it
is dropped from the working set. The parameter n has to be determined experi-
mentally for each system, but the system performance is usually not especially
sensitive to the exact value.
    Information about the working set can be used to improve the performance of
the clock algorithm. Normally, when the hand points to a page whose R bit is 0,
the page is evicted. The improvement is to check to see if that page is part of the
working set of the current process. If it is, the page is spared. This algorithm is
called wsclock.

4.5.2 Local versus Global Allocation Policies

     In the preceding sections we have discussed several algorithms for choosing a
page to replace when a fault occurs. A major issue associated with this choice
(which we have carefully swept under the rug until now) is how memory should
be allocated among the competing runnable processes.
     Take a look at Fig. 4-19(a). In this figure, three processes, A, B, and C, make
up the set of runnable processes. Suppose A gets a page fault. Should the page
replacement algorithm try to find the least recently used page considering only the
six pages currently allocated to A, or should it consider all the pages in memory?
If it looks only at A’s pages, the page with the lowest age value is A5, so we get
the situation of Fig. 4-19(b).
     On the other hand, if the page with the lowest age value is removed without
regard to whose page it is, page B3 will be chosen and we will get the situation of
Fig. 4-19(c). The algorithm of Fig. 4-19(b) is said to be a local page replacement
algorithm, whereas that of Fig. 4-19(c) is said to be a global algorithm. Local
algorithms effectively correspond to allocating every process a fixed fraction of
the memory. Global algorithms dynamically allocate page frames among the run-
nable processes. Thus the number of page frames assigned to each process varies
in time.
     In general, global algorithms work better, especially when the working set
size can vary over the lifetime of a process. If a local algorithm is used and the
working set grows, thrashing will result, even if there are plenty of free page
frames. If the working set shrinks, local algorithms waste memory. If a global
algorithm is used, the system must continually decide how many page frames to
assign to each process. One way is to monitor the working set size as indicated by
the aging bits, but this approach does not necessarily prevent thrashing. The
working set may change size in microseconds, whereas the aging bits are a crude
measure spread over a number of clock ticks.
SEC. 4.5              DESIGN ISSUES FOR PAGING SYSTEMS                                   407

                      Age
             A0       10                     A0                               A0
             A1       7                      A1                               A1
             A2       5                      A2                               A2
             A3       4                      A3                               A3
             A4       6                      A4                               A4
             A5       3                      A6                               A5
             B0       9                      B0                               B0
             B1       4                      B1                               B1
             B2       6                      B2                               B2
             B3       2                      B3                               A6
             B4       5                      B4                               B4
             B5       6                      B5                               B5
             B6       12                     B6                               B6
             C1       3                      C1                               C1
             C2       5                      C2                               C2
             C3       6                      C3                               C3
             (a)                             (b)                              (c)

Figure 4-19. Local versus global page replacement. (a) Original configuration.
        (b) Local page replacement. (c) Global page replacement.

     Another approach is to have an algorithm for allocating page frames to proc-
esses. One way is to periodically determine the number of running processes and
allocate each process an equal share. Thus with 12,416 available (i.e., nonoper-
ating system) page frames and 10 processes, each process gets 1241 frames. The
remaining 6 go into a pool to be used when page faults occur.
     Although this method seems fair, it makes little sense to give equal shares of
the memory to a 10-KB process and a 300-KB process. Instead, pages can be
allocated in proportion to each process’ total size, with a 300-KB process getting
30 times the allotment of a 10-KB process. It is probably wise to give each proc-
ess some minimum number, so it can run, no matter how small it is. On some
machines, for example, a single two-operand instruction may need as many as six
pages because the instruction itself, the source operand, and the destination
operand may all straddle page boundaries. With an allocation of only five pages,
programs containing such instructions cannot execute at all.
     If a global algorithm is used, it may be possible to start each process up with
some number of pages proportional to the process’ size, but the allocation has to
be updated dynamically as the processes run. One way to manage the allocation
is to use the PFF (Page Fault Frequency) algorithm. It tells when to increase or
decrease a process’ page allocation but says nothing about which page to replace
on a fault. It just controls the size of the allocation set.
     For a large class of page replacement algorithms, including LRU, it is known
that the fault rate decreases as more pages are assigned, as we discussed above.
This is the assumption behind PFF. This property is illustrated in Fig. 4-20.

                Page faults/sec
                                                                              A

                                                                              B

                                  Number of page frames assigned

Figure 4-20. Page fault rate as a function of the number of page frames assigned.

     Measuring the page fault rate is straightforward: just count the number of
faults per second, possibly taking a running mean over past seconds as well. One
easy way to do this is to add the present second’s value to the current running
mean and divide by two. The dashed line marked A corresponds to a page fault
rate that is unacceptably high, so the faulting process is given more page frames to
reduce the fault rate. The dashed line marked B corresponds to a page fault rate
so low that it can be concluded that the process has too much memory. In this
case, page frames may be taken away from it. Thus, PFF tries to keep the paging
rate for each process within acceptable bounds.
     If it discovers that there are so many processes in memory that it is not possi-
ble to keep all of them below A, then some process is removed from memory, and
its page frames are divided up among the remaining processes or put into a pool
of available pages that can be used on subsequent page faults. The decision to
remove a process from memory is a form of load control. It shows that even with
paging, swapping is still needed, only now swapping is used to reduce potential
demand for memory, rather than to reclaim blocks of it for immediate use. Swap-
ping processes out to relieve the load on memory is reminiscent of two-level
scheduling, in which some processes are put on disk and a short-term scheduler is
used to schedule the remaining processes. Clearly, the two ideas can be com-
bined, with just enough processes swapped out to make the page-fault rate accept-
able.

4.5.3 Page Size

    The page size is often a parameter that can be chosen by the operating system.
Even if the hardware has been designed with, for example, 512-byte pages, the
operating system can easily regard pages 0 and 1, 2 and 3, 4 and 5, and so on, as
1-KB pages by always allocating two consecutive 512-byte page frames for them.
    Determining the best page size requires balancing several competing factors.
As a result, there is no overall optimum. To start with, there are two factors that
SEC. 4.5             DESIGN ISSUES FOR PAGING SYSTEMS                           409
argue for a small page size. A randomly chosen text, data, or stack segment will
not fill an integral number of pages. On the average, half of the final page will be
empty. The extra space in that page is wasted. This wastage is called internal
fragmentation. With n segments in memory and a page size of p bytes, np /2
bytes will be wasted on internal fragmentation. This argues for a small page size.
     Another argument for a small page size becomes apparent if we think about a
program consisting of eight sequential phases of 4 KB each. With a 32-KB page
size, the program must be allocated 32 KB all the time. With a 16-KB page size,
it needs only 16 KB. With a page size of 4 KB or smaller, it requires only 4 KB
at any instant. In general, a large page size will cause more unused program to be
in memory than a small page size.
     On the other hand, small pages mean that programs will need many pages,
hence a large page table. A 32-KB program needs only four 8-KB pages, but 64
512-byte pages. Transfers to and from the disk are generally a page at a time,
with most of the time being for the seek and rotational delay, so that transferring a
small page takes almost as much time as transferring a large page. It might take
64 × 10 msec to load 64 512-byte pages, but only 4 × 10.1 msec to load four 8-KB
pages.
     On some machines, the page table must be loaded into hardware registers
every time the CPU switches from one process to another. On these machines
having a small page size means that the time required to load the page registers
gets longer as the page size gets smaller. Furthermore, the space occupied by the
page table increases as the page size decreases.
     This last point can be analyzed mathematically. Let the average process size
be s bytes and the page size be p bytes. Furthermore, assume that each page entry
requires e bytes. The approximate number of pages needed per process is then
s /p, occupying se /p bytes of page table space. The wasted memory in the last
page of the process due to internal fragmentation is p /2. Thus, the total overhead
due to the page table and the internal fragmentation loss is given by the sum of
these two terms:
                              overhead = se /p + p /2
    The first term (page table size) is large when the page size is small. The
second term (internal fragmentation) is large when the page size is large. The
optimum must lie somewhere in between. By taking the first derivative with
respect to p and equating it to zero, we get the equation
                                 −se /p 2 + 1/2 = 0

From this equation we can derive a formula that gives the optimum page size
(considering only memory wasted in fragmentation and page table size). The
result is:
                                     p = √???
                                          2se

For s = 1MB and e = 8 bytes per page table entry, the optimum page size is 4 KB.
Commercially available computers have used page sizes ranging from 512 bytes
to 1 MB. A typical value used to 1 KB, but nowadays 4 KB or 8 KB are more
common. As memories get larger, the page size tends to get larger as well (but
not linearly). Quadrupling the RAM size rarely even doubles the page size.

4.5.4 Virtual Memory Interface

    Up until now, our whole discussion has assumed that virtual memory is trans-
parent to processes and programmers. That is, all they see is a large virtual ad-
dress space on a computer with a small(er) physical memory. With many sys-
tems, that is true, but in some advanced systems, programmers have some control
over the memory map and can use it in nontraditional ways to enhance program
behavior. In this section, we will briefly look at a few of these.
    One reason for giving programmers control over their memory map is to al-
low two or more processes to share the same memory. If programmers can name
regions of their memory, it may be possible for one process to give another proc-
ess the name of a memory region so that process can also map it in. With two (or
more) processes sharing the same pages, high bandwidth sharing becomes pos-
sible: one process writes into the shared memory and another one reads from it.
    Sharing of pages can also be used to implement a high-performance mes-
sage-passing system. Normally, when messages are passed, the data are copied
from one address space to another, at considerable cost. If processes can control
their page map, a message can be passed by having the sending process unmap the
page(s) containing the message, and the receiving process mapping them in. Here
only the page names have to be copied, instead of all the data.
    Yet another advanced memory management technique is distributed shared
memory (Feeley et al., 1995; Li and Hudak, 1989; and Zekauskas et al., 1994).
The idea here is to allow multiple processes over a network to share a set of
pages, possibly, but not necessarily, as a single shared linear address space. When
a process references a page that is not currently mapped in, it gets a page fault.
The page fault handler, which may be in the kernel or in user space, then locates
the machine holding the page and sends it a message asking it to unmap the page
and send it over the network. When the page arrives, it is mapped in and the
faulting instruction is restarted.

4.6 SEGMENTATION

    The virtual memory discussed so far is one-dimensional because the virtual
addresses go from 0 to some maximum address, one address after another. For
many problems, having two or more separate virtual address spaces may be much
SEC. 4.6                              SEGMENTATION                                       411
better than having only one. For example, a compiler has many tables that are
built up as compilation proceeds, possibly including
      1. The source text being saved for the printed listing (on batch systems).
      2. The symbol table, containing the names and attributes of variables.
      3. The table containing all the integer and floating-point constants used.
      4. The parse tree, containing the syntactic analysis of the program.
      5. The stack used for procedure calls within the compiler.
Each of the first four tables grows continuously as compilation proceeds. The last
one grows and shrinks in unpredictable ways during compilation. In a one-
dimensional memory, these five tables would have to be allocated contiguous
chunks of virtual address space, as in Fig. 4-21.
                                   Virtual address space

                                        Call stack
                                                           Free
                Address space
                allocated to the                           Space currently being
                parse tree              Parse tree
                                                           used by the parse tree

                                      Constant table

                                     Source text
                                                           Symbol table has
                                      Symbol table         bumped into the
                                                           source text table

Figure 4-21. In a one-dimensional address space with growing tables, one table
        may bump into another.
    Consider what happens if a program has an exceptionally large number of
variables but a normal amount of everything else. The chunk of address space
allocated for the symbol table may fill up, but there may be lots of room in the
other tables. The compiler could, of course, simply issue a message saying that
the compilation cannot continue due to too many variables, but doing so does not
seem very sporting when unused space is left in the other tables.
    Another possibility is to play Robin Hood, taking space from the tables with
an excess of room and giving it to the tables with little room. This shuffling can
be done, but it is analogous to managing one’s own overlays—a nuisance at best
and a great deal of tedious, unrewarding work at worst.

     What is really needed is a way of freeing the programmer from having to
manage the expanding and contracting tables, in the same way that virtual mem-
ory eliminates the worry of organizing the program into overlays.
     A straightforward and extremely general solution is to provide the machine
with many completely independent address spaces, called segments. Each seg-
ment consists of a linear sequence of addresses, from 0 to some maximum. The
length of each segment may be anything from 0 to the maximum allowed. Dif-
ferent segments may, and usually do, have different lengths. Moreover, segment
lengths may change during execution. The length of a stack segment may be
increased whenever something is pushed onto the stack and decreased whenever
something is popped off the stack.
     Because each segment constitutes a separate address space, different seg-
ments can grow or shrink independently, without affecting each other. If a stack
in a certain segment needs more address space to grow, it can have it, because
there is nothing else in its address space to bump into. Of course, a segment can
fill up but segments are usually very large, so this occurrence is rare. To specify
an address in this segmented or two-dimensional memory, the program must sup-
ply a two-part address, a segment number, and an address within the segment.
Figure 4-22 illustrates a segmented memory being used for the compiler tables
discussed earlier. Five independent segments are shown here.
20K

16K                                                   16K

12K              12K                                  12K               12K
      Symbol
       table
 8K               8K                                   8K    Parse       8K
                                                              tree
                        Source                                                     Call
                         text                                                     stack
 4K               4K                                   4K                4K

                                         Constants
 0K               0K                0K                 0K                0K
      Segment          Segment            Segment           Segment           Segment
         0                1                  2                 3                 4

Figure 4-22. A segmented memory allows each table to grow or shrink in-
        dependently of the other tables.
    We emphasize that in its purest form, a segment is a logical entity, which the
programmer is aware of and uses as a logical entity. A segment might contain
one or more procedures, or an array, or a stack, or a collection of scalar variables,
but usually it does not contain a mixture of different types.
SEC. 4.6                        SEGMENTATION                                  413
     A segmented memory has other advantages besides simplifying the handling
of data structures that are growing or shrinking. If each procedure occupies a
separate segment, with address 0 as its starting address, the linking up of pro-
cedures compiled separately is greatly simplified. After all the procedures that
constitute a program have been compiled and linked up, a procedure call to the
procedure in segment n will use the two-part address (n, 0) to address word 0 (the
entry point).
     If the procedure in segment n is subsequently modified and recompiled, no
other procedures need be changed (because no starting addresses have been modi-
fied), even if the new version is larger than the old one. With a one-dimensional
memory, the procedures are packed tightly next to each other, with no address
space between them. Consequently, changing one procedure’s size can affect the
starting address of other, unrelated procedures. This, in turn, requires modifying
all procedures that call any of the moved procedures, in order to incorporate their
new starting addresses. If a program contains hundreds of procedures, this proc-
ess can be costly.
     Segmentation also facilitates sharing procedures or data between several
processes. A common example is the shared library. Modern workstations that
run advanced window systems often have extremely large graphical libraries com-
piled into nearly every program. In a segmented system, the graphical library can
be put in a segment and shared by multiple processes, eliminating the need for
having it in every process’ address space. While it is also possible to have shared
libraries in pure paging systems, it is much more complicated. In effect, these
systems do it by simulating segmentation.
     Because each segment forms a logical entity of which the programmer is
aware, such as a procedure, or an array, or a stack, different segments can have
different kinds of protection. A procedure segment can be specified as execute
only, prohibiting attempts to read from it or store into it. A floating-point array
can be specified as read/write but not execute, and attempts to jump to it will be
caught. Such protection is helpful in catching programming errors.
     You should try to understand why protection makes sense in a segmented
memory but not in a one-dimensional paged memory. In a segmented memory
the user is aware of what is in each segment. Normally, a segment would not con-
tain a procedure and a stack, for example, but one or the other. Since each seg-
ment contains only one type of object, the segment can have the protection
appropriate for that particular type. Paging and segmentation are compared in
Fig. 4-23.
     The contents of a page are, in a certain sense, accidental. The programmer is
unaware of the fact that paging is even occurring. Although putting a few bits in
each entry of the page table to specify the access allowed would be possible, to
utilize this feature the programmer would have to keep track of where in his ad-
dress space all the page boundaries were. However, that is precisely the sort of
complex administration that paging was invented to eliminate. Because the user

                  Consideration                     Paging           Segmentation

         Need the programmer be aware         No               Yes
         that this technique is being used?

         How many linear address              1                Many
         spaces are there?

         Can the total address space          Yes              Yes
         exceed the size of physical
         memory?

         Can procedures and data be           No               Yes
         distinguished and separately
         protected?

         Can tables whose size fluctuates     No               Yes
         be accommodated easily?
         Is sharing of procedures             No               Yes
         between users facilitated?

         Why was this technique               To get a large   To allow programs
         invented?                            linear address   and data to be broken
                                              space without    up into logically
                                              having to buy    independent address
                                              more physical    spaces and to aid
                                              memory           sharing and
                                                               protection

Figure 4-23. Comparison of paging and segmentation.

of a segmented memory has the illusion that all segments are in main memory all
the time—that is, he can address them as though they were—he can protect each
segment separately, without having to be concerned with the administration of
overlaying them.

4.6.1 Implementation of Pure Segmentation

     The implementation of segmentation differs from paging in an essential way:
pages are fixed size and segments are not. Figure 4-24(a) shows an example of
physical memory initially containing five segments. Now consider what happens
if segment 1 is evicted and segment 7, which is smaller, is put in its place. We
arrive at the memory configuration of Fig. 4-24(b). Between segment 7 and seg-
ment 2 is an unused area—that is, a hole. Then segment 4 is replaced by segment
5, as in Fig. 4-24(c), and segment 3 is replaced by segment 6, as in Fig. 4-24(d).
After the system has been running for a while, memory will be divided up into a
number of chunks, some containing segments and some containing holes. This
phenomenon, called checkerboarding or external fragmentation, wastes mem-
ory in the holes. It can be dealt with by compaction, as shown in Fig. 4-24(e).
SEC. 4.6                         SEGMENTATION                                         415

    
    
    
                                         (3K)              (3K)
   Segment 4         Segment 4
     (7K)              (7K)           Segment 5         Segment 5           (10K)
                                        (4K)              (4K)
                                                           (4K)
   Segment 3         Segment 3        Segment 3
                                                                          Segment 5
     (8K)              (8K)             (8K)            Segment 6           (4K)
                                                          (4K)
                                                                          Segment 6
   Segment 2         Segment 2        Segment 2         Segment 2           (4K)
     (5K)              (5K)
                        (3K)
                                        (5K)
                                         (3K)
                                                          (5K)
                                                           (3K)
                                                                          Segment 2
                                                                            (5K)
   Segment 1
     (8K)            Segment 7        Segment 7         Segment 7         Segment 7
                       (5K)             (5K)              (5K)              (5K)
   Segment 0         Segment 0        Segment 0         Segment 0         Segment 0
     (4K)              (4K)             (4K)              (4K)              (4K)
       (a)              (b)               (c)              (d)               (e)

Figure 4-24. (a)-(d) Development of checkerboarding. (e) Removal of the
        checkerboarding by compaction.

4.6.2 Segmentation with Paging: The Intel Pentium

    The Pentium supports up to 16K segments, each with up to 232 bytes of vir-
tual address space. The Pentium can be set up (by the operating system) to use
only segmentation, only paging, or both. Most operating systems, including Win-
dows XP and all flavors of UNIX, use the pure paging model, in which each proc-
ess has a single segment of 232 bytes. Since the Pentium is capable of providing
processes with a much larger address space, and one operating system (OS/2) did
actually use the full power of the addressing, we will describe how Pentium vir-
tual memory works in its full generality.
    The heart of the Pentium virtual memory consists of two tables, the LDT
(Local Descriptor Table) and the GDT (Global Descriptor Table). Each pro-
gram has its own LDT, but there is a single GDT, shared by all the programs on
the computer. The LDT describes segments local to each program, including its
code, data, stack, and so on, whereas the GDT describes system segments, includ-
ing the operating system itself.
    To access a segment, a Pentium program first loads a selector for that segment
into one of the machine’s six segment registers. During execution, the CS register
holds the selector for the code segment and the DS register holds the selector for
the data segment. The other segment registers are less important. Each selector is
a 16-bit number, as shown in Fig. 4-25.
    One of the selector bits tells whether the segment is local or global (i.e.,
whether it is in the LDT or GDT). Thirteen other bits specify the LDT or GDT
entry number; thus tables are each restricted to holding 8K segment descriptors.

                     Bits             13                 1    2

                                     Index

                                       0 = GDT/1 = LDT        Privilege level (0-3)

Figure 4-25. A Pentium selector.
The other 2 bits relate to protection, and will be described later. Descriptor 0 is
forbidden. It may be safely loaded into a segment register to indicate that the seg-
ment register is not currently available. It causes a trap if used.
    At the time a selector is loaded into a segment register, the corresponding
descriptor is fetched from the LDT or GDT and stored in microprogram registers,
so it can be accessed quickly. A descriptor consists of 8 bytes, including the
segment’s base address, size, and other information, as depicted in Fig. 4-26.

  0: 16-Bit segment                                                0: Segment is absent from memory
  1: 32-Bit segment                                                1: Segment is present in memory
                                                                   Privilege level (0-3)
    0: Li is in bytes                                              0: System
    1: Li is in pages                                              1: Application
   
                                                                   Segment type and protection

                                  Limit
      Base 24-31        G D 0                P DPL S    Type              Base 16-23   4
                                  16-19
 
                   Base 0-15                                 Limit 0-15                0

                                                                                       Relative
                                       32 Bits
                                                                                       address

Figure 4-26. Pentium code segment descriptor. Data segments differ slightly.

     The format of the selector has been cleverly chosen to make locating the
descriptor easy. First either the LDT or GDT is selected, based on selector bit 2.
Then the selector is copied to an internal scratch register, and the 3 low-order bits
set to 0. Finally, the address of either the LDT or GDT table is added to it, to give
a direct pointer to the descriptor. For example, selector 72 refers to entry 9 in the
GDT, which is located at address GDT + 72.
     Let us trace the steps by which a (selector, offset) pair is converted to a physi-
cal address. As soon as the microprogram knows which segment register is being
used, it can find the complete descriptor corresponding to that selector in its inter-
nal registers. If the segment does not exist (selector 0), or is currently paged out,
a trap occurs.
     It then checks to see if the offset is beyond the end of the segment, in which
case a trap also occurs. Logically, there should simply be a 32-bit field in the
SEC. 4.6                              SEGMENTATION                                       417
descriptor giving the size of the segment, but there are only 20 bits available, so a
different scheme is used. If the gbit (Granularity) field is 0, the limit field is the
exact segment size, up to 1 MB. If it is 1, the limit field gives the segment size in
pages instead of bytes. The Pentium page size is fixed at 4 KB, so 20 bits are
enough for segments up to 232 bytes.
     Assuming that the segment is in memory and the offset is in range, the Pen-
tium then adds the 32-bit base field in the descriptor to the offset to form what is
called a linear address, as shown in Fig. 4-27. The base field is broken up into
three pieces and spread all over the descriptor for compatibility with the 286, in
which the base is only 24 bits. In effect, the base field allows each segment to
start at an arbitrary place within the 32-bit linear address space.

                      Selector                                    Offset

                                        Descriptor
                                      Base address                  +
                                           Limit
                                       Other fields

                                                           32-Bit linear address

Figure 4-27. Conversion of a (selector, offset) pair to a linear address.

     If paging is disabled (by a bit in a global control register), the linear address is
interpreted as the physical address and sent to the memory for the read or write.
Thus with paging disabled, we have a pure segmentation scheme, with each
segment’s base address given in its descriptor. Segments are permitted to overlap,
incidentally, probably because it would be too much trouble and take too much
time to verify that they were all disjoint.
     On the other hand, if paging is enabled, the linear address is interpreted as a
virtual address and mapped onto the physical address using page tables, pretty
much as in our earlier examples. The only real complication is that with a 32-bit
virtual address and a 4-KB page, a segment might contain 1 million pages, so a
two-level mapping is used to reduce the page table size for small segments.
     Each running program has a page directory consisting of 1024 32-bit entries.
It is located at an address pointed to by a global register. Each entry in this direc-
tory points to a page table also containing 1024 32-bit entries. The page table
entries point to page frames. The scheme is shown in Fig. 4-28.
     In Fig. 4-28(a) we see a linear address divided into three fields, dir, page, and
offset. The dir field is used to index into the page directory to locate a pointer to
the proper page table. Then the page field is used as an index into the page table

                                              Linear address
      Bits              10                          10                               12

                        Dir                        Page                         Offset

                                                   (a)

             Page directory                        Page table                             Page frame

                                                                           Word
                                                                          selected

 1024
Entries
                                                                                Offset
       Dir
                                           Page

                      Directory entry                      Page table
                         points to                         entry points
                        page table                           to word
                                                   (b)

Figure 4-28. Mapping of a linear address onto a physical address.

to find the physical address of the page frame. Finally, offset is added to the
address of the page frame to get the physical address of the byte or word needed.
     The page table entries are 32 bits each, 20 of which contain a page frame
number. The remaining bits contain access and dirty bits, set by the hardware for
the benefit of the operating system, protection bits, and other utility bits.
     Each page table has entries for 1024 4-KB page frames, so a single page table
handles 4 megabytes of memory. A segment shorter than 4-MB will have a page
directory with a single entry, a pointer to its one and only page table. In this way,
the overhead for short segments is only two pages, instead of the million pages
that would be needed in a one-level page table.
     To avoid making repeated references to memory, the Pentium has a small
TLB that directly maps the most recently used dir−page combinations onto the
physical address of the page frame. Only when the current combination is not
present in the TLB is the mechanism of Fig. 4-28 actually carried out and the TLB
updated. As long as TLB misses are rare, performance is good.
     A little thought will reveal the fact that when paging is used, there is really no
point in having the base field in the descriptor be nonzero. All that base does is
cause a small offset to use an entry in the middle of the page directory, instead of
at the beginning. The real reason for including base at all is to allow pure (non-
paged) segmentation, and for compatibility with the 286, which always has paging
disabled (i.e., the 286 has only pure segmentation, but not paging).
SEC. 4.6                          SEGMENTATION                                   419
    It is also worth noting that if some application does not need segmentation but
is content with a single, paged, 32-bit address space, that model is possible. All
the segment registers can be set up with the same selector, whose descriptor has
base = 0 and limit set to the maximum. The instruction offset will then be the
linear address, with only a single address space used—in effect, normal paging.
In fact, all current operating systems for the Pentium work this way. OS/2 was the
only one that used the full power of the Intel MMU architecture.
    All in all, one has to give credit to the Pentium designers. Given the conflict-
ing goals of implementing pure paging, pure segmentation, and paged segments,
while at the same time being compatible with the 286, and doing all of this effi-
ciently, the resulting design is surprisingly simple and clean.
    Although we have covered the complete architecture of the Pentium virtual
memory, albeit briefly, it is worth saying a few words about protection, since this
subject is intimately related to the virtual memory. The Pentium supports four
protection levels with level 0 being the most privileged and level 3 the least.
These are shown in Fig. 4-29. At each instant, a running program is at a certain
level, indicated by a 2-bit field in its PSW. Each segment in the system also has a
level.
                                       rog
                                 User p rams              Typical uses of
                                                          the levels
                                   red libraries
                                Sha
                                    stem calls
                                  Sy

                                    Kernel

                                       0

                                       1

                                       2

                                       3

                                             Level

Figure 4-29. Protection on the Pentium.

     As long as a program restricts itself to using segments at its own level, every-
thing works fine. Attempts to access data at a higher level are permitted.
Attempts to access data at a lower level are illegal and cause traps. Attempts to
call procedures at a different level (higher or lower) are allowed, but in a carefully
controlled way. To make an interlevel call, the CALL instruction must contain a
selector instead of an address. This selector designates a descriptor called a call
gate, which gives the address of the procedure to be called. Thus it is not possible

to jump into the middle of an arbitrary code segment at a different level. Only
official entry points may be used.
     A typical use for this mechanism is suggested in Fig. 4-29. At level 0, we
find the kernel of the operating system, which handles I/O, memory management,
and other critical matters. At level 1, the system call handler is present. User pro-
grams may call procedures here to have system calls carried out, but only a
specific and protected list of procedures may be called. Level 2 contains library
procedures, possibly shared among many running programs. User programs may
call these procedures and read their data, but they may not modify them. Finally,
user programs run at level 3, which has the least protection.
     Traps and interrupts use a mechanism similar to the call gates. They, too,
reference descriptors, rather than absolute addresses, and these descriptors point
to specific procedures to be executed. The type field in Fig. 4-26 distinguishes
between code segments, data segments, and the various kinds of gates.

4.7 OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER
     Memory management in MINIX 3 is simple: paging is not used at all. MINIX 3
memory management as we will discuss it here does not include swapping either.
Swapping code is available in the complete source and could be activated to make
MINIX 3 work on a system with limited physical memory. In practice, memories
are so large now that swapping is rarely needed.
     In this chapter we will study a user-space server designated the process man-
ager, or PM for short. The process manager handles system calls relating to
process management. Of these some are intimately involved with memory man-
agement. The fork, exec, and brk calls are in this category. Process management
also includes processing system calls related to signals, setting and examining
process properties such as user and group ownership, and reporting CPU usage
times. The MINIX 3 process manager also handles setting and querying the real
time clock.
     Sometimes when we are referring to that part of the process manager that han-
dles memory management, we will refer to it as the ‘‘memory manager.’’ It is pos-
sible that in a future release, process management and memory management will
be completely separated, but in MINIX 3 the two functions are merged into one
process.
     The PM maintains a list of holes sorted in numerical memory address order.
When memory is needed, either due to a fork or an exec system call, the hole list
is searched using first fit for a hole that is big enough. Without swapping, a proc-
ess that has been placed in memory remains in exactly the same place during its
entire execution. It is never moved to another place in memory, nor does its allo-
cated memory area ever grow or shrink.
SEC. 4.7       OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                        421
    This strategy for managing memory is somewhat unusual and deserves some
explanation. It was originally derived from three factors:

     1. The desire to keep the system easy to understand.
     2. The architecture of the original IBM PC CPU (an Intel 8088),
     3. The goal of making MINIX 3 easy to port to other hardware,

     First, as a teaching system, avoiding complexity was highly desirable; a
source code listing of nearly 250 pages was deemed long enough. Second, the
system was designed for the original IBM PC, which did not even have an MMU,
so including paging was impossible to start with. Third, since other computers of
its era also lacked MMUs, this memory management strategy made porting to the
Macintosh, Atari, Amiga, and other machines easier.
     Of course, one can rightly ask if such a strategy still makes sense. The first
point is still valid, although the system has definitely grown over the years. How-
ever, several new factors also play a role now. Modern PCs have more than 1000
times as much memory available as the original IBM PC. While programs are
bigger, most systems have so much memory that swapping and paging are hardly
needed. Finally, MINIX 3 is targeted to some extent at low-end systems such as
embedded systems. Nowadays, digital cameras, DVD players, stereos, cell
phones, and other products have operating systems, but certainly do not support
swapping or paging. MINIX 3 is quite a reasonable choice in this world, so swap-
ping and paging are not a high priority. Nevertheless, some work is in progress to
see what can be done in the area of virtual memory in the simplest possible way.
The Web site should be consulted to follow current developments.
     It is also worth pointing out another way in which implementation of memory
management in MINIX 3 differs from that of many other operating systems. The
PM is not part of the kernel. Instead, it is a process that runs in user space and
communicates with the kernel by the standard message mechanism. The position
of the PM is shown in Fig. 2-29.
     Moving the PM out of the kernel is an example of the separation of policy and
mechanism. The decisions about which process will be placed where in memory
(policy) are made by the PM. The actual setting of memory maps for processes
(mechanism) is done by the system task within the kernel. This split makes it
relatively easy to change the memory management policy (algorithms, etc.)
without having to modify the lowest layers of the operating system.
     Most of the PM code is devoted to handling the MINIX 3 system calls that
involve creating processes, primarily fork and exec, rather than just manipulating
lists of processes and holes. In the next section we will look at the memory lay-
out, and in subsequent sections we will take a bird’s-eye view of how the process
management system calls are handled by the PM.

4.7.1 Memory Layout

     MINIX 3 programs may be compiled to use combined I and D space, in
which all parts of the process (text, data, and stack) share a block of memory
which is allocated and released as one block. This was the default for the original
version of MINIX. In MINIX 3, however, the default is to compile programs to use
separate I and D space. For clarity, allocation of memory for the simpler com-
bined model will be discussed first. Processes using separate I and D space can
use memory more efficiently, but taking advantage of this feature complicates
things. We will discuss the complications after the simple case has been outlined.
     In normal MINIX 3 operation memory is allocated on two occasions. First,
when a process forks, the amount of memory needed by the child is allocated.
Second, when a process changes its memory image via the exec system call, the
space occupied by the old image is returned to the free list as a hole, and memory
is allocated for the new image. The new image may be in a part of memory dif-
ferent from the released memory. Its location will depend upon where an ade-
quate hole is found. Memory is also released whenever a process terminates,
either by exiting or by being killed by a signal. There is a third case: a system
process can request memory for its own use; for instance, the memory driver can
request memory for the RAM disk. This can only happen during system initiali-
zation.
     Figure 4-30 shows memory allocation during a fork and an exec. In Fig. 4-
30(a) we see two processes, A and B, in memory. If A forks, we get the situation
of Fig. 4-30(b). The child is an exact copy of A. If the child now execs the file
C, the memory looks like Fig. 4-30(c). The child’s image is replaced by C.
            Upper
           memory
              limit
                                                                            C
                                               A’s child

                         B                        B                         B

                         A                        A                         A

                      MINIX 3                  MINIX 3                   MINIX 3
                 0
                        (a)                       (b)                       (c)

Figure 4-30. Memory allocation. (a) Originally. (b) After a fork. (c) After the
        child does an exec. The shaded regions are unused memory. The process is a
        common I&D one.

    Note that the old memory for the child is released before the new memory for
C is allocated, so that C can use the child’s memory. In this way, a series of fork
SEC. 4.7       OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                          423
and exec pairs (such as the shell setting up a pipeline) can result in all the
processes being adjacent, with no holes between them, assuming a large block of
unallocated memory exists. Holes would remain if the new memory had been
allocated before the old memory had been released.
     Doing it this way is not trivial. Consider the possible error condition that
there is not enough memory to perform an exec. A test for sufficient memory to
complete the operation should be performed before the child’s memory is
released, so the child can respond to the error somehow. This means the child’s
memory must be considered as if it were a hole while it is still in use.
     When memory is allocated, either by the fork or exec system calls, a certain
amount of it is taken for the new process. In the former case, the amount taken is
identical to what the parent process has. In the latter case, the PM takes the
amount specified in the header of the file executed. Once this allocation has been
made, under no conditions is the process ever allocated any more total memory.
     What has been said so far applies to programs that have been compiled with
combined I and D space. Programs with separate I and D space take advantage of
an enhanced mode of memory management called shared text. When such a
process does a fork, only the amount of memory needed for a copy of the new
process’ data and stack is allocated. Both the parent and the child share the exe-
cutable code already in use by the parent. When such a process does an exec, the
process table is searched to see if another process is already using the executable
code needed. If one is found, new memory is allocated only for the data and
stack, and the text already in memory is shared. Shared text complicates termina-
tion of a process. When a process terminates it always releases the memory occu-
pied by its data and stack. But it only releases the memory occupied by its text
segment after a search of the process table reveals that no other current process is
sharing that memory. Thus a process may be allocated more memory when it
starts than it releases when it terminates, if it loaded its own text when it started
but that text is being shared by one or more other processes when the first process
terminates.
     Figure 4-31 shows how a program is stored as a disk file and how this is trans-
ferred to the internal memory layout of a MINIX 3 process. The header on the disk
file contains information about the sizes of the different parts of the image, as
well as the total size. In the header of a program with common I and D space, a
field specifies the total size of the text and data parts; these parts are copied
directly to the memory image. The data part in the image is enlarged by the
amount specified in the bss field in the header. This area is cleared to contain all
zeroes and is used for uninitialized static data. The total amount of memory to be
allocated is specified by the total field in the header. If, for example, a program
has 4 KB of text, 2 KB of data plus bss, and 1 KB of stack, and the header says to
allocate 40 KB total, the gap of unused memory between the data segment and the
stack segment will be 33 KB. A program file on the disk may also contain a sym-
bol table. This is for use in debugging and is not copied into memory.

                                            Stack

  
  
                                                        Stack segment grows downward
                  Symbols       Total        Gap
                               memory                   Data segment grows upward
         Size      Data
                                use                     (or downward) when BRK
        of disk                           Data + bss
          file     Text                                 calls are made.

                  Header                     Text

                    (a)                      (b)

Figure 4-31. (a) A program as stored in a disk file. (b) Internal memory layout
        for a single process. In both parts of the figure the lowest disk or memory ad-
        dress is at the bottom and the highest address is at the top.

    If the programmer knows that the total memory needed for the combined
growth of the data and stack segments for the file a.out is at most 10 KB, he can
give the command
    chmem =10240 a.out
which changes the header field so that upon exec the PM allocates a space 10240
bytes more than the sum of the initial text and data segments. For the above
example, a total of 16 KB will be allocated on all subsequent execs of the file. Of
this amount, the topmost 1 KB will be used for the stack, and 9 KB will be in the
gap, where it can be used by growth of the stack, the data area, or both, as actually
needed.
     For a program using separate I and D space (indicated by a bit in the header
that is set by the linker), the total field in the header applies to the combined data
and stack space only. A program with 4 KB of text, 2 KB of data, 1 KB of stack,
and a total size of 64 KB will be allocated 68 KB (4 KB instruction space, 64 KB
stack and data space), leaving 61 KB for the data segment and stack to consume
during execution. The boundary of the data segment can be moved only by the
brk system call. All brk does is check to see if the new data segment bumps into
the current stack pointer, and if not, notes the change in some internal tables. This
is entirely internal to the memory originally allocated to the process; no additional
memory is allocated by the operating system. If the new data segment bumps into
the stack, the call fails.
     This is a good place to mention a possible semantic difficulty. When we use
the word ‘‘segment,’’ we refer to an area of memory defined by the operating sys-
tem. Intel processors have a set of internal segment registers and segment
descriptor tables which provide hardware support for ‘‘segments.’’ The Intel
hardware designers’ concept of a segment is similar to, but not always the same
as, the segments used and defined by MINIX 3. All references to segments in this
text should be interpreted as references to memory areas delineated by MINIX 3
SEC. 4.7       OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                          425
data structures. We will refer explicitly to ‘‘segment registers’’ or ‘‘segment
descriptors’’ when talking about the hardware.
    This warning can be generalized. Hardware designers often try to provide
support for the operating systems that they expect to be used on their machines,
and the terminology used to describe registers and other aspects of a processor’s
architecture usually reflects an idea of how the features will be used. Such
features are often useful to the implementer of an operating system, but they may
not be used in the same way the hardware designer foresaw. This can lead to
misunderstandings when the same word has different meanings when used to
describe an aspect of an operating system or of the underlying hardware.

4.7.2 Message Handling

     Like all the other components of MINIX 3, the process manager is message
driven. After the system has been initialized, PM enters its main loop, which con-
sists of waiting for a message, carrying out the request contained in the message,
and sending a reply.
     Two message categories may be received by the process manager. For high
priority communication between the kernel and system servers such as PM, a sys-
tem notification message is used. These are special cases to be discussed in the
implementation section of this chapter. The majority of messages received by the
process manager result from system calls originated by user processes. For this
category, Figure 4-32 gives the list of legal message types, input parameters, and
values sent back in the reply message.
     Fork, exit, wait, waitpid , brk, and exec are clearly closely related to memory
allocation and deallocation. The calls kill, alarm, and pause are all related to sig-
nals, as are sigaction, sigsuspend, sigpending, sigmask, and sigreturn . These also
can affect what is in memory, because when a signal kills a process the memory
used by that process is deallocated. The seven get/set calls have nothing to do
with memory management at all, but they certainly relate to process management.
Other calls could go either in the file system or the PM, since every system call is
handled by one or the other. They were put here simply because the file system
was large enough already. The time, stime, and times calls were put here for this
reason, as was ptrace, which is used in debugging.
     Reboot has effects throughout the operating system, but its first job is to send
signals to terminate all processes in a controlled way, so the PM is a good place
for it. The same is true of svrctl, whose most important use is to enable or disable
swapping in the PM.
     You may have noticed that the last two calls mentioned here, reboot and
svrctl, were not listed in Fig. 1-9. This also true of the remaining calls in Fig. 4-
32, getsysinfo, getprocnr , memalloc , memfree, and getsetpriority . None of these
are intended for use by ordinary user processes, and they are not parts of the
POSIX standard. They are provided because they are needed in a system like

MINIX 3. In a system with a monolithic kernel the operations provided by these
calls could be provided by calls to functions compiled into the kernel. But in
MINIX 3 components that are normally considered part of the operating system
run in user space, and additional system calls are needed. Some of these do little
more than implement an interface to a kernel call, a term we use for calls that
request kernel services via the system task.
     As mentioned in Chap. 1, although there is a library routine sbrk, there is no
system call sbrk. The library routine computes the amount of memory needed by
adding the increment or decrement specified as parameter to the current size and
makes a brk call to set the size. Similarly, there are no separate system calls for
geteuid and getegid. The calls getuid and getgid return both the effective and real
identifiers. In like manner, getpid returns the PID of both the calling process and
its parent.
     A key data structure used for message processing is the call ? vec table de-
clared in table.c. It contains pointers to the procedures that handle the various
message types. When a message comes in to the PM, the main loop extracts the
message type and puts it in the global variable call ? nr. This value is then used to
index into call ? vec to find the pointer to the procedure that handles the newly
arrived message. That procedure is then called to execute the system call. The
value that it returns is sent back to the caller in the reply message to report on the
success or failure of the call. The mechanism is similar to the table of pointers to
system call handlers used in step 7 of Fig. 1-16, only in user space rather than in
the kernel.

4.7.3 Process Manager Data Structures and Algorithms

    Two key data structures are used by the process manager: the process table
and the hole table. We will now look at each of these in turn.
    In Fig. 2-4 we saw that some process table fields are needed by the kernel,
others by the process manager, and yet others by the file system. In MINIX 3,
each of these three pieces of the operating system has its own process table, con-
taining just those fields that it needs. With a few exceptions, entries correspond
exactly, to keep things simple. Thus, slot k of the PM’s table refers to the same
process as slot k of the file system’s table. When a process is created or des-
troyed, all three parts update their tables to reflect the new situation, in order to
keep them synchronized.
    The exceptions are processes that are not known outside of the kernel, either
because they are compiled into the kernel, like the CLOCK and SYSTEM tasks, or
because they are place holders like IDLE, and KERNEL. In the kernel process
table their slots are designated by negative numbers. These slots do not exist in
the process manager or file system process tables. Thus, strictly speaking, what
was said above about slot k in the tables is true for k equal to or greater than zero.
SEC. 4.7                                                         OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                427

                                                                                 
                                                     type ?                                                                                                             ?                                                                                                ?
   Message                                ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
                                                             
                                                                                                                                                       Input parameters
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reply value
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
   fork                                                       ? (none)
                                                                                                                                                                              Child’s PID, (to child: 0) ?
                                                                 Exit status                                                                                                 ? (No reply if successful) ?
   exit                                   ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
   wait                                                           ? (none)
                                                                                                                                                                                  Status                                                                                       ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                   
                                          waitpid                    ?                                                                    Process  identifier and flags            ?                                                                   Status                      ?
   brk                                                                 ? New size
                                                                                                                                                                                       New size                                                                                      ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
   exec                                                                   ? Pointer to initial stack
                                                                                                                                                                                          (No reply if successful) ?
                                                                             Process identifier and signal                                                                               ? Status                                                                                        ?
   kill                                   ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
   alarm                                                                      ? Number of seconds to wait
                                                                                                                                                                                              Residual time                                                                                  ?
              pause                                                            ? (none)                                                                                                      ? (No reply if successful) ?
                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
   sigaction                                                                      ? Signal number, action, old action
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Status                                                                                         ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
   sigsuspend                                                                        ? Signal mask
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (No reply if successful) ?
                                                                                        (none)                                                                                                      ? Status                                                                                         ?
   sigpending                             ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
   sigprocmask                                                                           ? How, set, old set
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Status                                                                                          ?
                                                                                            Context                                                                                                     ? Status                                                                                           ?
   sigreturn                              ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
   getuid                                                                                    ? (none)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Uid, effective uid                                                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
   getgid                                                                                       ? (none)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Gid, effective gid                                                                                 ?
   getpid                                                                                        ? (none)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PID, parent PID                                                                                     ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
   setuid                                                                                           ? New uid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Status                                                                                               ?
                                                                                                       New gid                                                                                                     ? Status                                                                                                ?
   setgid                                 ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
   setsid                                                                                               ? New sid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Process group                                                                                          ?
                           getpgrp                                                                       ? New gid                                                                                                     ? Process group                                                                                           ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
   time                                                                                                     ? Pointer to place where current time goes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Status                                                                                                   ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
   stime                                                                                                       ? Pointer to current time
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Status                                                                                                    ?
   times                                                                                                        ? Pointer to buffer for process and child times ? Uptime since boot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
   ptrace                                                                                                          ? Request, PID, address, data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Status                                                                                                       ?
                                reboot                                                                              ? How (halt, reboot, or panic)                                                                               ? (No reply if successful) ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
   svrctl                                                                                                              ? Request, data (depends upon function)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Status                                                                                                       ?
                                 getsysinfo                                                                             ? Request, data (depends upon function)                                                                      ? Status                                                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
   getprocnr                              ???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ? (none)                                                                                                     ? Proc number                                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
   memalloc                               ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????    ? Size, pointer to address                                                                                   ? Status                                                                                                          ?
   memfree                                ???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?   ?          Size, address                                                                                     ?          Status
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                      getpriority
                                                                                                                                     Pid, type, value                                                                                           ? Priority (nice value)                                                                                          ?
                                       setpriority                                                                                  ? Pid, type, value                                                                                           ? Priority (nice value)                                                                                           ?
                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                          gettimeofday
                                                                                                                                          (none)                                                                                                    ?? Time, uptime                                                                                                    ??

Figure 4-32. The message types, input parameters, and reply values used for
                                  communicating with the PM.

Processes in Memory

     The PM’s process table is called mproc and its definition is given in
src/servers/pm/mproc.h. It contains all the fields related to a process’ memory
allocation, as well as some additional items. The most important field is the array
mp ? seg, which has three entries, for the text, data, and stack segments, respec-
tively. Each entry is a structure containing the virtual address, physical address,
and length of the segment, all measured in clicks rather than in bytes. The size of
a click is implementation dependent. In early MINIX versions it was 256 bytes.
For MINIX 3 it is 1024 bytes. All segments must start on a click boundary and
occupy an integral number of clicks.
     The method used for recording memory allocation is shown in Fig. 4-33. In
this figure we have a process with 3 KB of text, 4 KB of data, a gap of 1 KB, and
then a 2-KB stack, for a total memory allocation of 10 KB. In Fig. 4-33(b) we see
what the virtual, physical, and length fields for each of the three segments are,
assuming that the process does not have separate I and D space. In this model, the
text segment is always empty, and the data segment contains both text and data.
When a process references virtual address 0, either to jump to it or to read it (i.e.,
as instruction space or as data space), physical address 0x32000 (in decimal,
200K) will be used. This address is at click 0xc8.

                          Address (hex)                     Virtual Physical Length
                                                    Stack    0x8     0xd0     0x2

                          210K (0x34800)             Data      0     0xc8     0x7
                Stack
                                                     Text      0     0xc8        0
                          208K (0x34000)
                          207K (0x33c00)                              (b)

                 Data

                          203K (0x32c00)                    Virtual Physical Length

                 Text                               Stack    0x5     0xd0     0x2

                          200K (0x32000)             Data      0     0xcb     0x4

                                                     Text      0     0xc8     0x3

                  (a)                                                 (c)

Figure 4-33. (a) A process in memory. (b) Its memory representation for com-
        bined I and D space. (c) Its memory representation for separate I and D space.

    Note that the virtual address at which the stack begins depends initially on the
total amount of memory allocated to the process. If the chmem command were
SEC. 4.7        OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                            429
used to modify the file header to provide a larger dynamic allocation area (bigger
gap between data and stack segments), the next time the file was executed, the
stack would start at a higher virtual address. If the stack grows longer by one
click, the stack entry should change from the triple (0x8, 0xd0, 0x2) to the triple
(0x7, 0xcf, 0x3). Note that, in this example, growth of the stack by one click
would reduce the gap to nothing if there were no increase of the total memory
allocation.
     The 8088 hardware does not have a stack limit trap, and MINIX defined the
stack in a way that will not trigger the trap on 32-bit processors until the stack has
already overwritten the data segment. Thus, this change will not be made until
the next brk system call, at which point the operating system explicitly reads SP
and recomputes the segment entries. On a machine with a stack trap, the stack
segment’s entry could be updated as soon as the stack outgrew its segment. This
is not done by MINIX 3 on 32-bit Intel processors, for reasons we will now dis-
cuss.
     We mentioned previously that the efforts of hardware designers may not al-
ways produce exactly what the software designer needs. Even in protected mode
on a Pentium, MINIX 3 does not trap when the stack outgrows its segment.
Although in protected mode the Intel hardware detects attempted access to mem-
ory outside a segment (as defined by a segment descriptor such as the one in
Fig. 4-26), in MINIX 3 the data segment descriptor and the stack segment descrip-
tor are always identical. The MINIX 3 data and stack segments each use part of
this space, and thus either or both can expand into the gap between them. How-
ever, only MINIX 3 can manage this. The CPU has no way to detect errors involv-
ing the gap, since as far as the hardware is concerned the gap is a valid part of
both the data area and the stack area. Of course, the hardware can detect a very
large error, such as an attempt to access memory outside the combined data-gap-
stack area. This will protect one process from the mistakes of another process but
is not enough to protect a process from itself.
     A design decision was made here. We recognize an argument can be made
for abandoning the shared hardware-defined segment that allows MINIX 3 to
dynamically reallocate the gap area. The alternative, using the hardware to define
nonoverlapping stack and data segments, would offer somewhat more security
from certain errors but would make MINIX 3 more memory-hungry. The source
code is available to anybody who wants to evaluate the other approach.
     Fig. 4-33(c) shows the segment entries for the memory layout of Fig. 4-33(a)
for separate I and D space. Here both the text and data segments are nonzero in
length. The mp ? seg array shown in Fig. 4-33(b) or (c) is primarily used to map
virtual addresses onto physical memory addresses. Given a virtual address and
the space to which it belongs, it is a simple matter to see whether the virtual ad-
dress is legal or not (i.e., falls inside a segment), and if legal, what the correspond-
ing physical address is. The kernel procedure umap ? local performs this mapping
for the I/O tasks and for copying to and from user space, for example.

                                                     0x3dc00
                                           Stack
                                          (proc 2)
                                                     0x3d400
                                            Gap
                                                     0x3d000

                                            Data
                                          (proc 2)
                                                                             Virtual Physical Length
                                                     0x3c000
                                                                    Stack     0x5     0xf5      0x2

                                                     0x34800         Data       0     0xf0      0x4
                                           Stack
                                          (proc 1)                    Text      0     0xc8      0x3
        Virtual Physical Length                      0x34000
                                            Gap                                     Process 2
                                                     0x33c00
Stack    0x5     0xd0      0x2                                                         (c)
                                            Data
 Data      0     0xcb      0x4
                                          (proc 1)
 Text      0    0xc8       0x3
                                                     0x32c00
               Process 1                    Text
                  (a)                     (shared)
                                                     0x32000

                                             (b)

Figure 4-34. (a) The memory map of a separate I and D space process, as in the
          previous figure. (b) The layout in memory after a second process starts, execut-
          ing the same program image with shared text. (c) The memory map of the
          second process.

Shared Text

     The contents of the data and stack areas belonging to a process may change as
the process executes, but the text does not change. It is common for several
processes to be executing copies of the same program, for instance several users
may be executing the same shell. Memory efficiency is improved by using
shared text. When exec is about to load a process, it opens the file holding the
disk image of the program to be loaded and reads the file header. If the process
uses separate I and D space, a search of the mp ? dev, mp ? ino, and mp ? ctime
fields in each slot of mproc is made. These hold the device and i-node numbers
and changed-status times of the images being executed by other processes. If a
process in memory is found to be executing the same program that is about to be
loaded, there is no need to allocate memory for another copy of the text. Instead
SEC. 4.7        OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                                 431
the mp ? seg[T] portion of the new process’ memory map is initialized to point to
the same place where the text segment is already loaded, and only the data and
stack portions are set up in a new memory allocation. This is shown in Fig. 4-34.
If the program uses combined I and D space or no match is found, memory is allo-
cated as shown in Fig. 4-33 and the text and data for the new process are copied in
from the disk.
     In addition to the segment information, mproc also holds additional informa-
tion about the process. This includes the process ID (PID) of the process itself
and of its parent, the UIDs and GIDs (both real and effective), information about
signals, and the exit status, if the process has already terminated but its parent has
not yet done a wait for it. Also in mproc there are fields for a timer for sigalarm
and for accumulated user and system time use by child processes. The kernel was
responsible for these items in earlier versions of MINIX, but responsibility for
them has been shifted to the process manager in MINIX 3.

The Hole List

     The other major process manager data structure is the hole table, hole, de-
fined in src/servers/pm/alloc.c , which lists every hole in memory in order of in-
creasing memory address. The gaps between the data and stack segments are not
considered holes; they have already been allocated to processes. Consequently,
they are not contained in the free hole list. Each hole list entry has three fields:
the base address of the hole, in clicks; the length of the hole, in clicks; and a
pointer to the next entry on the list. The list is singly linked, so it is easy to find
the next hole starting from any given hole, but to find the previous hole, you have
to search the entire list from the beginning until you come to the given hole.
Because of space limitations alloc.c is not included in the printed listing although
it is on the CD-ROM. But the code defining the hole list is simple, and is shown
in Fig. 4-35.

      PRIVATE struct hole {
             struct hole *h?next;             /* pointer to next entry on the list */
             phys?clicks h?base;              /* where does the hole begin? */
             phys?clicks h?len;               /* how big is the hole? */
      } hole[NR ?HOLES];

Figure 4-35. The hole list is an array of struct hole.

    The reason for recording everything about segments and holes in clicks rather
than bytes is simple: it is much more efficient. In 16-bit mode, 16-bit integers are
used for recording memory addresses, so with 1024-byte clicks, up to 64 MB of
memory can be supported. In 32-bit mode, address fields can refer to up to as
many as 232 × 210 = 242 bytes, which is 4 terabytes (4096 gigabytes).

     The principal operations on the hole list are allocating a piece of memory of a
given size and returning an existing allocation. To allocate memory, the hole list
is searched, starting at the hole with the lowest address, until a hole that is large
enough is found (first fit). The segment is then allocated by reducing the hole by
the amount needed for the segment, or in the rare case of an exact fit, removing
the hole from the list. This scheme is fast and simple but suffers from both a
small amount of internal fragmentation (up to 1023 bytes may be wasted in the
final click, since an integral number of clicks is always taken) and external frag-
mentation.
     When a process terminates and is cleaned up, its data and stack memory are
returned to the free list. If it uses combined I and D, this releases all its memory,
since such programs never have a separate allocation of memory for text. If the
program uses separate I and D and a search of the process table reveals no other
process is sharing the text, the text allocation will also be returned. Since with
shared text the text and data regions are not necessarily contiguous, two regions of
memory may be returned. For each region returned, if either or both of the
region’s neighbors are holes, they are merged, so adjacent holes never occur. In
this way, the number, location, and sizes of the holes vary continuously during
system operation. Whenever all user processes have terminated, all of available
memory is once again ready for allocation. This is not necessarily a single hole,
however, since physical memory may be interrupted by regions unusable by the
operating system, as in IBM compatible systems where read-only memory (ROM)
and memory reserved for I/O transfers separate usable memory below address
640K from memory above 1 MB.

4.7.4 The FORK, EXIT, and WAIT System Calls

    When processes are created or destroyed, memory must be allocated or deal-
located. Also, the process table must be updated, including the parts held by the
kernel and FS. The PM coordinates all this activity. Process creation is done by
fork, and carried out in the series of steps shown in Fig. 4-36.
    It is difficult and inconvenient to stop a fork call part way through, so the PM
maintains a count at all times of the number of processes currently in existence in
order to see easily if a process table slot is available. If the table is not full, an
attempt is made to allocate memory for the child. If the program is one with
separate I and D space, only enough memory for new data and stack allocations is
requested. If this step also succeeds, the fork is guaranteed to work. The newly
allocated memory is then filled in, a process slot is located and filled in, a PID is
chosen, and the other parts of the system are informed that a new process has been
created.
    A process fully terminates when two events have both happened: (1) the proc-
ess itself has exited (or has been killed by a signal), and (2) its parent has exe-
cuted a wait system call to find out what happened. A process that has exited or
SEC. 4.7        OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                                                      433

                                                                     
                  1. Check to see if process table is full.                           ?
                                                                                         
                                                                       
                            2. Try to allocate memory for the child’s data and stack.     ?
                   3. Copy the parent’s data and stack to the child’s memory. ?
                                                                        
                                                                       
                            4. Find a free process slot and copy parent’s slot to it.       ?
                                                                                               
                            5. Enter child’s memory   map  in process table.
                                                                        
                                                                       
                            6. Choose a PID for the child.                                      ?
                                                                                                   
                            7. Tell kernel and file system about child.
                                                                                                     
                        8. Report child’s memory map to kernel.                                       ?
                                                                                
                                                                                 
                            9. Send reply messages to parent and child.                                 ??

Figure 4-36. The steps required to carry out the fork system call.

has been killed, but whose parent has not (yet) done a wait for it, enters a kind of
suspended animation, sometimes known as zombie state. It is prevented from
being scheduled and has its alarm timer turned off (if it was on), but it is not
removed from the process table. Its memory is freed. Zombie state is temporary
and rarely lasts long. When the parent finally does the wait, the process table slot
is freed, and the file system and kernel are informed.
     A problem arises if the parent of an exiting process is itself already dead. If
no special action were taken, the exiting process would remain a zombie forever.
Instead, the tables are changed to make it a child of the init process. When the
system comes up, init reads the /etc/ttytab file to get a list of all terminals, and
then forks off a login process to handle each one. It then blocks, waiting for
processes to terminate. In this way, orphan zombies are cleaned up quickly.

4.7.5 The EXEC System Call

    When a command is typed at the terminal, the shell forks off a new process,
which then executes the command requested. It would have been possible to have
a single system call to do both fork and exec at once, but they were provided as
two distinct calls for a very good reason: to make it easy to implement I/O
redirection. When the shell forks, if standard input is redirected, the child closes
standard input and then opens the new standard input before executing the com-
mand. In this way the newly started process inherits the redirected standard input.
Standard output is handled the same way.
    Exec is the most complex system call in MINIX 3. It must replace the current
memory image with a new one, including setting up a new stack. The new image
must be a binary executable file, of course. An executable file may also be a
script that must be interpreted by another program, such as the shell or perl. In
that case the file whose image must be placed in memory is the binary of the
interpreter, with the name of the script as an argument. In this section we discuss

the simple case of an exec call that refers to a binary executable. Later, when we
discuss implementation of exec, the additional processing required to execute a
script will be described.
    Exec carries out its job in a series of steps, as shown in Fig. 4-37.
                                                                       
             1. Check permissions—is the file executable?                ?
                                                                                        
                                                                        
               2. Read the header to get the segment and total sizes.     ?
              3. Fetch the arguments and environment from the caller.       ?
                                                                                        
                                                                        
              4. Allocate new memory and release unneeded old memory.    ?
                                                                                        
                  5. Copy stack to new memory image.
                                                                                   
                                                                         
                  6. Copy data (and possibly text) segment to new memory image. ?
                                                                                     
                  7. Check for and handle setuid, setgid bits.
                                                                                       
             8. Fix up process table entry.                                 ?
                                                                        
                                                                               
                                                                           
                 9. Tell kernel that process is now runnable.                   ??

Figure 4-37. The steps required to carry out the exec system call.

     Each step consists, in turn, of yet smaller steps, some of which can fail. For
example, there might be insufficient memory available. The order in which the
tests are made has been carefully chosen to make sure the old memory image is
not released until it is certain that the exec will succeed, to avoid the embarrassing
situation of not being able to set up a new memory image, but not having the old
one to go back to, either. Normally exec does not return, but if it fails, the calling
process must get control again, with an error indication.
     A few steps in Fig. 4-37 deserve some more comment. First is the question of
whether or not there is enough room. After determining how much memory is
needed, which requires determining if the text memory of another process can be
shared, the hole list is searched to check whether there is sufficient physical mem-
ory before freeing the old memory. If the old memory were freed first and there
were insufficient memory, it would be hard to get the old image back again and
we would be up a tree.
     However, this test is overly strict. It sometimes rejects exec calls that, in fact,
could succeed. Suppose, for example, the process doing the exec call occupies 20
KB and its text is not shared by any other process. Further suppose that there is a
30-KB hole available and that the new image requires 50 KB. By testing before
releasing, we will discover that only 30 KB is available and reject the call. If we
had released first, we might have succeeded, depending on whether or not the new
20-KB hole were adjacent to, and thus now merged with, the 30 KB hole. A more
sophisticated implementation could handle this situation a little better.
     Another possible improvement would be to search for two holes, one for the
text segment and one for the data segment, if the process to be execed uses
separate I and D space. The segments do not need to be contiguous.
SEC. 4.7            OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                      435
     A more subtle issue is whether the executable file fits in the virtual address
space. The problem is that memory is allocated not in bytes, but in 1024-byte
clicks. Each click must belong to a single segment, and may not be, for example,
half data, half stack, because the entire memory administration is in clicks.
     To see how this restriction can give trouble, note that the address space on
16-bit Intel processors (8086 and 80286) is limited to 64 KB, which with a click
size of 1024 allows 64 clicks. Suppose that a separate I and D space program has
40,000 bytes of text, 32,770 bytes of data, and 32,760 bytes of stack. The data
segment occupies 33 clicks, although only 2 bytes of the last click is used; still,
the whole click must be alloted for the data segment. The stack segment is 32
clicks. Together they exceed 64 clicks, and thus cannot co-exist, even though the
number of bytes needed fits in the virtual address space (barely). In theory this
problem exists on all machines whose click size is larger than 1 byte, but in prac-
tice it rarely occurs on Pentium-class processors, since they permit large (4-GB)
segments. Unfortunately, the code has to check for this case. A system that does
not check for rare, but possible, conditions is likely to crash in an unexpected way
if one of them ever occurs.
     Another important issue is how the initial stack is set up. The library call nor-
mally used to invoke exec with arguments and an environment is
    execve(name, argv, envp);
where name is a pointer to the name of the file to be executed, argv is a pointer to
an array of pointers, each one pointing to an argument, and envp is a pointer to an
array of pointers, each one pointing to an environment string.
     It would be easy enough to implement exec by just putting the three pointers
in the message to the PM and letting it fetch the file name and two arrays by itself.
Then it would have to fetch each argument and each string one at a time. Doing it
this way requires at least one message to the system task per argument or string
and probably more, since the PM has no way of knowing in advance the size of
each one.
     To avoid the overhead of multiple messages to read all these pieces, a com-
pletely different strategy has been chosen. The execve library procedure builds
the entire initial stack inside itself and passes its base address and size to the PM.
Building the new stack within the user space is highly efficient, because refer-
ences to the arguments and strings are just local memory references, not refer-
ences to a different address space.
     To make this mechanism clearer, consider an example. When a user types
    ls –l f.c g.c
to the shell, the shell interprets it and then makes the call
    execve(′′/bin/ls′′, argv, envp);
to the library procedure. The contents of the two pointer arrays are shown in
Fig. 4-38(a). The procedure execve, within the shell’s address space, now builds

                             \0   t         s   a   52   \0   t         s   a 8188      \0   t         s   a 8188

      Environment            /    r         s   u   48   /    r         s   u 8184      /    r         s   u 8184
         array               /    =        E    M 44     /    =        E    M 8180      /    =        E    M 8180
          0                  O H \0             c   40   O H \0             c   8176    O H \0             c   8176
                             .    g        \0   c   36   .    g        \0   c   8172    .    g        \0   c   8172
                             .    f        \0   l   32   .    f        \0   l   8168    .    f        \0   l   8168
         HOME = /usr/ast     –    \0        s   l   28   –    \0        s   l   8164    –    \0        s   l   8164
                                       0            24             0            8160              0            8160
                                      42            20        8178              8156         8178              8156
                                       0            16             0            8152              0            8152

       Argument                       38            12        8174              8148         8174              8148
         array                        34             8        8170              8144         8170              8144
          0                           31             4        8167              8140         8167              8140
                       g.c            28             0        8164              8136         8164              8136
                       f.c                                                      envp         8156              8132
                       –l                                                        argv        8136              8128
                       ls                                                        argc             4            8124
                                                                                             return            8120

          (a)                         (b)                         (c)                            (d)

Figure 4-38. (a) The arrays passed to execve. (b) The stack built by execve. (c)
         The stack after relocation by the PM. (d) The stack as it appears to main at the
         start of execution.
the initial stack, as shown in Fig. 4-38(b). This stack is eventually copied intact to
the PM during the processing of the exec call.
     When the stack is finally copied to the user process, it will not be put at vir-
tual address 0. Instead, it will be put at the end of the memory allocation, as de-
termined by the total memory size field in the executable file’s header. As an ex-
ample, let us arbitrarily assume that the total size is 8192 bytes, so the last byte
available to the program is at address 8191. It is up to the PM to relocate the
pointers within the stack so that when deposited into the new address, the stack
looks like Fig. 4-38(c).
     When the exec call completes and the program starts running, the stack will
indeed look exactly like Fig. 4-38(c), with the stack pointer having the value
8136. However, another problem is yet to be dealt with. The main program of
the executed file is probably declared something like this:
    main(argc, argv, envp);
As far as the C compiler is concerned, main is just another function. It does not
know that main is special, so it compiles code to access the three parameters on
the assumption that they will be passed on the stack according to the standard C
SEC. 4.7       OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                                437
calling convention, last parameter first. With one integer and two pointers, the
three parameters are expected to occupy the three words just before the return
address. Of course, the stack of Fig. 4-38(c) does not look like that at all.
     The solution is that programs do not begin with main. Instead, a small, as-
sembly language routine called the C run-time, start-off procedure, or crtso, is
always linked in at text address 0 so it gets control first. Its job is to push three
more words onto the stack and then to call main using the standard call instruc-
tion. This results in the stack of Fig. 4-38(d) at the time that main starts execut-
ing. Thus, main is tricked into thinking it was called in the usual way (actually, it
is not really a trick; it is called that way).
     If the programmer neglects to call exit at the end of main, control will pass
back to the C run-time, start-off routine when main is finished. Again, the com-
piler just sees main as an ordinary procedure and generates the usual code to re-
turn from it after the last statement. Thus main returns to its caller, the C run-
time, start-off routine which then calls exit itself. Most of the code of 32-bit crtso
is shown in Fig. 4-39. The comments should make its operation clear. Left out
are initialization of the environment if not defined by the programmer, code to
load the registers that are pushed and a few lines that set a flag that indicates if a
floating point coprocessor is present or not. The complete source is in the file
src/lib/i386/rts/crtso.s.

      push   ecx                    ! push environ
      push   edx                    ! push argv
      push   eax                    ! push argc
      call   ? main                 ! main(argc, argv, envp)
      push   eax                    ! push exit status
      call   ? exit
      hlt                           ! force a trap if exit fails

Figure 4-39. The key part of crtso, the C run-time, start-off routine.

4.7.6 The BRK System Call

     The library procedures brk and sbrk are used to adjust the upper bound of the
data segment. The former takes an absolute size (in bytes) and calls brk. The lat-
ter takes a positive or negative increment to the current size, computes the new
data segment size, and then calls brk. Actually, there is no sbrk system call.
     An interesting question is: ‘‘How does sbrk keep track of the current size, so it
can compute the new size?’’ The answer is that a variable, brksize, always holds
the current size so sbrk can find it. This variable is initialized to a compiler gen-
erated symbol giving the initial size of text plus data (combined I and D) or just
data (separate I and D). The name, and, in fact, very existence of such a symbol
is compiler dependent, and thus it will not be found defined in any header file in

the source file directories. It is defined in the library, in the file brksize.s. Exactly
where it will be found depends on the system, but it will be in the same directory
as crtso.s.
     Carrying out brk is easy for the process manager. All that must be done is to
check to see that everything still fits in the address space, adjust the tables, and
tell the kernel.

4.7.7 Signal Handling

     In Chap. 1, signals were described as a mechanism to convey information to a
process that is not necessarily waiting for input. A defined set of signals exists,
and each signal has a default action—either kill the process to which it is directed,
or ignore the signal. Signal processing would be easy to understand and to imple-
ment if these were the only alternatives. However, processes can use system calls
to alter these responses. A process can request that any signal (except for the spe-
cial sigkill signal) be ignored. Furthermore, a user process can prepare to catch a
signal by requesting that a signal handler procedure internal to the process be ac-
tivated instead of the default action for any signal (except, again, for sigkill). Thus
to the programmer it appears that there are two distinct times when the operating
system deals with signals: a preparation phase when a process may modify its
response to a future signal, and a response phase when a signal is generated and
acted upon. The action can be execution of a custom-written signal handler. A
third phase also occurs, as shown in Fig. 4-40. When a user-written handler ter-
minates, a special system call cleans up and restores normal operation of the sig-
naled process. The programmer does not need to know about this third phase. He
writes a signal handler just like any other function. The operating system takes
care of the details of invoking and terminating the handler and managing the
stack.
                                                                    
                  Preparation: program code prepares for possible signal. ?
                                                                               
                                                                     
                     Response: signal is received and action is taken.   ?
                   Cleanup: restore normal operation of the process.       ?
                                                                              

Figure 4-40. Three phases of dealing with signals.

    In the preparation phase there are several system calls that a process can exe-
cute at any time to change its response to a signal. The most general of these is
sigaction , which can specify that the process ignore some signal, catch some sig-
nal (replacing the default action with execution of user-defined signal-handling
code within the process), or restore the default response to some signal. Another
system call, sigprocmask , can block a signal, causing it to be queued and to be
acted upon only when and if the process unblocks that particular signal at a later
time. These calls may be made at any time, even from within a signal catching
SEC. 4.7       OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                           439
function. In MINIX 3 the preparation phase of signal processing is handled en-
tirely by the PM, since the necessary data structures are all in the PM’s part of the
process table. For each process there are several sigset ? t variables. These are
bitmaps, in which each possible signal is represented by a bit. One such variable
defines a set of signals to be ignored, another defines a set to be caught, and so on.
For each process there is also an array of sigaction structures, one for each signal.
The structure is defined in Fig. 4-41. Each element of the sigaction structure con-
tains a variable to hold the address of a custom handler for that signal and an addi-
tional sigset ? t variable to map signals to be blocked while that handler is execut-
ing. The field used for the address of the handler can instead hold special values
signifying that the signal is to be ignored or is to be handled in the default way
defined for that signal.

struct sigaction {
       sighandler ? t sa?handler; /* SIG ? DFL, SIG ? IGN, SIG ? MESS,
                                     or pointer to function */
  sigset ? t sa ? mask;           /* signals to be blocked during handler */
  int sa ? flags;                 /* special flags */
}

Figure 4-41. The sigaction structure.

    This is a good place to mention that a system process, such as the process
manager itself, cannot catch signals. System processes use a a new handler type
SIG ? MESS that tells PM to forward a signal by means of a SYS ? SIG notification
message. No cleanup is needed for SIG ? MESS-type signals.
    When a signal is generated, multiple parts of the MINIX 3 system may become
involved. The response begins in the PM, which figures out which processes
should get the signal using the data structures just mentioned. If the signal is to be
caught, it must be delivered to the target process. This requires saving informa-
tion about the state of the process, so normal execution can be resumed. The
information is stored on the stack of the signaled process, and a check must be
made to determine that there is sufficient stack space. The PM does this check-
ing, since this is within its realm, and then calls the system task in the kernel to
put the information on the stack. The system task also manipulates the program
counter of the process, so the process can execute the handler code. When the
handler terminates, a sigreturn system call is made. Through this call, both the
PM and the kernel participate in restoring the signal context and registers of the
signaled process so it can resume normal execution. If the signal is not caught,
the default action is taken, which may involve calling the file system to produce a
core dump (writing the memory image of the process to a file that may be exam-
ined with a debugger), as well as killing the process, which involves all of the
PM, file system, and kernel. The PM may direct one or more repetitions of these
actions, since a single signal may need to be delivered to a group of processes.

     The signals known to MINIX 3 are defined in include/signal.h, a file required
by the POSIX standard. They are listed in Fig. 4-42. All of the mandatory POSIX
signals are defined in MINIX 3, but not all the optional ones are. For instance,
POSIX requires several signals related to job control, the ability to put a running
program into the background and bring it back. MINIX 3 does not support job
control, but programs that might generate these signals can be ported to MINIX 3.
These signals will be ignored if generated. Job control has not been implemented
because it was intended to provide a way to start a program running, then detach
from it to allow the user to do something else. With MINIX 3, after starting a pro-
gram, a user can just hit ALT+F2 to switch to a new virtual terminal to do some-
thing else while the program runs. Virtual terminals are a kind of poor man’s
windowing system, but eliminate the need for job control and its signals, at least if
you are working on the local console. MINIX 3 also defines some non-POSIX sig-
nals for internal use and some synonyms for POSIX names for compatibility with
older source code.
     In a traditional UNIX system, signals can be generated in two ways: by the kill
system call, and by the kernel. Some user-space processes in MINIX 3 do things
that would be done by the kernel in a traditional system. Fig. 4-42 shows all sig-
nals known to MINIX 3 and their origins. Sigint, sigquit, and sigkill can be initiated
by pressing special key combinations on the keyboard. Sigalrm is managed by the
process manager. Sigpipe is generated by the file system. The kill program can
be used to cause any signal to be sent to any process. Some kernel signals depend
upon hardware support. For instance, the 8086 and 8088 processors do not sup-
port detection of illegal instruction operation codes, but this capability is available
on the 286 and above, which trap on an attempt to execute an illegal opcode. This
service is provided by the hardware. The implementer of the operating system
must provide code to generate a signal in response to the trap. We saw in Chap. 2
that kernel/exception.c contains code to do just this for a number of different con-
ditions. Thus a sigill signal will be generated in response to an illegal instruction
when MINIX 3 runs on a 286 or higher processor; on the original 8088 it was
never seen.
     Just because the hardware can trap on a certain condition does not mean the
capability can be used fully by the operating system implementer. For instance,
several kinds of violations of memory integrity result in exceptions on all Intel
processors beginning with the 286. Code in kernel/exception.c translates these
exceptions into sigsegv signals. Separate exceptions are generated for violations
of the limits of the hardware-defined stack segment and for other segments, since
these might need to be treated differently. However, because of the way MINIX 3
uses memory, the hardware cannot detect all the errors that might occur. The
hardware defines a base and a limit for each segment. The stack and data seg-
ments are combined in a single harware segment. The hardware-defined data seg-
ment base is the same as the MINIX 3 data segment base, but the hardware-defined
data segment limit is higher than the limit that MINIX 3 enforces in software. In
SEC. 4.7                             OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                                                                                                                                                                                                                 441

                                                                          
                                                                 Signal    ?                                                             Description     ? Generated by ?
                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
               SIGHUP
                                                                                 Hangup                                                                     ? KILL system call ?
                SIGINT                                                          ? Interrupt                                                                  ? TTY                                                       ?
                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                   SIGQUIT
                                                                                     Quit                                                                       ? TTY                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                               SIGILL
                                                                          
                                                                                                                           Illegal instruction                     ?                                        Kernel (*)           ?
                                                                           
                                                               SIGTRAP                  ? Trace trap                                                                 ? Kernel (M)                                                  ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                          SIGABRT
                                                                                             Abnormal termination                                                       ? TTY                                                          ?
                           SIGFPE                                                           ? Floating point exception                                                   ? Kernel (*)                                                    ?
                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                              SIGKILL
                                                                                                 Kill (cannot be caught or ignored)                                         ? KILL system call ?
                               SIGUSR1                                                          ? User-defined signal # 1                                                    ? Not supported                                                 ?
                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                  SIGSEGV ? Segmentation violation
                                                                                                                                                                                  Kernel (*)                                                     ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                     SIGUSR2
                                                                                                       User defined signal # 2                                                     ? Not supported                                                   ?
                                      SIGPIPE                                                         ? Write on a pipe with no one to read it ? FS                                                                                                    ?
                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                         SIGALRM ? Alarm clock, timeout
                                                                                                                                                                                        PM                                                                 ?
                                          SIGTERM ? Software termination signal from kill ? KILL system call ?
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                               SIGCHLD                                     ? Child process terminated or stopped ? PM                                                                                                          ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                               SIGCONT ? Continue if stopped
                                                                                                                                                                                             Not supported                                                         ?
                                                                                                                  
                                                               SIGSTOP                                        ? Stop signal                                                                 ? Not supported                                                          ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                               SIGTSTP                                           ? Interactive stop signal
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Not supported                                                           ?
                                                     SIGTTIN                                                      ? Background process wants to read                                            ? Not supported                                                            ?
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                         
                                                               SIGTTOU                                               ? Background process wants to write                                           ? Not supported                                                             ?
                                                         SIGKMESS ? Kernel message                                                                                                                  ? Kernel                                                                     ?
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                             
                                                               SIGKSIG                                                  ? Kernel signal pending                                                        ? Kernel                                                                      ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                               SIGKSTOP ? Kernel shutting down
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kernel                                                                       ?

Figure 4-42. Signals defined by POSIX and MINIX 3. Signals indicated by (*)
        depend upon hardware support. Signals marked (M) are not defined by POSIX,
        but are defined by MINIX 3 for compatibility with older programs. Kernel sig-
        nals are MINIX 3 specific signals generated by the kernel, and used to inform
        system processes about system events. Several obsolete names and synonyms
        are not listed here.

other words, the hardware defines the data segment as the maximum amount of
memory that MINIX 3 could possibly use for data, if somehow the stack could
shrink to nothing. Similarly, the hardware defines the stack as the maximum
amount of memory the MINIX 3 stack could use if the data area could shrink to
nothing. Although certain violations can be detected by the hardware, the
hardware cannot detect the most probable stack violation, growth of the stack into
the data area, since as far as the hardware registers and descriptor tables are con-
cerned the data area and the stack area overlap.

     Conceivably some code could be added to the kernel that would check the
register contents of a process after each time the process gets a chance to run and
generate a sigsegv signal upon detection of a violation of the integrity of the
MINIX 3-defined data or stack areas. Whether this would be worthwhile is un-
clear; hardware traps can catch a violation immediately. A software check might
not get a chance to do its work until many thousands of additional instructions had
been executed, and at that point there might be very little a signal handler could
do to try to recover.
     Whatever their origin, the PM processes all signals the same way. For each
process to be signaled, a variety of checks are made to see if the signal is feasible.
One process can signal another if the signaler is the superuser or if the real or
effective UID of the signaler is equal to either the real or effective UID of the sig-
naled process. But there are several conditions that can prevent a signal being
sent. Zombies cannot be signaled, for example. A process cannot be signaled if it
has explicitly called sigaction to ignore the signal or sigprocmask to block it.
Blocking a signal is distinct from ignoring it; receipt of a blocked signal is
remembered, and it is delivered when and if the signaled process removes the
block. Finally, if its stack space is not adequate the signaled process is killed.
     If all the conditions are met, the signal can be sent. If the process has not
arranged for the signal to be caught, no information needs to be passed to the
process. In this case the PM executes the default action for the signal, which is
usually to kill the process, possibly also producing a core dump. For a few signals
the default action is to ignore the signal. The signals marked ‘‘Not supported’’ in
Fig. 4-42 are required to be defined by POSIX but are ignored by MINIX 3, as per-
mitted by the standard.
     Catching a signal means executing custom signal-handling code, the address
of which is stored in a sigaction structure in the process table. In Chap. 2 we saw
how the stackframe within its process table entry receives the information needed
to restart a process when it is interrupted. By modifying the stackframe of a proc-
ess to be signaled, it can be arranged that when the process next is allowed to exe-
cute the signal handler will run. By modifying the stack of the process in user
space, it can be arranged that when the signal handler terminates the sigreturn sys-
tem call will be made. This system call is never invoked by user-written code. It
is executed after the kernel puts its address on the stack in such a way that its
address becomes the return address popped from the stack when a signal handler
terminates. Sigreturn restores the original stackframe of the signaled process, so
it can resume execution at the point where it was interrupted by the signal.
     Although the final stage of sending a signal is done by the system task, this is
a good place to summarize how it is done, since the data used are passed to the
kernel from the PM. Catching a signal requires something much like the context
switch that occurs when one process is taken out of execution and another process
is put into execution, since when the handler terminates the process ought to be
able to continue as if nothing had happened. However, there is only room in the
SEC. 4.7           OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                                      443
process table to store one copy of the contents of all the CPU registers that are
needed to restore the process to its original state. The solution to this problem is
shown in Fig. 4-43. Part (a) of the figure is a simplified view of the stack of a
process and part of its process table entry just after it has been taken out of execu-
tion following an interrupt. At the time of suspension the contents of all of the
CPU registers are copied into the stackframe structure in the process table entry
for the suspended process in the kernel part of the process table. This will be the
situation at the moment a signal is generated. A signal is generated by a process
or task different from the intended recipient, so the recipient cannot be running at
that time.

       Ret addr            Ret addr             Ret addr             Ret addr

      Local vars          Local vars           Local vars           Local vars
      (process)           (process)            (process)            (process)

                          Stackframe           Stackframe
                          (CPU regs)           (CPU regs)
                           (original)           (original)
                                                                                      Stack
                          Ret addr 2           Ret addr 2

                           Sigframe            Local vars
                           structure           (Sigreturn)

                          Ret addr 1

                          Local vars
                           (handler)

     Stackframe           Stackframe           Stackframe           Stackframe
     (CPU regs)           (CPU regs)           (CPU regs)           (CPU regs)        Process
      (original)           (modified,           (modified,           (original)       table
                         ip = handler)        ip = handler)

       Before              Handler              Sigreturn         Back to normal
                          executing             executing
           (a)                (b)                  (c)                  (d)

Figure 4-43. The stack of a process (above) and its stackframe in the process
        table (below) corresponding to phases in handling a signal. (a) State as process
        is taken out of execution. (b) State as handler begins execution. (c) State while
        sigreturn is executing. (d) State after sigreturn completes execution.

    In preparation for handling the signal, the stackframe from the process table is
copied onto the stack of the receiving process as a sigcontext structure, thus

preserving it. Then a sigframe structure is placed on the stack. This structure
contains information to be used by sigreturn after the handler finishes. It also
contains the address of the library procedure that invokes sigreturn itself, ret
addr1, and another return address, ret addr2, which is the address where execu-
tion of the interrupted program will resume. As will be seen, however, the latter
address is not used during normal execution.
     Although the handler is written as an ordinary procedure by the programmer,
it is not called by a call instruction. The instruction pointer (program counter)
field in the stackframe in the process table is altered to cause the signal handler to
begin executing when restart puts the signaled process back into execution. Fig-
ure 4-43(b) shows the situation after this preparation has been completed and as
the signal handler executes. Recall that the signal handler is an ordinary pro-
cedure, so when it terminates, ret addr1 is popped and sigreturn executes.
     Part (c) shows the situation while sigreturn is executing. The rest of the sig-
frame structure is now sigreturn ’s local variables. Part of sigreturn ’s action is to
adjust its own stack pointer so that if it were to terminate like an ordinary func-
tion, it would use ret addr2 as its return address. However, sigreturn does not ac-
tually terminate this way. It terminates like other system calls, allowing the
scheduler in the kernel to decide which process to restart. Eventually, the sig-
naled process will be rescheduled and will restart at this address, because the
address is also in the process’ original stackframe. The reason this address is on
the stack is that a user might want to trace a program using a debugger, and this
fools the debugger into a reasonable interpretation of the stack while a signal
handler is being traced. In each phase the stack looks like that of an ordinary
process, with local variables on top of a return address.
     The real work of sigreturn is to restore things to the state they were in before
the signal was received, and to clean up. Most importantly, the stackframe in the
process table is restored to its original state, using the copy that was saved on the
signaled process’ stack. When sigreturn terminates, the situation will be as in
Fig. 4-43(d), which shows the process waiting to be put back into execution in the
same state it was in when interrupted.
     For most signals the default action is to kill the signaled process. The PM
takes care of this for any signal that is not ignored by default, and which the reci-
pient process has not been enabled to handle, block, or ignore. If the parent is
waiting for it, the killed process is cleaned up and removed from the process table.
If the parent is not waiting, it becomes a zombie. For certain signals (e.g.,
SIGQUIT), the PM also writes a core dump of the process to the current directory.
     It can easily happen that a signal is sent to a process that is currently blocked
waiting for a read on a terminal for which no input is available. If the process has
not specified that the signal is to be caught, it is just killed in the usual way. If,
however, the signal is caught, the issue arises of what to do after the signal inter-
rupt has been processed. Should the process go back to waiting, or should it con-
tinue with the next statement? Decisions, decisions.
SEC. 4.7       OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                          445
    What MINIX 3 does is this: the system call is terminated in such a way as to
return the error code EINTR, so the process can see that the call was broken off by
a signal. Determining that a signaled process was blocked on a system call is not
entirely trivial. The PM must ask the file system to check for it.
    This behavior is suggested, but not required, by POSIX, which also allows a
read to return the number of bytes read so far at the time of receipt of the signal.
Returning EINTR makes it possible to set an alarm and to catch sigalrm . This is
an easy way to implement a timeout, for instance to terminate login and hang up a
modem line if a user does not respond within a certain period.

User-Space Timers

    Generating an alarm to wake up a process after a preset period of time is one
of the most common uses of signals. In a conventional operating system, alarms
would be managed entirely by the kernel, or a clock driver running in kernel
space. In MINIX 3 responsibility for alarms to user processes is delegated to the
process manager. The idea is to lighten the kernel’s load, and simplify the code
that runs in kernel space. If it is true that some number b of bugs are inevitable
per some number l of lines of code, it is reasonable to expect that a smaller kernel
will mean fewer bugs in the kernel. Even if the total number of bugs remains the
same, their effects should be less serious if they occur in user-space operating sys-
tem components rather than in the kernel itself.
    Can we handle alarms without depending upon kernel-space code at all? In
MINIX 3, at least, the answer is no, of course not. Alarms are managed in the first
place by the kernel-space clock task, which maintains a linked list, or queue, of
timers, as schematized in Fig. 2-49. On every interrupt from the clock chip the
expiration time of the timer at the head of the queue is compared to the current
time, and if it has expired the clock task main loop is activated. The clock task
then causes a notification to be sent to the process that requested the alarm.
    The innovation in MINIX 3 is that timers in kernel space are maintained only
for system processes. The process manager maintains another queue of timers on
behalf of user processes that have requested alarms. The process manager
requests an alarm from the clock only for the timer at the head of its queue. If a
new request is not added to the head of the queue no request to the clock is neces-
sary at the time it is added. (Actually, of course, an alarm request is made
through the system task, since the clock task does not communicate directly with
any other process.) When expiration of an alarm is detected after a clock interrupt
a notification comes to the process manager. The PM then does all the work of
checking its own timer queue, signaling user processes, and possibly requesting
another alarm if there is still an active alarm request at the head of its list.
    So far this does not sound as if it saves much effort at the kernel level, but
there are several other considerations. First there is the possibility that more than
one timer may be found to have expired on a particular clock tick. It may seem

improbable that two processes would request alarms at the same time. However,
although the clock checks for timer expirations on every interrupt from the clock
chip, interrupts are sometimes disabled, as we have seen. A call to the PC BIOS
can cause enough interrupts to be missed that special provision is made to catch
up. This means the time maintained by the clock task can jump by multiple ticks,
making it possible that multiple timeouts may need to be handled at once. If these
are handled by the process manager the kernel-space code does not have to
traverse its own linked list, cleaning it up and generating multiple notifications.
     Second, alarms can be cancelled. A user process may terminate before a
timer set on its behalf expires. Or a timer may have been set as a backup to pre-
vent a process from waiting forever for an event that might never occur. When
the event does occur the alarm can be cancelled. Clearly, it eases the load on the
kernel-space code if cancellation of timers is done on a queue maintained by the
process manager, and not in the kernel. The kernel-space queue only needs atten-
tion when the timer at its head expires or when the process manager makes a
change to the head of its queue.
     The implementation of timers will be easier to understand if we take a quick
tour of the functions used in handling an alarm now. Many functions in the proc-
ess manager and in the kernel are involved, and it is hard to see the whole picture
when looking at details, one function at a time.
     When the PM sets an alarm on behalf of a user process a timer is initialized
by set ? alarm. The timer structure has fields for the expiration time, the process
on behalf of which the alarm is set, and a pointer to a function to execute. For
alarms that function is always cause ? sigalarm. Then the system task is asked to
set a kernel-space alarm. When this timer expires the watchdog process in the
kernel, cause ? alarm, is executed and sends a notification to the process manager.
Several functions and macros are involved in this, but eventually this notification
is received by the PM’s get ? work function, and detected as a message of type
SYN ? ALARM in the PM’s main loop, which calls the PM’s pm?expire ?timers
function. Now several more functions in the process manager’s space are used.
A library function, tmrs ? exptimers causes the watchdog cause ? sigalrm to be exe-
cuted, which calls checksig, which calls sig ? proc. Next, sig ? proc decides
whether to kill the process or send it the SIGALRM. Finally, sending the signal
requires asking the system task in kernel space for help, of course, since data in
the process table and in the stack space of the signaled process are manipulated,
as was described in Fig. 4-43.

4.7.8 Other System Calls

    The PM also handles a few more simple system calls. Time and stime deal
with the real time clock. The times call gets process accounting times. They are
handled here largely because the PM is a convenient place to put them. (We will
SEC. 4.7        OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER                            447
discuss another time-related call, utime, when we come to file systems in Chap. 5,
since it stores file modification times in i-nodes.)
     The library functions getuid and geteuid both invoke the getuid system call,
which returns both values in its return message. Similarly, the getgid system call
also returns real and effective values for use by the getgid and getegid functions.
getpid works the same way to return both the process ID and the ID of the parent
process, and setuid and setgid can each set both real and effective values in one
call. Two additional system calls exist in this group, getpgrp and setsid. The
former returns the process group ID, and the latter sets it to the current PID value.
These seven calls are the simplest MINIX 3 system calls.
     The ptrace and reboot system calls are also handled by the PM. The former
supports debugging of programs. The latter affects many aspects of the system. It
is appropriate to place it in the PM because its first action is to send signals to kill
all processes except init. After that, it calls upon the file system and the system
task to complete its work.

4.8 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 PROCESS MANAGER
    Armed with a general overview of how the PM works, let us now turn to the
code itself. The PM is written entirely in C, is straightforward, and contains a
substantial amount of commentary in the code itself, so our treatment of most
parts need not be long or involved. We will first look briefly at the header files,
then the main program, and finally the files for the various system call groups dis-
cussed previously.

4.8.1 The Header Files and Data Structures

     Several header files in the PM source directory have the same names as files
in the kernel directory; these names will be seen again in the file system. These
files have similar functions in their own contexts. The parallel structure is
designed to make it easier to understand the organization of the whole MINIX 3
system. The PM also has a number of headers with unique names. As in other
parts of the system, storage for global variables is reserved when the PM’s version
of table.c is compiled. In this section we will look at all of the header files, as
well as table.c.
     As with the other major parts of MINIX 3, the PM has a master header file,
pm.h (line 17000). It is included in every compilation, and it in turn includes all
the system-wide header files from /usr/include and its subdirectories that are
needed by every object module. Most of the files that are included in
kernel/kernel.h are also included here. The PM also needs some definitions in
include/fcntl.h and include/unistd.h. The PM’s own versions of const.h, type.h,
proto.h, and glo.h also are included. We saw a similar structure with the kernel.

     Const.h (line 17100) defines some constants used by the PM.
     Type.h is currently unused and exists in skeletal form just so the PM files will
have the same organization as the other parts of MINIX 3. Proto.h (line 17300)
collects in one place function prototypes needed throughout the PM. Dummy
definitions of some functions needed when swapping is compiled into MINIX 3 are
found on lines 17313 and 17314. Putting these macros here simplifies compiling
a version without swapping; otherwise many other source files would have to be
modified to remove calls to these functions.
     The PM’s global variables are declared in glo.h (line 17500). The same trick
used in the kernel with EXTERN is used here, namely, EXTERN is normally a
macro that expands to extern, except in the file table.c. There it becomes the null
string so storage can be reserved for the variables declared as EXTERN.
     The first of these variables, mp, is a pointer to an mproc structure, the PM part
of the process table for the process whose system call is being processed. The
second variable, procs ? in ? use, keeps track of how many process slots are cur-
rently in use, making it easy to see if a fork call is feasible.
     The message buffer m ? in is for the request messages. Who is the index of the
current process; it is related to mp by

    mp = &mproc[who];

When a message comes in, the system call number is extracted from it and put in
call ? nr.
     MINIX 3 writes an image of a process to a core file when a process terminates
abnormally. Core ? name defines the name this file will have, core ? sset is a bit-
map which defines which signals should produce core dumps, and ign ? sset is a
bitmap telling which signals should be ignored. Note that core ? name is defined
extern, not EXTERN. The array call ? vec is also declared as extern. The reason
for making both of these declarations this way will be explained when we discuss
table.c.
     The PM’s part of the process table is in the next file, mproc.h (line 17600).
Most of the fields are adequately described by their comments. Several fields
deal with signal handling. Mp ? ignore, mp ? catch, mp ? sig2mess, mp ? sigmask,
mp ? sigmask2, and mp ? sigpending are bitmaps, in which each bit represents one
of the signals that can be sent to a process. The type sigset ? t is a 32-bit integer,
so MINIX 3 could support up to 32 signals. Currently 22 signals are defined,
although some are not supported, as permitted by the POSIX standard. Signal 1 is
the least significant (rightmost) bit. In any case, POSIX requires standard func-
tions to add or delete members of the signal sets represented by these bitmaps, so
all necessary manipulations can be done without the programmer being aware of
these details. The array mp ? sigact is important for handling signals. An element
is provided for each signal type, and each element is a sigaction structure (defined
in the file include/signal.h). Each sigaction structure consists of three fields:

     1. The sa ? handler field defines whether the signal is to be handled in
        the default way, ignored, or handled by a special handler.
     2. The sa ? mask field is a sigset ? t that defines which signals are to be
        blocked when the signal is being handled by a custom handler.
     3. The sa ? flags field is a set of flags that apply to the signal.

This array makes possible a great deal of flexibility in handling signals.
     The mp ? flags field is used to hold a miscellaneous collection of bits, as indi-
cated at the end of the file. This field is an unsigned integer, 16 bits on low-end
CPUs or 32 bits on a 386 and up.
     The next field in the process table is mp ? procargs. When a new process is
started, a stack like the one shown in Fig. 4-38 is built, and a pointer to the start of
the new process’ argv array is stored here. This is used by the ps command. For
instance, for the example of Fig. 4-38, the value 8164 would be stored here, mak-
ing it possible for ps to display the command line,
    ls –l f.c g.c
if executed while the ls command is active.
     The mp ? swapq field is not used in MINIX 3 as described here. It is used when
swapping is enabled, and points to a queue of processes waiting to be swapped.
The mp ? reply field is where a reply message is built. In earlier versions of
MINIX , one such field was provided, defined in glo.h and thus compiled when
table.c was compiled. In MINIX 3, a space for building a reply message is pro-
vided for every process. Providing a place for a reply in each process table slot
allows the PM to go on to handle another incoming message if a reply cannot be
sent immediately upon completion of building the reply. The PM cannot handle
two requests at once, but it can postpone replies if necessary, and catch up by try-
ing to send all pending replies each time it completes a request.
     The last two items in the process table might be regarded as frills. Mp ? nice
provides a place for each process to be assigned a nice value, so users can lower
the priority of their processes, for example, to allow one running process to defer
to another, more important, one. However, MINIX 3 uses this field internally to
provide system processes (servers and drivers) with different priorities, depending
upon their needs. The mp ? name field is convenient for debugging, to help the
programmer identify a process table slot in a memory dump. A system call is
available to search the process table for a process name and return a process ID.
     Finally, note that the process manager’s part of the process table is declared
as an array of size NR ? PROCS (line 17655). Recall that the kernel’s part of the
process table was declared as an array of size NR ? TASKS + NR ? PROCS in
kernel/proc.h (line 5593). As mentioned previously, processes compiled into the
kernel are not known to user space components of the operating system such as
the process manager. They are not really first-class processes.

    The next file is param.h (line 17700), which contains macros for many of the
system call parameters contained in the request message. It also contains twelve
macros for fields in the reply message, and three macros used only in messages to
the file system. For example, if the statement
    k = m ?in.pid;
appears in any file in which param.h is included, the C preprocessor converts it to
    k = m ? in.m1 ? i1;
before feeding it to the compiler proper (line 17707).
    Before we continue with the executable code, let us look at table.c (line
17800). Compilation of this file reserves storage for the various EXTERN vari-
ables and structures we have seen in glo.h and mproc.h. The statement
    #define ? TABLE
causes EXTERN to become the null string. This is the same mechanism that we
saw in the kernel code. As we mentioned earlier, core ? name was declared as
extern, not EXTERN in glo.h. Now we can see why. Here core ? name is declared
with an initialization string. Initialization is not possible within an extern defini-
tion.
     The other major feature of table.c is the array call ? vec (line 17815). It is also
an initialized array, and thus could not be declared as EXTERN in glo.h. When a
request message arrives, the system call number is extracted from it and used as
an index into call ? vec to locate the procedure that carries out that system call.
System call numbers that are not valid calls all invoke no ? sys, which just returns
an error code. Note that although the ? PROTOTYPE macro is used in defining
call ? vec, this is not a declaration of a prototype; it is the definition of an initial-
ized array. However, it is an array of functions, and use of ? PROTOTYPE is the
easiest way to do this that is compatible with both classic (Kernighan & Ritchie)
C and Standard C.
     A final note on header files: because MINIX 3 is still being actively
developed, there are still some rough edges. One of these is that some source files
in pm/ include header files from the kernel directory. It may be hard to find some
important definitions if you are not aware of this. Arguably definitions used by
more than one major component of MINIX 3 should be consolidated into header
files in the include/ directory.

4.8.2 The Main Program

    The PM is compiled and linked independently from the kernel and the file
system. Consequently, it has its own main program, which is started up after the
kernel has finished initializing itself. The entry point is at line 18041 in main.c.
After doing its own initialization by calling pm ? init, the PM enters its loop on

line 18051. In this loop, it calls get ? work to wait for an incoming request mes-
sage. Then it calls one of its do ? XXX procedures via the call ? vec table to carry
out the request. Finally, it sends a reply, if needed. This construction should be
familiar by now: it is the same one used by the I/O tasks.
     The preceding description is slightly simplified. As mentioned in Chap. 2,
notification messages can be sent to any process. These are identified by special
values in the call ? nr field. In lines 18055 to 18062 a test is made for the two
types of notification messages the PM can receive, and special action is taken in
these cases. Also, a test is made for a valid call ? nr on line 18064 before an
attempt is made to carry out a request (on line 18067). Although an invalid
request is unlikely, the test is cheap and the consequences of an invalid request
would be serious.
     Another point worth noting is the call to swap ? in at line 18073. As we men-
tioned in the context of proto.h, in MINIX 3 as configured for description in this
text this is a dummy call. But if the system is compiled with the full set of source
code with swapping enabled, this is where a test is made to see if a process could
be swapped in.
     Finally, although the comment on line 18070 indicates this is where a reply is
sent back, that is also a simplification. The call to setreply constructs a reply in
the space we mentioned earlier, in the process table entry for the current process.
Then in lines 18078 to 18091 of the loop, all entries in the process table are
checked and all pending replies that can be sent are sent, skipping over any that
cannot be sent at this time.
     The procedures get ? work (line 18099) and setreply (line 18116) handle the
actual receiving and sending, respectively. The former does a little trick to make
it look like a message from the kernel was actually from the PM itself, since the
kernel does not have a process table slot of its own. The latter function does not
really send the reply, it sets it up to be sent later, as mentioned above.

Initialization of the Process Manager

    The longest procedure in main.c is pm ? init, which initializes the PM. It is not
used after the system has started running. Even though drivers and servers are
compiled separately and run as separate processes, some of them are loaded as
part of the boot image by the boot monitor. It is hard to see how any operating
system could be started without a PM and a file system, so these components
probably will always need to be loaded into memory by the boot monitor. Some
device drivers are also loaded as part of the image. Although it is a goal to make
as many MINIX 3 drivers as possible independently loadable, it is hard to see, for
instance, how to avoid loading some disk driver early in the game.
    Most of the work of pm ? init is to initialize the PM’s tables so all of the
preloaded processes can run. As noted earlier the PM maintains two important
data structures, the hole table (or free memory table) and a part of the process

table. We will consider the hole table first. Initialization of memory is compli-
cated. It will be easier to understand the description that follows if we first show
how memory is organized when the PM is activated. MINIX 3 provides all the
information we need for this.
    Before the MINIX 3 boot image itself is loaded into memory, the boot monitor
determines the layout of available memory. From the boot menu, you can press
the ESC key to see the boot parameters. One line in the display shows blocks of
unused memory, and looks like this:
    memory = 800:923e0,100000:3df0000
(After MINIX 3 starts you can also see this information using the sysenv command
or the F5 key. The exact numbers you see may be different, of course.)
     This shows two blocks of free memory. In addition, there are two blocks of
used memory. Memory below 0x800 is used for BIOS data and by the master
boot record and the bootblock. It really does not matter how it is used, it is not
available by the time the boot monitor starts up. The free memory beginning at
0x800 is the ‘‘base memory’’ of IBM-compatible computers. In this example,
starting at address 0x800 (2048) there are 0x923e0 (599008) bytes available.
Above this is the 640 KB to 1 MB ‘‘upper memory area’’ which is off limits to
ordinary programs—it is reserved for ROM and dedicated RAM on I/O adapters.
Finally, at address 0x100000 (1 MB) there are 0x3df0000 bytes free. This range
is commonly referred to as ‘‘extended memory.’’ This example indicates the com-
puter has a total of 64 MB of RAM installed.
     If you have been keeping track of these numbers you will have noticed that
the amount of free base memory is less than the 638 KB you might have expected.
The MINIX 3 boot monitor loads itself as high as possible in this range, and in this
case requires about 52 KB. In this example about 584 KB is really free. This is a
good place to note that memory use could be more complicated than is in this ex-
ample. For instance, one method of running MINIX, not yet ported to MINIX 3 at
the time this is being written, uses an MS-DOS file to simulate a MINIX disk. The
technique requires loading some components of MS-DOS before starting the
MINIX 3 boot monitor. If these are not loaded adjacent to memory regions
already in use more than two regions of free memory will be reported by the boot
monitor.
     When the boot monitor loads the boot image into memory information about
the image components is displayed on the console screen. Fig. 4-44 shows part of
such a display. In this example (typical but possibly not identical to what you will
see as this was from a pre-release version of MINIX 3), the boot monitor loaded
the kernel into the free memory at address 0x800. The PM, file system, reincarna-
tion server, and other components not shown in the figure are installed in the
block of free memory that starts at 1 MB. This was an arbitrary design choice;
enough memory remains below the 588 KB limit for some of these components.
However, when MINIX 3 is compiled with a large block cache, as is true in this

example, the file system cannot fit into the space just above the kernel. It was
easier, but by no means essential, just to load everything in the higher region of
memory. Nothing is lost by this, the memory manager can make use of the hole
in memory below 588 KB once the system is running and user processes are
started.
                                                                         
                cs        ds      text   data      bss       stack              ?
        0000800         0005800  19552   3140      30076           0   kernel ?
         0100000        0104c00  19456   2356      48612       1024    pm
                                                                                   
                                                                                     
            0111800     011c400  43216   5912    6224364       2048    fs
                                                                                       
                                                                         
              070e000   070f400    4352   616       4696     131072    rs               ?
Figure 4-44. Boot monitor display of memory usage of the first few boot image
        components.

    Initialization of the PM starts by looping through the process table to disable
the timer for each slot so no spurious alarms can occur. Then global variables that
define the default sets of signals that will be ignored or that will cause core dumps
are initialized. Next the information we have seen about memory use is pro-
cessed. On line 18182 the system task retrieves the boot monitor’s memory string
that we saw above. In our example there are two base:size pairs showing blocks
of free memory. The call to get ? mem ? chunks (line 18184) converts the data in
the ASCII string into binary, and enters the base and size values into the array
mem ? chunks (line 18192) the elements of which are defined as
    struct memory {phys ? clicks base; phys ? clicks size;};
Mem ? chunks is not the hole list yet, it is just a small array in which this informa-
tion is collected prior to initializing the hole list.
     After querying the kernel and converting information about kernel memory
use into units of clicks, patch ? mem ? chunks is called to subtract the kernel usage
from mem ? chunks array. Now memory that was in use before MINIX 3 started is
accounted for, as is memory used by the kernel. Mem ? chunks is not complete,
but memory used by normal processes in the boot image will be accounted for
within the loop on lines 18201 to 18239 which initializes process table entries.
     Information about attributes of all processes that are part of the boot image
are in the image table that was declared in kernel/table.c (lines 6095 to 6109).
Before entering the main loop the sys ? getimage kernel call on line 18197 pro-
vides the process manager with a copy of the image table. (Strictly speaking, this
is not exactly a kernel call; it is one of more than a dozen macros defined in
include/minix/syslib.h that provide easily-used interfaces to the sys ? getinfo kernel
call.) Kernel processes are not known in user space and the PM (and FS) parts of
the process table do not need initialization for kernel processes. In fact, space is
not reserved for kernel process slots. These each have a negative process number

(process table index), and they are ignored by the test on line 18202. Also, it is
not necessary to call patch ? mem ? chunks for kernel processes; the allowance
made for the kernel’s memory use also takes care of the tasks that are compiled
into the kernel.
     System processes and user processes need to be added to the process table, al-
though they get slightly different treatments (lines 18210 to 18219). The only
user process loaded in the boot image is init, thus a test is made for
INIT ? PROC ? NR (line 18210). All of the other processes in the boot image are
system processes. System processes are special—they cannot be swapped, they
each have a dedicated slot in the priv table in the kernel, and they have special
privileges as indicated by their flags. For each process, the proper defaults are set
for signal processing (with some differences between the defaults for system
processes and init). Then the memory map of each process is obtained from the
kernel, using get ? mem ? map, which ultimately invokes the sys ? getinfo kernel
call, and patch ? mem ? chunks is called to adjust the mem ? chunks array (lines
18225 to 18230) accordingly.
     Finally, a message is sent to the file system so an entry for each process can
be initialized in the FS part of the process table (lines 18233 to 18236). The mes-
sage contains only the process number and the PID; this is sufficient to initialize
the FS process table slot, as all the processes in the system boot image belong to
the superuser and can be given the same default values. Each message is
dispatched with a send operation, so no reply is expected. After sending the mes-
sage the name of the process is displayed on the console (line 18237):
      Building process table: pm fs rs tty memory log driver init
In this display driver is a stand-in for the default disk driver; multiple disk drivers
may be compiled into the boot image, with one selected as the default by a label=
assignment in the boot parameters.
     The PM’s own process table entry is a special case. After the main loop is
complete the PM makes some changes to its own entry and then sends a final
message to the file system with a symbolic value of NONE as the process number.
This message is sent with a sendrec call, and the process manager blocks expect-
ing a response. While the PM has been looping through the initialization code the
file system has been executing a receive loop (on lines 24189 to 24202, if you
want to peek at code to be described in the next chapter). Receiving the message
with process number NONE tells the FS that all system processes have been ini-
tialized, so it can exit its loop and send a synchronization message to unblock the
PM.
     Now the FS is free to continue its own initialization, and here in the PM ini-
tialization is also almost complete. On line 18253, mem ? init is called. This func-
tion takes the information that has been collected in the mem ? chunks array and
initializes the linked list of free memory regions and related variables that will be
used for memory management once the system is running. Normal memory man-

agement begins after printing a message on the console listing total memory,
memory in use by MINIX 3, and available memory:
      Physical memory: total 63996 KB, system 12834 KB, free 51162 KB.
     The next function is get ? nice ? value (line 18263). It is called to determine
the ‘‘nice level’’ of each process in the boot image. The image table provides a
queue value for each boot image process which defines on which priority queue
the process will be scheduled. These range from 0 for high priority processes like
CLOCK to 15 for IDLE. But the traditional meaning of ‘‘nice level’’ in UNIX sys-
tems is a value that can be either positive or negative. Thus get ? nice ? value
scales the kernel priority values on a scale centered on zero for user processes.
This is done using constants defined as macros in include/sys/resource.h (not
listed), PRIO ? MIN and PRIO ? MAX, with values of -20 and +20. These are
scaled between MIN ? USER ? Q and MAX ? USER ? Q, defined in kernel/proc.h, so
if a decision is made to provide fewer or more scheduling queues the nice com-
mand will still work. Init, the root process in the user process tree, is scheduled in
priority queue 7 and receives a ‘‘nice’’ value of 0, which is inherited by a child
after a fork.
     The last two functions contained in main.c have already been mentioned in
passing. Get ? mem ? chunks (line 18280) is called only once. It takes the memory
information returned by the boot monitor as an ASCII string of hexadecimal
base:size pairs, converts the information into units of clicks, and stores the infor-
mation in the mem ? chunks array. Patch ? mem ? chunks (line 18333) continues
building the free memory list, and is called several times, once for the kernel itself
and once for init and each of the system processes initialized during the main loop
of pm ? init. It corrects the raw boot monitor information. Its job is easier because
it gets its data in click units. For each process, pm ? init is passed the base and size
of the text and data allocations for that process. For each process, the base of the
last element in the array of free blocks is increased by the sum of the lengths of
the text and data segments. Then the size of that block is decreased by the same
amount to mark the memory for that process as in use.

4.8.3 Implementation of FORK, EXIT, and WAIT

     The fork, exit, and wait system calls are implemented by the procedures
do ? fork, do ? pm ? exit, and do ? waitpid in the file forkexit.c. The procedure
do ? fork (line 18430) follows the steps shown in Fig. 4-36. Notice that the second
call to procs ? in ? use (line 18445) reserves the last few process table slots for the
superuser. In computing how much memory the child needs, the gap between the
data and stack segments is included, but the text segment is not. Either the
parent’s text is shared, or, if the process has common I and D space, its text seg-
ment is of zero length. After doing the computation, a call is made to alloc ? mem
to get the memory. If this is successful, the base addresses of child and parent are

converted from clicks into absolute bytes, and sys ? copy is called to send a mes-
sage to the system task to get the copying done.
     Now a slot is found in the process table. The test involving procs ? in ? use
earlier guarantees that one will exist. After the slot has been found, it is filled in,
first by copying the parent’s slot there, and then updating the fields mp ? parent,
mp ? flags, mp ? child ? utime, mp ? child ? stime, mp ? seg, mp ? exitstatus, and
mp ? sigstatus. Some of these fields need special handling. Only certain bits in
the mp ? flags field are inherited. The mp ? seg field is an array containing ele-
ments for the text, data, and stack segments, and the text portion is left pointing to
the parent’s text segment if the flags indicate this is a separate I and D program
that can share text.
     The next step is assigning a PID to the child. The call to get ? free ? pid does
what its name indicates. This is not as simple as one might think, and we will de-
scribe the function further on.
     Sys ? fork and tell ? fs inform the kernel and file system, respectively, that a
new process has been created, so they can update their process tables. (All the
procedures beginning with sys ? are library routines that send a message to the
system task in the kernel to request one of the services of Fig. 2-45.) Process
creation and destruction are always initiated by the PM and then propagated to the
kernel and file system when completed.
     The reply message to the child is sent explicitly at the end of do ? fork. The
reply to the parent, containing the child’s PID, is sent by the loop in main, as the
normal reply to a request.
     The next system call handled by the PM is exit. The procedure do ? pm ? exit
(line 18509) accepts the call, but most of the work is done by the call to pm ? exit,
a few lines further down. The reason for this division of labor is that pm ? exit is
also called to take care of processes terminated by a signal. The work is the same,
but the parameters are different, so it is convenient to split things up this way.
     The first thing pm ? exit does is to stop the timer, if the process has one run-
ning. Then the time used by the child is added to the parent’s account. Next, the
kernel and file system are notified that the process is no longer runnable (lines
18550 and 18551). The sys ? exit kernel call sends a message to the system task
telling it to clear the slot used by this process in the kernel’s process table. Next
the memory is released. A call to find ? share determines whether the text seg-
ment is being shared by another process, and if not the text segment is released by
a call to free ? mem. This is followed by another call to the same procedure to
release the data and stack. It is not worth the trouble to decide whether all the
memory could be released in one call to free ? mem. If the parent is waiting,
cleanup is called to release the process table slot. If the parent is not waiting, the
process becomes a zombie, indicated by the ZOMBIE bit in the mp ? flags word,
and the parent is sent a SIGCHILD signal.
     Whether the process is completely eliminated or made into a zombie, the final
action of pm ? exit is to loop through the process table and look for children of the

process it has just terminated (lines 18582 to 18589). If any are found, they are
disinherited and become children of init. If init is waiting and a child is hanging,
cleanup is then called for that child. This deals with situations such as the one
shown in Fig. 4-45(a). In this figure we see that process 12 is about to exit, and
that its parent, 7, is waiting for it. Cleanup will be called to get rid of 12, so 52
and 53 are turned into children of init, as shown in Fig. 4-45(b). Now we have the
situation that 53, which has already exited, is the child of a process doing a wait.
Consequently, it can also be cleaned up.

                                               Waiting
                              INIT                               INIT

                     6         7          8

                                          Waiting        6   7    8     52   53
                              12
                                              Exiting
                         52          53
                                                Zombie
                              (a)                                (b)

Figure 4-45. (a) The situation as process 12 is about to exit. (b) The situation
        after it has exited.

      When the parent process does a wait or a waitpid , control comes to procedure
do ? waitpid on line 18598. The parameters supplied by the two calls are different,
and the actions expected are also different, but the setup done in lines 18613 to
18615 prepares internal variables so do ? waitpid can perform the actions of either
call. The loop on lines 18623 to 18642 scans the entire process table to see if the
process has any children at all, and if so, checks to see if any are zombies that can
now be cleaned up. If a zombie is found (line 18630), it is cleaned up and
do ? waitpid returns the SUSPEND return code. If a traced child is found, the
reply message being constructed is modified to indicate the process is stopped,
and do ? waitpid returns.
      If the process doing the wait has no children, it simply receives an error return
(line 18653). If it has children, but none are zombies or are being traced, a test is
made to see if do ? waitpid was called with a bit set indicating the parent did not
want to wait. If not (the usual case), then a bit is set on line 18648 to indicate that
it is waiting, and the parent is suspended until a child terminates.
      When a process has exited and its parent is waiting for it, in whichever order
these events occur, the procedure cleanup (line 18660) is called to perform the
last rites. Not much remains to be done by this point. The parent is awakened
from its wait or waitpid call and is given the PID of the terminated child, as well as
its exit and signal status. The file system has already released the child’s mem-
ory, and the kernel has already suspended scheduling and freed up the child’s slot
in the process table. At this point, the child process is gone forever.

4.8.4 Implementation of EXEC

     The code for exec follows the outline of Fig. 4-40. It is contained in the pro-
cedure do ? exec (line 18747) in exec.c. After making a few validity checks, the
PM fetches the name of the file to be executed from user space (lines 18773 to
18776). Recall that the library procedures which implement exec build a stack
within the old core image, as we saw in Fig. 4-38. This stack is fetched into the
PM’s memory space next (line 18782).
     The next few steps are written as a loop (lines 18789 to 18801). However, for
ordinary binary executables only one pass through the loop takes place. We will
first describe this case. On line 18791 a message to the file system switches to the
user’s directory so the path to the file will be interpreted relative to the user’s,
rather than to PM’s, working directory. Then allowed is called—if execution is
allowed it opens the file. If the test fails a negative number is returned instead of
a valid file descriptor, and do ? exit terminates indicating failure. If the file is
present and executable, the PM calls read ? header and gets the segment sizes.
For an ordinary binary the return code from read ? header will cause an exit from
the loop at line 18800.
     Now we will look at what happens if the executable is a script. MINIX 3, like
most UNIX-like operating systems, supports executable scripts. Read ? header
tests the first two bytes of the file for the magic shebang (#!) sequence and
returns a special code if this is found, indicating a script. The first line of a script
marked this way specifies the interpreter for the script, and possibly also specifies
flags and options for the interpreter. For instance, a script can be written with a
first line like
    #! /bin/sh
to show it is to be interpreted by the Bourne shell, or
    #! /usr/local/bin/perl –wT
to be interpreted with Perl with flags set to warn of possible problems. This com-
plicates the job of exec, however. When a script is to be run, the file that
do ? exec must load into memory is not the script itself. Instead the binary for the
interpreter must be loaded. When a script is identified patch ? stack is called on
line 18801 at the bottom of the loop.
     What patch ? stack does can be illustrated by an example. Suppose that a Perl
script is called with a few arguments on the command line, like this:
    perl ? prog.pl file1 file2
If the perl script was written with a shebang line similar to the one we saw above
patch ? stack creates a stack to execute the perl binary as if the command line
were:
    /usr/local/bin/perl -wT perl ? prog.pl file1 file2

If it is successful in this, the first part of this line, that is, the path to the binary
executable of the interpreter, is returned. Then the body of the loop is executed
once more, this time reading the file header and getting the segment sizes of the
file to be executed. It is not permitted for the first line of a script to point to
another script as its interpreter. That is why the variable r is used. It can only be
incremented once, allowing only one chance to call patch ? stack. If on the second
time through the loop the code indicating a script is encountered, the test on line
18800 will break the loop. The code for a script, represented symbolically as
ESCRIPT, is a negative number (defined on line 18741). In this case the test on
line 18803 will cause do ? exit to return with an error code telling whether the
problem is a file that canot be executed or a command line that is too long.
     Some work remains to be done to complete the exec operation. Find ? share
checks to see if the new process can share text with a process that is already run-
ning (line 18809), and new ? mem allocates memory for the new image and
releases the old memory. Both the image in memory and the process table need to
be made ready before the exec-ed program can run. On lines 18819 to 18821 the
executable file’s i-node, filesystem, and modification time are saved in the proc-
ess table. Then the stack is fixed up as in Fig. 4-38(c) and copied to the new im-
age in memory. Next the text (if not already sharing text) and data segments are
copied from the disk to the memory image by calling rw ? seg (lines 18834 to
18841). If the setuid or setgid bits are set the file system needs to be notified to
put the effective id information into the FS part of process table entry (lines 18845
to 18852). In the PM’s part of the file table a pointer to the arguments to the new
program is saved so the ps command will be able to show the command line, sig-
nal bitmasks are initialized, the FS is notified to close any file descriptors that
should be closed after an exec, and the name of the command is saved for display
by ps or during debugging (lines 18856 to 18877). Usually, the last step is to tell
the kernel, but if tracing is enabled a signal must be sent (lines 18878 to 18881).
     In describing the work of do ? exec we mentioned a number of supporting
functions provided in exec.c. Read ? header (line 18889) not only reads the header
and returns the segment sizes, it also verifies that the file is a valid MINIX 3 exe-
cutable for the same CPU type as the operating system is compiled for. The con-
stant value A ? I80386 on line 18944 is determined by a #ifdef ... #endif sequence
at compile time. Binary executable programs for 32-bit MINIX 3 on Intel plat-
forms must have this constant in their headers to be acceptable. If MINIX 3 were
to be compiled to run in 16-bit mode the value here would be A ? I8086. If you are
curious, you can see values defined for other CPUs in include/a.out.h.
     Procedure new ? mem (line 18980) checks to see if sufficient memory is avail-
able for the new memory image. It searches for a hole big enough for just the
data and stack if the text is being shared; otherwise it searches for a single hole
big enough for the combined text, data, and stack. A possible improvement here
would be to search for two separate holes. In earlier versions of MINIX it was
required that the text and data/stack segments be contiguous, but this is not

necessary in MINIX 3. If sufficient memory is found, the old memory is released
and the new memory is acquired. If insufficient memory is available, the exec
call fails. After the new memory is allocated, new ? mem updates the memory
map (in mp ? seg) and reports it to the kernel with the sys ? newmap kernel call.
     The final job of new ? mem is to zero the bss segment, gap, and stack segment.
(The bss segment is that part of the data segment that contains all the uninitialized
global variables.) The work is done by the system task, called by sys ? memset at
line 19064. Many compilers generate explicit code to zero the bss segment, but
doing it here allows MINIX 3 to work even with compilers that do not. The gap
between data and stack segments is also zeroed, so that when the data segment is
extended by brk, the newly acquired memory will contain zeroes. This is not only
a convenience for the programmer, who can count on new variables having an ini-
tial value of zero, it is also a security feature on a multiuser operating system,
where a process previously using this memory may have been using data that
should not be seen by other processes.
     The next procedure, patch ? ptr (line 19074), relocates pointers like those of
Fig. 4-38(b) to the form of Fig. 4-38(c). The work is simple: examine the stack to
find all the pointers and add the base address to each one.
     The next two functions work together. We described their purpose earlier.
When a script is exec-ed the binary for the interpreter of the script is the execut-
able that must be run. Insert ? arg (line 19106) inserts strings into the PM copy of
the stack. This is directed by patch ? stack (line 19162), which finds all of the
strings on the shebang line of the script, and calls insert ? arg. The pointers have
to be corrected, too, of course. Insert ? arg’s job is straightforward, but there are a
number of things that can go wrong and must be tested. This is a good place to
mention that checking for problems when dealing with scripts is particularly
important. Scripts, after all, can be written by users, and all computer profession-
als recognize that users are often the major cause of problems. But, seriously, a
major difference between a script and a compiled binary is that you can generally
trust the compiler to have refused to produce output for a wide range of errors in
the source code. A script is not validated this way.
     Fig. 4-46 shows how this would work for a call to a shell script, s.sh, which
operates on a file f1. The command line looks like this:
    s.sh f1
and the shebang line of the script indicates it is to be interpreted by the Bourne
shell:
    #! /bin/sh
In part (a) of the figure is the stack copied from the caller’s space. Part (b) shows
how this is transformed by patch ? stack and insert ? arg. Both of these diagrams
correspond to Fig.4-38(b).
    The next function defined in exec.c is rw ? seg (line 19208). Is called once or
twice per exec, possibly to load the text segment and always to load the data

                                                                                                 \0   t    52

  Environment                                                                       s    a        /   r    48
     array                                                                          s    u        /   =    44
       0                                 \0   t    40       0                       E    M O          H    40
                            s    a        /   r    36                               \0   1        f   \0   36
                            s    u        /   =    32                               h    s        .   s    32
   HOME = /usr/ast          E    M O          H    28   HOME = /usr/ast             \0   h        s   /    28
                            \0   1        f   \0   24                               n    i        b   /    24
                            h    s        .   s    20                                        0             20
                                     0             16                                        40            16
                                                        Effective
                                     32            12                                        0             12
    Argument                                            argument
      array                          0              8     array                              37             8
       0                             25             4       0                                32             4
                     f1              20             0                     f1                 24             0
                     s.sh                                                 s.sh
                                                                          /bin/sh

                  (a)                                                     (b)

        Figure 4-46. a. Arrays passed to execve and the stack created when a script is
        executed. b. After processing by patch?stack, the arrays and the stack look like
        this. The script name is passed to the program which interprets the script.
segment. Rather than just reading the file block by block and then copying the
blocks to the user, a trick is used to allow the file system to load the entire seg-
ment directly to the user space. In effect, the call is decoded by the file system in
a slightly special way so that it appears to be a read of the entire segment by the
user process itself. Only a few lines at the beginning of the file system’s read rou-
tine know that some monkey business is going on here. Loading is appreciably
speeded up by this maneuver.
     The final procedure in exec.c is find ? share (line 19256). It searches for a
process that can share text by comparing the i-node, device, and modification
times of the file to be executed with those of existing processes. This is just a
straightforward search of the appropriate fields in mproc. Of course, it must
ignore the process on behalf of which the search is being made.
4.8.5 Implementation of BRK
    As we have just seen, the basic memory model used by MINIX 3 is quite sim-
ple: each process is given a single contiguous allocation for its data and stack
when it is created. It is never moved around in memory, it never grows, and it
never shrinks. All that can happen is that the data segment can eat away at the
gap from the low end, and the stack can eat away at it from the high end. Under

these circumstances, the implementation of the brk call in break.c is especially
easy. It consists of verifying that the new sizes are feasible and then updating the
tables to reflect them.
     The top-level procedure is do ? brk (line 19328), but most of the work is done
in adjust (line 19361). The latter checks to see if the stack and data segments
have collided. If they have, the brk call cannot be carried out, but the process is
not killed immediately. A safety factor, SAFETY ? BYTES, is added to the top of
the data segment before making the test, so (hopefully) the decision that the stack
has grown too far can be made while there is still enough room on the stack for
the process to continue for a short while. It gets control back (with an error mes-
sage), so it can print appropriate messages and shut down gracefully.
     Note that SAFETY ? BYTES and SAFETY ? CLICKS are defined using #define
statements in the middle of the procedure (line 19393). This use is rather unusual;
normally such definitions appear at the beginning of files, or in separate header
files. The associated comment reveals that the programmer found deciding upon
the size of the safety factor to be difficult. No doubt this definition was done in
this way to attract attention and, perhaps, to stimulate additional experimentation.
     The base of the data segment is constant, so if adjust has to adjust the data
segment, all it does is update the length field. The stack grows downward from a
fixed end point, so if adjust also notices that the stack pointer, which is given to it
as a parameter, has grown beyond the stack segment (to a lower address), both the
origin and length are updated.

4.8.6 Implementation of Signal Handling

     Eight POSIX system calls are related to signals. These calls are summarized
in Fig. 4-47. These system calls, as well as the signals themselves, are processed
in the file signal.c.
                                                                      
                                            call ?                                                               ?
                 System           ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????
                                                    
                                                                                          Purpose
                                                                                                                    
                    sigaction                        ? Modify response to future signal
                                                                                                                      
                     sigprocmask ? Change set of blocked signals                                                       ?
                     
                                                                            
                                                                                                                          
                       kill                             ? Send signal to another process
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                              
                                                                        Send ALRM
                                                                                 
                                  alarm                    ?                         signal  to self after delay               ?
                           pause  ???????????????????????????????????????????????????????
                                                                        Suspend  self until future signal
                                                                                                                                  
                              sigsuspend                         ? Change set of blocked signals, then PAUSE ?
                                                                                        
                               sigpending                         ? Examine set of pending (blocked) signals                       ?
                               
                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                      
                                  sigreturn                          ?? Clean up after signal handler
                                                                                                                                         
Figure 4-47. System calls relating to signals.

    The sigaction system call supports the sigaction and signal functions, which
allow a process to alter how it will respond to signals. Sigaction is required by

POSIX and is the preferred call for most purposes, but the signal library function
is required by Standard C, and programs that must be portable to non-POSIX sys-
tems should be written using it. The code for do ? sigaction (line 19544) begins
with checks for a valid signal number and verification that the call is not an
attempt to change the response to a sigkill signal (lines 19550 and 19551). (It is
not permitted to ignore, catch, or block sigkill. Sigkill is the ultimate means by
which a user can control his processes and a system manager can control his
users.) Sigaction is called with pointers to a sigaction structure, sig ? osa, which
receives the old signal attributes that were in effect before the call, and another
such structure, sig ? nsa, containing a new set of attributes.
     The first step is to call the system task to copy the current attributes into the
structure pointed to by sig ? osa. Sigaction can be called with a NULL pointer in
sig ? nsa to examine the old signal attributes without changing them. In this case
do ? sigaction returns immediately (line 19560). If sig ? nsa is not NULL, the struc-
ture defining the new signal action is copied to the PM’s space.
     The code in lines 19567 to 19585 modifies the mp ? catch, mp ? ignore, and
mp ? sigpending bitmaps according to whether the new action is to be to ignore the
signal, to use the default handler, or to catch the signal. The sa ? handler field of
the sigaction structure is used to pass a pointer to the procedure to the function to
be executed if a signal is to be caught, or one of the special codes SIG ? IGN or
SIG ? DFL, whose meanings should be clear if you understand the POSIX stan-
dards for signal handling discussed earlier. A special MINIX 3-specific code,
SIG ? MESS is also possible; this will be explained below.
     The library functions sigaddset and sigdelset are used, to modify the signal
bitmaps, although the actions are straightforward bit manipulation operations that
could have been implemented with simple macros. However, these functions are
required by the POSIX standard in order to make programs that use them easily
portable, even to systems in which the number of signals exceeds the number of
bits available in an integer. Using the library functions helps to make MINIX 3
itself easily portable to different architectures.
     We mentioned a special case above. The SIG ? MESS code detected on line
19576 is available only for privileged (system) processes. Such processes are nor-
mally blocked, waiting for request messages. Thus the ordinary method of receiv-
ing a signal, in which the PM asks the kernel to put a signal frame on the reci-
pients stack, will be delayed until a message wakes up the recipient. A
SIG ? MESS code tells the PM to deliver a notification message, which has higher
priority than normal messages. A notification message contains the set of pending
signals as an argument, allowing multiple signals to be passed in one message.
     Finally, the other signal-related fields in the PM’s part of the process table are
filled in. For each potential signal there is a bitmap, the sa ? mask, which defines
which signals are to be blocked while a handler for that signal is executing. For
each signal there is also a pointer, sa ? handler. It can contain a pointer to the
handler function, or special values to indicate the signal is to be ignored, handled

in the default way, or used to generate a message. The address of the library rou-
tine that invokes sigreturn when the handler terminates is stored in mp ? sigreturn.
This address is one of the fields in the message received by the PM.
     POSIX allows a process to manipulate its own signal handling, even while
within a signal handler. This can be used to change signal response to subsequent
signals while a signal is being processed, and then to restore the normal set of
responses. The next group of system calls support these signal-manipulation
features. Sigpending is handled by do ? sigpending (line 19597), which returns the
mp ? sigpending bitmap, so a process can determine if it has pending signals. Sig-
procmask, handled by do ? sigprocmask, returns the set of signals that are cur-
rently blocked, and can also be used to change the state of a single signal in the
set, or to replace the entire set with a new one. The moment that a signal is
unblocked is an appropriate time to check for pending signals, and this is done by
calls to check ? pending on line 19635 and line 19641. Do ? sigsuspend (line
19657) carries out the sigsuspend system call. This call suspends a process until
a signal is received. Like the other functions we have discussed here, it manipu-
lates bitmaps. It also sets the sigsuspended bit in mp ? flags, which is all it takes
to prevent execution of the process. Again, this is a good time to make a call to
check ? pending. Finally, do ? sigreturn handles sigreturn , which is used to return
from a custom handler. It restores the signal context that existed when the handler
was entered, and it also calls check ? pending on line 19682.
     When a user process, such as the kill command, invokes the kill system call,
the PM’s do ? kill function (line 19689) is invoked. A single call to kill may
require delivery of signals to a group of several processes, and do ? kill just calls
check ? sig, which checks the entire process table for eligible recipients.
     Some signals, such as sigint, originate in the kernel itself. Ksig ? pending (line
19699) is activated when a message from the kernel about pending signals is sent
to the PM. There may be more than one process with pending signals, so the loop
on lines 19714 to 19722 repeatedly asks the system task for a pending signal,
passes it on to handle ? sig, and then tells the system task it is done, until there are
no more processes with signals pending. The messages come with a bitmap, al-
lowing the kernel to generate multiple signals with one message. The next func-
tion, handle ? sig, processes the bitmap one bit at a time on lines 19750 to 19763.
Some kernel signals need special attention: the process ID is changed in some
cases to cause the signal to be delivered to a group of processes (lines 19753 to
19757). Otherwise, each set bit results in a call to check ? sig, just as in do ? kill.

Alarms and Timers

     The alarm system call is handled by do ? alarm (line 19769). It calls the next
function, set ? alarm, which is a separate function because it is also used to turn off
a timer when a process exits with a timer still on. This is done by calling
set ? alarm with an alarm time of zero. Set ? alarm does its work with timers

maintained within the process manager. It first determines if a timer is already set
on behalf of the requesting process, and if so, whether it has expired, so the sys-
tem call can return the time in seconds remaining on a previous alarm, or zero if
no timer was set. A comment within the code explains some problems with deal-
ing with long times. Some rather ugly code on line 19918 multiplies the argument
to the call, a time in seconds, by the constant HZ, the number of clock ticks per
second, to get a time in tick units. Three casts are needed to make the result the
correct clock ? t data type. Then on the next line the calculation is reversed with
ticks cast from clock ? t to unsigned long. The result is compared with a cast of the
original alarm time argument cast to unsigned long. If they are not equal it means
the requested time resulted in a number that was out of range of one of the data
types used, and a value which means ‘‘never’’ is substituted. Finally, either
pm ? set ? timer or pm ? cancel ? timer is called to add or remove a timer from the
process manager’s timer queue. The key argument to the former call is
cause ? sigalarm, the watchdog function to be executed when the timer expires.
     Any interaction with the timer maintained in kernel space is hidden in the
calls to the pm ? XXX ? timer routines. Every request for an alarm that eventually
culminates in an alarm will normally result in a request to set a timer in kernel
space. The only exception would be if more than one request for a timeout at the
exact same time were to occur. However, processes may cancel their alarms or
terminate before their alarms expire. A kernel call to request setting a timer in
kernel space only needs to be made when there is a change to the timer at the head
of the process manager’s timer queue.
     Upon expiration of a timer in the kernel-space timer queue that was set on
behalf of the PM, the system task announces the fact by sending the PM a notifi-
cation message, detected as type SYN ? ALARM by the main loop of the PM. This
results in a call to pm ? expire ? timers, which ultimately results in execution of the
next function, cause ? sigalrm.
     Cause ? sigalarm (line 19935) is the watchdog, mentioned above. It gets the
process number of the process to be signaled, checks some flags, resets the
ALARM ? ON flag, and calls check ? sig to send the SIGALRM signal.
     The default action of the SIGALRM signal is to kill the process if it is not
caught. If the SIGALRM is to be caught, a handler must be installed by sigaction .
Fig. 4-48 shows the complete sequence of events for a SIGALRM signal with a
custom handler. The figure shows that three sequences of messages occur. First,
in message (1) the user does an alarm call via a message to the PM. At this point
the process manager sets up a timer in the queue of timers it maintains for user
processes, and acknowledges with message (2). Nothing more may happen for a
while. When the timer for this request reaches the head of the PM’s timer queue,
because timers ahead of it have expired or have been cancelled, message (3) is
sent to the system task to have it set up a new kernel-space timer for the process
manager, and is acknowledged by message (4). Again, some time will pass be-
fore anything more happens. But after this timer reaches the head of the kernel-

space timer queue the clock interrupt handler will find it has expired. The
remaining messages in the sequence will follow quickly. The clock interupt
handler sends a HARD ? INT message (5) to the clock task, which causes it to run
and update its timers. The timer watchdog function, cause ? alarm, initiates mes-
sage (6), a notification to the PM. The PM now updates its timers, and after
determining from its part of the process table that a handler is installed for
SIGALRM in the target process, sends message (7) to the system task to have it do
the stack manipulations needed to send the signal to the user process. This is
acknowledged by message (8). The user process will be scheduled and will exe-
cute the handler, and then will make a sigreturn call (9) to the process manager.
The process manager then sends message (10) to the system task to complete the
cleanup, and this is acknowledged by message (11). Not shown in this diagram is
another pair of messages from the PM to the system task to get the uptime, made
before message (3).

                                                                              Layer

                                     User         Handler                       4
                                                 for ALRM

                                     1       2        9

                                                 PM                             3

                                                     4        8    10
                                                 3        7             11
                                         6                                      2

                                 5
                  Hardware                       Clock            System
                                                                                1

Figure 4-48. Messages for an alarm. The most important are: (1) User does
        alarm. (3) PM asks system task to set timer. (6) Clock tells PM time has ex-
        pired. (7) PM requests signal to user. (9) Handler terminates with call to sig-
        return. See text for details.

    The next function, do ? pause, takes care of the pause system call (line
19853). It isn’t really related to alarms and timers, although it can be used in a
program to suspend execution until an alarm (or some other signal) is received.

All that is necessary is to set a bit and return the SUSPEND code, which causes
the main loop of the PM to refrain from replying, thus keeping the caller blocked.
The kernel need not even be informed, since it knows that the caller is blocked.

Support Functions for Signals

     Several support functions in signal.c have been mentioned in passing. We
will now look at them in more detail. By far the most important is sig ? proc (line
19864), which actually sends a signal. First a number of tests are made. Attempts
to send to dead or zombie processes are serious problems that cause a system pan-
ic (lines 19889 to 19893). A process that is currently being traced is stopped
when signaled (lines 19894 to 19899). If the signal is to be ignored, sig ? proc’s
work is complete on line 19902. This is the default action for some signals, for
instance, those signals that are required to be there by POSIX but do not have to
(and are not) supported by MINIX 3. If the signal is blocked, the only action that
needs to be taken is to set a bit in that process’ mp ? sigpending bitmap. The key
test (line 19910) is to distinguish processes that have been enabled to catch signals
from those that have not. With the exception of signals that are converted into
messages to be sent to system services all other special considerations have been
eliminated by this point and a process that cannot catch the signal must be ter-
minated.
     First we will look at the processing of signals that are eligible to be caught
(lines 19911 to 19950). A message is constructed to be sent to the kernel, some
parts of which are copies of information in the PM’s part of the process table. If
the process to be signaled was previously suspended by sigsuspend, the signal
mask that was saved at the time of suspension is included in the message; other-
wise the current signal mask is included (line 19914). Other items included in the
message are several addresses in the space of the signaled process space: the sig-
nal handler, the address of the sigreturn library routine to be called on completion
of the handler, and the current stack pointer.
     Next, space is allocated on the process’ stack. Figure 4-49 shows the struc-
ture that is put on the stack. The sigcontext portion is put on the stack to preserve
it for later restoration, since the corresponding structure in the process table itself
is altered in preparation for execution of the signal handler. The sigframe part
provides a return address for the signal handler and data needed by sigreturn to
complete restoration of the process’ state when the handler is done. The return
address and frame pointer are not actually used by any part of MINIX 3. They are
there to fool a debugger if anyone should ever try to trace execution of a signal
handler.
     The structure to be put on the signaled process’ stack is fairly large. The code
in lines 19923 and 19924 reserves space for it, following which a call to adjust
tests to see whether there is enough room on the process’ stack. If there is not

                                                             Processor
                                                              registers
                                                             (64 bytes)

                                                               Mask
                      Sigcontext
                       structure
                                                               Flags

                                                        Pointer to sigcontext
                       Sigframe
                       structure
                                                          Return address

                                                           Frame pointer

                                                        Pointer to sigcontext

                                                        Code (floating point)

                                                           Signal number

                                                        Address of sigreturn

Figure 4-49. The sigcontext and sigframe structures pushed on the stack to
        prepare for a signal handler. The processor registers are a copy of the stack-
        frame used during a context switch.

enough stack space, the process is killed by jumping to the label doterminate
using the seldom-used C goto (lines 19926 and 19927).
     The call to adjust has a potential problem. Recall from our discussion of the
implementation of brk that adjust returns an error if the stack is within
SAFETY ? BYTES of running into the data segment. The extra margin of error is
provided because the validity of the stack can only be checked occasionally by
software. This margin of error is probably excessive in the present instance, since
it is known exactly how much space is needed on the stack for the signal, and
additional space is needed only for the signal handler, presumably a relatively
simple function. It is possible that some processes may be terminated unneces-
sarily because the call to adjust fails. This is certainly better than having pro-
grams fail mysteriously at other times, but finer tuning of these tests may be pos-
sible at some time in the future.

     If there is enough room on the stack for the struct, two more flags are
checked. The SA ? NODEFER flag indicates if the signaled process is to block
further signals of the same type while handling a signal. The SA ? RESETHAND
flag tells if the signal handler is to be reset upon receiving this signal. (This pro-
vides faithful emulation of the old signal call. Although this ‘‘feature’’ is often
considered a fault in the old call, support of old features requires supporting their
faults as well.) The kernel is then notified, using the sys ? sigsend kernel call (line
19940) to put the sigframe on the stack. Finally, the bit indicating that a signal is
pending is cleared, and unpause is called to terminate any system call on which
the process may be hanging. When the signaled process next executes, the signal
handler will run. If for some reason all of the tests above failed, the PM panics
(line 19949).
     The exception mentioned above—signals converted into messages for system
services—is tested for on line 19951, and carried out by the sys ? kill kernel call
that follows. This causes the system task to send a notification message to the
signaled process. Recall that, unlike most other notifications, a notification from
the system task carries a payload in addition to the basic information about its ori-
gin and a timestamp. It also transmits a bitmap of signals, so the signaled system
process learns of all pending signals. If the sys ? kill call fails, the PM panics. If it
succeeds sig ? proc returns (line 19954). If the test on line 19951 failed, execution
falls through to the doterminate label.
     Now let us look at the termination code marked by the label doterminate (line
19957). The label and a goto are the easiest way to handle the possible failure of
the call to adjust. Here signals are processed that for one reason or another cannot
or should not be caught. It is possible that the signal was one to be ignored, in
which case sig ? proc just returns. Otherwise the process must be terminated. The
only question is whether a core dump is also needed. Finally, the process is ter-
minated as if it had exited, through a call to pm ? exit (line 19967).
     Check ? sig (line 19973) is where the PM checks to see if a signal can be sent.
The call
    kill(0, sig);
causes the indicated signal to be sent to all the processes in the caller’s group (i.e.,
all the processes started from the same terminal). Signals originating in the kernel
and the reboot system call also may affect multiple processes. For this reason,
check ? sig loops on lines 19996 to 20026 to scan through the process table to find
all the processes to which a signal should be sent. The loop contains a large
number of tests. Only if all of them are passed is the signal sent, by calling
sig ? proc on line 20023.
     Check ? pending (line 20036) is another important function called several
times in the code we have just reviewed. It loops through all the bits in the
mp ? sigpending bitmap for the process referred to by do ? sigmask, do ? sigreturn,
or do ? sigsuspend, to see if any blocked signal has become unblocked. It calls

sig ? proc to send the first unblocked pending signal it finds. Since all signal
handlers eventually cause execution of do ? sigreturn, this code suffices eventually
to deliver all pending unmasked signals.
     The procedure unpause (line 20065) has to do with signals that are sent to
processes suspended on pause, wait, read, write, or sigsuspend calls. Pause, wait,
and sigsuspend can be checked by consulting the PM’s part of the process table,
but if none of these are found, the file system must be asked to use its own
do ? unpause function to check for a possible hangup on read or write. In every
case the action is the same: an error reply is sent to the waiting call and the flag
bit that corresponds to the cause of the wait is reset so the process may resume
execution and process the signal.
     The final procedure in this file is dump ? core (line 20093), which writes core
dumps to the disk. A core dump consists of a header with information about the
size of the segments occupied by a process, a copy of all the process’ state infor-
mation, obtained by copying the kernel process table information for the process,
and the memory image of each of the segments. A debugger can interpret this
information to help the programmer determine what went wrong during execution
of the process.
     The code to write the file is straightforward. The potential problem men-
tioned in the previous section again raises its head, but in a somewhat different
form. To be sure the stack segment to be recorded in the core dump is up to date,
adjust is called on line 20120. This call may fail because of the safety margin
built into it. The success of the call is not checked by dump ? core, so the core
dump will be written in any case, but within the file the information about the
stack may be incorrect.

Support Functions for Timers

     The MINIX 3 process manager handles requests for alarms from user
processes, which are not allowed to contact the kernel or the system task directly
themselves. All details of scheduling an alarm at the clock task are hidden behind
this interface. Only system processes are allowed to set an alarm timer at the ker-
nel. Support for this is provided in the file timers.c (line 20200).
     The process manager maintains a list of requests for alarms, and asks the sys-
tem task to notify it when it is time for an alarm. When an alarm comes from the
kernel the process manager passes it on to the process that should receive it.
     Three functions are provided here to support timers. Pm ? set ? timer sets a ti-
mer and adds it to the PM’s list of timers, pm ? expire ? timer checks for expired
timers and pm ? cancel ? timer removes a timer from the PM’s list. All three of
these take advantage of functions in the timers library, declared in include/-
timers.h. The function Pm ? set ? timer calls tmrs ? settimer, pm ? expire ? timer calls
tmrs ? exptimers, and pm ? cancel ? timer calls tmrs ? clrtimers. These all manage

the business of traversing a linked list and inserting or removing an item, as
required. Only when an item is inserted at or removed from the head of the queue
does it become necessary to involve the system task in order to adjust the kernel-
space timer queue. In such cases each of the pm ? XXX ? timer functions uses a
sys ? setalarm kernel call to request help at the kernel level.

4.8.7 Implementation of Other System Calls

    The process manager handles three system calls that involve time in time.c:
time, stime, and times. They are summarized in Fig. 4-50.
                                                                  
                     Call ?                          Function                    ?
                                                                    
                                                                                    
                            time ? Get current real time and uptime in seconds ?
                                                                      
                       stime ? Set the real time clock                               ?
                                                                         
                                                                                        
                                                                           
                            times ?? Get the process accounting times                    ??

Figure 4-50. Three system calls involving time.

     The real time is maintained by the clock task within the kernel, but the clock
task itself does not exchange messages with any process except the system task.
As a consequence, the only way to get or set the real time is to send a message to
the system task. This is, in fact, what do ? time (line 20320) and do ? stime (line
20341) both do. The real time is measured in seconds since Jan 1, 1970.
     Accounting information is also maintained by the kernel for each process. At
each clock tick it charges one tick to some process. The kernel doesn’t know
about parent-child relationships, so it falls to the process manager to accumulate
time information for the children of a process. When a child exits, its times are
accumulated in the parent’s slot in the PM’s part of the process table. Do ? times
(line 20366) retrieves the time usage of a parent process from the system task with
a sys ? times kernel call, then fills in a reply message with user and system time
charged to children.
     The file getset.c contains one procedure, do ? getset (line 20415), which car-
ries out seven POSIX-required PM system calls. They are shown in Fig. 4-51.
They are all so simple that they are not worth an entire procedure each. The
getuid and getgid calls both return the real and effective UID or GID.
     Setting the uid or gid is slightly more complex than just reading it. A check
has to be made to see if the caller is authorized to set the uid or gid. If the caller
passes the test, the file system must be informed of the new uid or gid, since file
protection depends on it. The setsid call creates a new session, and a process
which is already a process group leader is not allowed to do this. The test on line
20463 checks this. The file system completes the job of making a process into a
session leader with no controlling terminal.
     In contrast to the system calls considered so far in this chapter, the calls in
misc.c are not required by POSIX. These calls are necessary because the user-

                                                                     
                     System Call ?                                             Description        ?
                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                         
                                     getuid         ? Return real and effective UID                   ?
                         getgid                      ? Return real and effective GID                    ?
                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                            
                                     getpid             ? Return PIDs of process and its parent ?
                                                                                                             
                                     setuid                ? Set caller’s real and effective UID
                                                                                                               
                                                                                
                                     setgid                 ? Set caller’s real and effective GID               ?
                                                                                                                   
                                     setsid                    ? Create new session, return PID
                                                                                                                     
                                   getpgrp                      ? Return ID of process group                          ?
                                                                                      
                                                                                                                         

Figure 4-51. The system calls supported in servers/pm/getset.c.

space device drivers and servers of MINIX 3 need support for communication with
the kernel that is not necessary in monolithic operating systems. Fig. 4-52 shows
these calls and their purposes.
                                                                     
                  System Call ?                                                Description               ?
                                                                       
                                                                                                            
                   do            ? allocmem          ? Allocate a chunk of memory
                                                                                                              
                    do ? freemem                      ? Deallocate a chunk of memory                           ?
                    
                                                                           
                                                                                                                  
                      do         ? getsysinfo            ? Get info about PM from kernel
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                      
                        
                         do      ? getprocnr                ? Get index to proc table from PID or name ?
                                                                                     
                          do     ? reboot                    ? Kill all processes, tell FS and kernel
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                          
                             do  ? getsetpriority ? Get or set system priority
                                                                                                                            
                              do ? svrctrl                      ? Make a process into a server                               ?
                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                

Figure 4-52. Special-purpose MINIX 3 system calls in servers/pm/misc.c.

     The first two are handled entirely by the PM. do ? allocmem reads the request
from a received message, converts it into click units, and calls alloc ? mem. This
is used, for example, by the memory driver to allocate memory for the RAM disk.
Do ? freemem is similar, but calls free ? mem.
     The next calls usually need help from other parts of the system. They may be
thought of as interfaces to the system task. Do ? getsysinfo (line 20554) can do
several things, depending on the request in the message received. It can call the
system task to get information about the kernel contained in the kinfo structure
(defined in the file include/minix/type.h). It can also be used to provide the
address of the PM’s own part of the process table or a copy of the entire process
table to another process upon request. The final action is carried out by a call to
sys ? datacopy (line 20582). Do ? getprocnr can find an index into the process
table in its own section if given PID, and calls the system task for help if all it has
to work with is the name of the target process.

     The next two calls, although not required by POSIX, will probably be found in
some form in most UNIX-like systems. Do ? reboot sends a KILL signal to all
processes, and tells the file system to get ready for a reboot. Only after the file
system has been synched is the kernel notified with a sys ? abort call (line 20667).
A reboot may be the result of a panic, or a request from the superuser to halt or
restart, and the kernel needs to know which case applies. Do ? getsetpriority, sup-
ports the famous UNIX nice utility, which allows a user to reduce the priority of a
process in order to be a good neighbor to other processes (possibly his own).
More importantly, this call is used by the MINIX 3 system to provide fine-grained
control of relative priorities of system components. A network or disk device that
must handle a rapid stream of data can be given priority over one that receives
data more slowly, such as a keyboard. Also, a high-priority process that is stuck
in a loop and preventing other processes from running may have its priority
lowered temporarily. Changing priority is done by scheduling the process on a
lower (or higher) priority queue, as described in the discussion of implementation
of scheduling in Chap. 2. When this is initiated by the scheduler in the kernel
there is no need to involve the PM, of course, but an ordinary process must use a
system call. At the level of the PM it is just a matter of reading the current value
returned in a message or generating a message with a new value. A kernel call,
sys ? nice sends the new value to the system task.
     The last function in misc.c is do ? svrctl. It is currently used to enable and dis-
able swapping. Other functions once served by this call are expected to be imple-
mented in the reincarnation server.
     The last system call we will consider in this chapter is ptrace, handled by
trace.c. This file is not listed in Appendix B, but may be found on the CD-ROM
and the MINIX 3 Web site. Ptrace is used by debugging programs. The parameter
to this call can be one of eleven commands. These are shown in Fig. 4-53. In the
PM do ? trace processes four of them: T ? OK, T ? RESUME, I T ? EXIT , T ? STEP.
Requests to enable and exit tracing are completed here. All other commands are
passed on to the system task, which has access to the kernel’s part of the process
table. This is done by calling the sys ? trace library function. Two support func-
tions for tracing are provided. Find ? proc searches the process table for the proc-
ess to be traced, and stop ? proc stops a traced process when it is signaled.
4.8.8 Memory Management Utilities
    We will end this chapter by describing briefly two more files which provide
support functions for the process manager. These are alloc.c and utility.c.
Because internal details of these files are not discussed here, they are not printed
in Appendix B (to keep this already fat book from becoming even fatter). How-
ever, they are available on the CD-ROM and the MINIX 3 Web site.
    Alloc.c is where the system keeps track of which parts of memory are in use
and which are free. It has three entry points:

                                                                     
                Command ?                                                                Description            ?
                
                                                                      
                                                                                                                   
                  T                    ? STOP        ? Stop the process
                                                                                                                     
                   T ? OK                             ? Enable tracing by parent for this process ?
                                                                          
                                                                                                                       
                     T                 ? GETINS          ? Return value from text (instruction) space ?
                                                                                          
                                                                                                                         
                        T              ? GETDATA ? Return value from data space
                                                                                                                           
                         T           ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????
                                         GETUSER            ?             Return  value from user process table
                                                                                                                             
                            T          ? SETINS                 ? Set value in instruction space
                                                                                                                               
                             T ? SETDATA ? Set value in data space                                                              ?
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                   
                               T       ? SETUSER ? Set value in user process table
                                                                                                                                     
                                T ? RESUME ? Resume execution                                                                         ?
                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                         
                                  T    ? EXIT                        ? Exit
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                             
                                     T ? STEP                           ? Set trace bit
                                                                                                                                               

Figure 4-53. Debugging commands supported by servers/pm/trace.c.

      1. alloc ? mem – request a block of memory of a given size.
      2. free ? mem – return memory that is no longer needed.
      3. mem ? init            – initialize the free list when the PM starts running.

     As we have said before, alloc ? mem uses first fit on a list of holes sorted by
memory address. If it finds a piece that is too big, it takes what it needs and
leaves the rest on the free list, but reduced in size by the amount taken. If an
entire hole is needed, del ? slot is called to remove the entry from the free list.
     Free ? mem’s job is to check if a newly released piece of memory can be
merged with holes on either side. If it can, merge is called to join the holes and
update the lists.
     Mem ? init builds the initial free list, consisting of all available memory.
     The last file to be described is utility.c, which holds a few miscellaneous pro-
cedures used in various places in the PM. As with alloc.c, utility.c is not listed in
Appendix B.
     Get ? free ? pid finds a free PID for a child process. It avoids a problem that
conceivably could occur. The maximum PID value is 30,000. It ought to be the
maximum value that can be in PID ? t, but this value was chosen to avoid prob-
lems with some older programs that use a smaller type. After assigning, say, PID
20 to a very long-lived process, 30,000 more processes might be created and des-
troyed, and simply incrementing a variable each time a new PID is needed and
wrapping around to zero when the limit is reached could bring us back to 20
again. Assigning a PID that was still in use would be a disaster (suppose someone
later tried to signal process 20). A variable holding the last PID assigned is incre-
mented and if it exceeds a fixed maximum value, a fresh start is made with PID 2

(because init always has PID 1). Then the whole process table is searched to
make sure that the PID to be assigned is not already in use. If it is in use the pro-
cedure is repeated until a free PID is found.
     The procedure allowed checks to see if a given access is allowed to a file. For
example, do ? exec needs to know if a file is executable.
     The procedure no ? sys should never be called. It is provided just in case a
user ever calls the PM with an invalid system call number.
     Panic is called only when the PM has detected an error from which it cannot
recover. It reports the error to the system task, which then brings MINIX 3 to a
screeching halt. It is not called lightly.
     The next function in utility.c is tell ? fs, which constructs a message and sends
it to the file system when the latter needs to be informed of events handled by the
PM.
     Find ? param is used to parse the monitor parameters. Its current use is to
extract information about memory use before MINIX 3 is loaded into memory, but
it could be used to find other information if there were a need.
     The next two functions in this file provide interfaces to the library function
sys ? getproc, which calls the system task to get information from the kernel’s part
of the process table. Sys ? getproc, in turn, is actually a macro defined in
include/minix/syslib.h which passes parameters to the sys ? getinfo kernel call.
Get ? mem ? map gets the memory map of a process. Get ? stack ? ptr gets the stack
pointer. Both of these need a process number, that is, an index into the process
table, which is not the same as a PID. The last function in utility.c is
proc ? from ? pid which provides this support—it is called with a PID and returns
an index to the process table.

4.9 SUMMARY

    In this chapter we have examined memory management, both in general and
in MINIX 3. We saw that the simplest systems do not swap or page at all. Once a
program is loaded into memory, it remains there until it finishes. Embedded sys-
tems usually work like this, possibly with the code even in ROM. Some operating
systems allow only one process at a time in memory, while others support mul-
tiprogramming.
    The next step up is swapping. When swapping is used, the system can handle
more processes than it has room for in memory. Processes for which there is no
room are swapped out to the disk. Free space in memory and on disk can be kept
track of with a bitmap or a hole list.
    More advanced computers often have some form of virtual memory. In the
simplest form, each process’ address space is divided up into uniformly sized
blocks called pages, which can be placed into any available page frame in

memory. Many page replacement algorithms have been proposed. Two of the
better known ones are second chance and aging. To make paging systems work
well, choosing an algorithm is not enough; attention to issues such as determining
the working set, memory allocation policy, and page size are required.
     Segmentation helps in handling data structures that change size during execu-
tion and simplifies linking and sharing. It also facilitates providing different pro-
tection for different segments. Sometimes segmentation and paging are combined
to provide a two-dimensional virtual memory. The Intel Pentium supports seg-
mentation and paging.
     Memory management in MINIX 3 is simple. Memory is allocated when a
process executes a fork or exec system call. The memory so allocated is never
increased or decreased as long as the process lives. On Intel processors there are
two memory models used by MINIX 3. Small programs can have instructions and
data in the same memory segment. Larger programs use separate instruction and
data space (separate I and D). Processes with separate I and D space can share
the text portion of their memory, so only data and stack memory must be allocated
during a fork. This may also be true during an exec if another process already is
using the text needed by the new program.
     Most of the work of the PM is concerned not with keeping track of free mem-
ory, which it does using a hole list and the first fit algorithm, but rather with carry-
ing out the system calls relating to process management. A number of system
calls support POSIX-style signals, and since the default action of most signals is to
terminate the signaled process, it is appropriate to handle them in the PM, which
initiates termination of all processes. Several system calls not directly related to
memory are also handled by the PM, mainly because it is smaller than the file sys-
tem, and thus it was most convenient to put them here.

                                        PROBLEMS

 1. A computer system has enough room to hold four programs in its main memory.
    These programs are each idle half the time waiting for I/O. What fraction of the CPU
    time is wasted?
 2. Consider a swapping system in which memory consists of the following hole sizes in
    memory order: 10 KB, 4 KB, 20 KB, 18 KB, 7 KB, 9 KB, 12 KB, and 15 KB. Which
    hole is taken for successive segment requests of
    (a) 12 KB
    (b) 10 KB
    (c) 9 KB
    for first fit? Now repeat the question for best fit, worst fit, and next fit.
CHAP. 4                                 PROBLEMS                                           477
 3. A computer has 1 GB of RAM allocated in units of 64 KB. How many KB are needed
    if a bitmap is used to keep track of free memory?
 4. Now revisit the previous question using a hole list. How much memory is needed for
    the list in the best case and in the worst case? Assume the operating system occupies
    the bottom 512 KB of memory.
 5. What is the difference between a physical address and a virtual address?
 6. Using the page mapping of Fig. 4-8, give the physical address corresponding to each
    of the following virtual addresses:
    (a) 20
    (b) 4100
    (c) 8300
 7. In Fig. 4-9, the page field of the virtual address is 4 bits and the page field of the phy-
    sical address is 3 bits. In general, is it permitted for the number of page bits of the vir-
    tual address to be smaller, equal to, or larger than the number of page bits of the physi-
    cal address? Discuss your answer.
 8. The Intel 8086 processor does not support virtual memory. Nevertheless, some com-
    panies previously sold systems that contained an unmodified 8086 CPU and do pag-
    ing. Make an educated guess as to how they did it. (Hint: think about the logical loca-
    tion of the MMU.)
 9. If an instruction takes 1 nsec and a page fault takes an additional n nsec, give a for-
    mula for the effective instruction time if page faults occur every k instructions.
10. A machine has a 32-bit address space and an 8 KB page. The page table is entirely in
    hardware, with one 32-bit word per entry. When a process starts, the page table is
    copied to the hardware from memory, at one word every 100 nsec. If each process
    runs for 100 msec (including the time to load the page table), what fraction of the CPU
    time is devoted to loading the page tables?
11. A computer with a 32-bit address uses a two-level page table. Virtual addresses are
    split into a 9-bit top-level page table field, an 11-bit second-level page table field, and
    an offset. How large are the pages and how many are there in the address space?
12. Below is the listing of a short assembly language program for a computer with 512-
    byte pages. The program is located at address 1020, and its stack pointer is at 8192
    (the stack grows toward 0). Give the page reference string generated by this program.
    Each instruction occupies 4 bytes (1 word), and both instruction and data references
    count in the reference string.
    Load word 6144 into register 0
    Push register 0 onto the stack
    Call a procedure at 5120, stacking the return address
    Subtract the immediate constant 16 from the stack pointer
    Compare the actual parameter to the immediate constant 4
    Jump if equal to 5152
13. Suppose that a 32-bit virtual address is broken up into four fields, a, b, c, and d. The
    first three are used for a three-level page table system. The fourth field, d, is the

    offset. Does the number of pages depend on the sizes of all four fields? If not, which
    ones matter and which ones do not?
14. A computer whose processes have 1024 pages in their address spaces keeps its page
    tables in memory. The overhead required for reading a word from the page table is
    500 nsec. To reduce this overhead, the computer has a TLB, which holds 32 (virtual
    page, physical page frame) pairs, and can do a look up in 100 nsec. What hit rate is
    needed to reduce the mean overhead to 200 nsec?
15. The TLB on the VAX did not contain an R bit. Was this omission just an artifact of its
    era (1980s) or is there some other reason for its absence?
16. A machine has 48-bit virtual addresses and 32-bit physical addresses. Pages are 8 KB.
    How many entries are needed for the page table?
17. A RISC CPU with 64-bit virtual addresses and 8 GB of RAM uses an inverted page
    table with 8-KB pages. What is the minimum size of the TLB?
18. A computer has four page frames. The time of loading, time of last access, and the R
    and M bits for each page are as shown below (the times are in clock ticks):

    Page         Loaded         Last ref.          R     M
    0            126            279                0     0
    1            230            260                1     0
    2            120            272                1     1
    3            160            280                1     1

    (a) Which page will NRU replace?
    (b) Which page will FIFO replace?
    (c) Which page will LRU replace?
    (d) Which page will second chance replace?
19. If FIFO page replacement is used with four page frames and eight pages, how many
    page faults will occur with the reference string 0172327103 if the four frames are ini-
    tially empty? Now repeat this problem for LRU.
20. A small computer has 8 page frames, each containing a page. The page frames con-
    tain virtual pages A, C, G, H, B, L, N, D, and F in that order. Their respective load
    times were 18, 23, 5, 7, 32, 19, 3, and 8. Their reference bits are 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, and
    0 and their modified bits are 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, and 1, respectively. What is the order
    that second chance considers pages and which one is selected?
21. Are there any circumstances in which clock and second chance choose different pages
    to replace? If so, what are they?
22. Suppose that a computer uses the PFF page replacement algorithm but there is suffi-
    cient memory to hold all the processes without page faults. What happens?
23. A small computer has four page frames. At the first clock tick, the R bits are 0111
    (page 0 is 0, the rest are 1). At subsequent clock ticks, the values are 1011, 1010,
    1101, 0010, 1010, 1100, and 0001. If the aging algorithm is used with an 8-bit
    counter, give the values of the four counters after the last tick.
CHAP. 4                                 PROBLEMS                                         479
24. How long does it take to load a 64-KB program from a disk whose average seek time
    is 10 msec, whose rotation time is 8 msec, and whose tracks hold 1 MB
    (a) for a 2-KB page size?
    (b) for a 4-KB page size?
    (c) for a 64-KB page size
    The pages are spread randomly around the disk.
25. Given the results of the previous problem, why are pages so small? Name two disad-
    vantages of 64-KB pages with respect to 4-KB pages.
26. One of the first timesharing machines, the PDP-1, had a memory of 4-KB 18-bit
    words. It held one process at a time in memory. When the scheduler decided to run
    another process, the process in memory was written to a paging drum, with 4K 18-bit
    words around the circumference of the drum. The drum could start writing (or read-
    ing) at any word, rather than only at word 0. Why do you suppose this drum was
    chosen?
27. An embedded computer provides each process with 65,536 bytes of address space
    divided into pages of 4096 bytes. A particular program has a text size of 32,768 bytes,
    a data size of 16,386 bytes, and a stack size of 15,870 bytes. Will this program fit in
    the address space? If the page size were 512 bytes, would it fit? Remember that a
    page may not contain parts of two different segments.
28. It has been observed that the number of instructions executed between page faults is
    directly proportional to the number of page frames allocated to a program. If the
    available memory is doubled, the mean interval between page faults is also doubled.
    Suppose that a normal instruction takes 1 microsec, but if a page fault occurs, it takes
    2001 microsec (i.e., 2 msec) to handle the fault. If a program takes 60 sec to run, dur-
    ing which time it gets 15,000 page faults, how long would it take to run if twice as
    much memory were available?
29. A group of operating system designers for the Frugal Computer Company are thinking
    about ways of reducing the amount of backing store needed in their new operating sys-
    tem. The head guru has just suggested not bothering to save the program text in the
    swap area at all, but just page it in directly from the binary file whenever it is needed.
    Are there any problems with this approach?
30. Explain the difference between internal fragmentation and external fragmentation.
    Which one occurs in paging systems? Which one occurs in systems using pure seg-
    mentation?
31. When segmentation and paging are both being used, as in the Pentium, first the seg-
    ment descriptor must be looked up, then the page descriptor. Does the TLB also work
    this way, with two levels of lookup?
32. Why does the MINIX 3 memory management scheme make it necessary to have a pro-
    gram like chmem?
33. Figure 4-44 shows the initial memory usage of the first four components of a MINIX 3
    system. What will be the cs value for the next component loaded after rs?

34. IBM-compatible computers have ROM and I/O device memory not available for pro-
    gram use in the range from 640 KB to 1 MB, and after the MINIX 3 boot monitor relo-
    cates itself below the 640-KB limit the memory available for program use is further
    reduced. In Fig. 4-44, how much memory is available for loading a program in the
    region between the kernel and the unavailable region if the boot monitor has 52256
    bytes allocated to it?
35. In the previous problem does it matter whether the boot monitor takes exactly as much
    memory as it needs or if it is rounded up to units of clicks?
36. In Sec. 4.7.5, it was pointed out that on an exec call, by testing for an adequate hole
    before releasing the current process’ memory, a suboptimal implementation is
    achieved. Reprogram this algorithm to do better.
37. In Sec. 4.8.4, it was pointed out that it would be better to search for holes for the text
    and data segments separately. Implement this improvement.
38. Redesign adjust to avoid the problem of signaled processes being killed unnecessarily
    because of a too-strict test for stack space.
39. To tell the current memory allocation of a MINIX 3 process you can use the command
         chmem +0 a.out
    but this has the annoying side effect of rewriting the file, and thus changing its date
    and time information. Modify chmem to make a new command showmem, which sim-
    ply displays the current memory allocation of its argument.
