                                      5
                       FILE SYSTEMS

     All computer applications need to store and retrieve information. While a
process is running, it can store a limited amount of information within its own
address space. However, the storage capacity is restricted to the size of the virtual
address space. For some applications this size is adequate, but for others, such as
airline reservations, banking, or corporate record keeping, it is far too small.
     A second problem with keeping information within a process’ address space
is that when the process terminates, the information is lost. For many applica-
tions, (e.g., for databases), the information must be retained for weeks, months, or
even forever. Having it vanish when the process using it terminates is unaccept-
able. Furthermore, it must not go away when a computer crash kills the process.
     A third problem is that it is frequently necessary for multiple processes to
access (parts of) the information at the same time. If we have an online telephone
directory stored inside the address space of a single process, only that process can
access it. The way to solve this problem is to make the information itself in-
dependent of any one process.
     Thus we have three essential requirements for long-term information storage:
     1. It must be possible to store a very large amount of information.
     2. The information must survive the termination of the process using it.
     3. Multiple processes must be able to access the information concurrently.

The usual solution to all these problems is to store information on disks and other
external media in units called files. Processes can then read them and write new
ones if need be. Information stored in files must be persistent, that is, not be af-
fected by process creation and termination. A file should only disappear when its
owner explicitly removes it.
     Files are managed by the operating system. How they are structured, named,
accessed, used, protected, and implemented are major topics in operating system
design. As a whole, that part of the operating system dealing with files is known
as the file system and is the subject of this chapter.
     From the users’ standpoint, the most important aspect of a file system is how
it appears to them, that is, what constitutes a file, how files are named and pro-
tected, what operations are allowed on files, and so on. The details of whether
linked lists or bitmaps are used to keep track of free storage and how many sectors
there are in a logical block are of less interest, although they are of great impor-
tance to the designers of the file system. For this reason, we have structured the
chapter as several sections. The first two are concerned with the user interface to
files and directories, respectively. Then comes a discussion of alternative ways a
file system can be implemented. Following a discussion of security and protec-
tion mechanisms, we conclude with a description of the MINIX 3 file system.

5.1 FILES

     In the following pages we will look at files from the user’s point of view, that
is, how they are used and what properties they have.

5.1.1 File Naming

     Files are an abstraction mechanism. They provide a way to store information
on the disk and read it back later. This must be done in such a way as to shield
the user from the details of how and where the information is stored, and how the
disks actually work.
     Probably the most important characteristic of any abstraction mechanism is
the way the objects being managed are named, so we will start our examination of
file systems with the subject of file naming. When a process creates a file, it
gives the file a name. When the process terminates, the file continues to exist and
can be accessed by other processes using its name.
     The exact rules for file naming vary somewhat from system to system, but all
current operating systems allow strings of one to eight letters as legal file names.
Thus andrea, bruce, and cathy are possible file names. Frequently digits and spe-
cial characters are also permitted, so names like 2, urgent!, and Fig.2-14 are often
valid as well. Many file systems support names as long as 255 characters.
SEC. 5.1                               FILES                                    483
     Some file systems distinguish between upper- and lower-case letters, whereas
others do not. UNIX (including all its variants) falls in the first category; MS-DOS
falls in the second. Thus a UNIX system can have all of the following as three dis-
tinct files: maria, Maria, and MARIA. In MS-DOS, all these names refer to the
same file.
     Windows falls in between these extremes. The Windows 95 and Windows 98
file systems are both based upon the MS-DOS file system, and thus inherit many of
its properties, such as how file names are constructed. With each new version im-
provements were added but the features we will discuss are mostly common to
MS-DOS and ‘‘classic’’ Windows versions. In addition, Windows NT, Windows
2000, and Windows XP support the MS-DOS file system. However, the latter sys-
tems also have a native file system (NTFS) that has different properties (such as
file names in Unicode). This file system also has seen changes in successive ver-
sions. In this chapter, we will refer to the older systems as the Windows 98 file
system. If a feature does not apply to the MS-DOS or Windows 95 versions we
will say so. Likewise, we will refer to the newer system as either NTFS or the
Windows XP file system, and we will point it out if an aspect under discussion
does not also apply to the file systems of Windows NT or Windows 2000. When
we say just Windows, we mean all Windows file systems since Windows 95.
     Many operating systems support two-part file names, with the two parts
separated by a period, as in prog.c. The part following the period is called the file
extension and usually indicates something about the file, in this example that it is
a C programming language source file. In MS-DOS, for example, file names are 1
to 8 characters, plus an optional extension of 1 to 3 characters. In UNIX, the size
of the extension, if any, is up to the user, and a file may even have two or more
extensions, as in prog.c.bz2, where .bz2 is commonly used to indicate that the file
(prog.c) has been compressed using the bzip2 compression algorithm. Some of
the more common file extensions and their meanings are shown in Fig. 5-1.
     In some systems (e.g., UNIX), file extensions are just conventions and are not
enforced by the operating system. A file named file.txt might be some kind of text
file, but that name is more to remind the owner than to convey any actual infor-
mation to the computer. On the other hand, a C compiler may actually insist that
files it is to compile end in .c, and it may refuse to compile them if they do not.
     Conventions like this are especially useful when the same program can handle
several different kinds of files. The C compiler, for example, can be given a list
of files to compile and link together, some of them C files (e.g., foo.c), some of
them assembly language files (e.g., bar.s), and some of them object files (e.g.,
other.o). The extension then becomes essential for the compiler to tell which are
C files, which are assembly files, and which are object files.
     In contrast, Windows is very much aware of the extensions and assigns mean-
ing to them. Users (or processes) can register extensions with the operating sys-
tem and specify which program ‘‘owns’’ which one. When a user double clicks
on a file name, the program assigned to its file extension is launched and given

                                                                                                 
          Extension ?                                                                            Meaning                       ?
                                                                            
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                            
                                file.bak     ? Backup file                                                                         ?
           file.c                             ? C source program                                                                     ?
                                                                             
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                             
                                file.gif         ? Graphical Interchange Format image                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                            
                                file.html                                   World
                                                                               
                                                                                  Wide Web  HyperText Markup Language document               ?
                                                                               
                                file.iso              ? ISO image of a CD-ROM (for burning to CD)                                              ?
                                                                                                                                                  
                                file.jpg                 ? Still picture encoded with the JPEG standard
                                                                                                                                                    
                 file.mp3                                 ? Music encoded in MPEG layer 3 audio format                                               ?
                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                    
                                file.mpg                     ? Movie encoded with the MPEG standard                                                      ?
                    file.o                                    ? Object file (compiler output, not yet linked)                                              ?
                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                       
                                file.pdf                         ? Portable Document Format file                                                               ?
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                file.ps                             ? PostScript file
                                                                                                                                                                    
                          file.tex                                   ? Input for the TEX formatting program                                                          ?
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                              
                                file.txt                                ? General text file                                                                              ?
                              file.zip                                   ? Compressed archive                                                                              ?
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                              

Figure 5-1. Some typical file extensions.
the name of the file as parameter. For example, double clicking on file.doc starts
Microsoft Word with file.doc as the initial file to edit.
    Some might think it odd that Microsoft chose to make common extensions in-
visible by default since they are so important. Fortunately most of the ‘‘wrong by
default’’ settings of Windows can be changed by a sophisticated user who knows
where to look.

5.1.2 File Structure

     Files can be structured in any one of several ways. Three common possibili-
ties are depicted in Fig. 5-2. The file in Fig. 5-2(a) is just an unstructured
sequence of bytes. In effect, the operating system does not know or care what is
in the file. All it sees are bytes. Any meaning must be imposed by user-level pro-
grams. Both UNIX and Windows 98 use this approach.
     Having the operating system regard files as nothing more than byte sequences
provides the maximum flexibility. User programs can put anything they want in
their files and name them any way that is convenient. The operating system does
not help, but it also does not get in the way. For users who want to do unusual
things, the latter can be very important.
     The first step up in structure is shown in Fig. 5-2(b). In this model, a file is a
sequence of fixed-length records, each with some internal structure. Central to
the idea of a file being a sequence of records is the idea that the read operation
returns one record and the write operation overwrites or appends one record. As a
SEC. 5.1                                     FILES                                            485

        1 Byte           1 Record

                                                            Ant     Fox    Pig

                                Cat    Cow    Dog           Goat    Lion   Owl   Pony   Rat    Worm

                                             Hen     Ibis    Lamb

  (a)             (b)                                               (c)

Figure 5-2. Three kinds of files. (a) Byte sequence. (b) Record sequence.
        (c) Tree.

historical note, when the 80-column punched card was king many (mainframe)
operating systems based their file systems on files consisting of 80-character rec-
ords, in effect, card images. These systems also supported files of 132-character
records, which were intended for the line printer (which in those days were big
chain printers having 132 columns). Programs read input in units of 80 characters
and wrote it in units of 132 characters, although the final 52 could be spaces, of
course. No current general-purpose system works this way.
     The third kind of file structure is shown in Fig. 5-2(c). In this organization, a
file consists of a tree of records, not necessarily all the same length, each contain-
ing a key field in a fixed position in the record. The tree is sorted on the key field,
to allow rapid searching for a particular key.
     The basic operation here is not to get the ‘‘next’’ record, although that is also
possible, but to get the record with a specific key. For the zoo file of Fig. 5-2(c),
one could ask the system to get the record whose key is pony, for example,
without worrying about its exact position in the file. Furthermore, new records
can be added to the file, with the operating system, and not the user, deciding
where to place them. This type of file is clearly quite different from the unstruc-
tured byte streams used in UNIX and Windows 98 but is widely used on the large
mainframe computers still used in some commercial data processing.

5.1.3 File Types

    Many operating systems support several types of files. UNIX and Windows,
for example, have regular files and directories. UNIX also has character and block
special files. Windows XP also uses metadata files, which we will mention later.

Regular files are the ones that contain user information. All the files of Fig. 5-2
are regular files. Directories are system files for maintaining the structure of the
file system. We will study directories below. Character special files are related
to input/output and used to model serial I/O devices such as terminals, printers,
and networks. Block special files are used to model disks. In this chapter we will
be primarily interested in regular files.
     Regular files are generally either ASCII files or binary files. ASCII files con-
sist of lines of text. In some systems each line is terminated by a carriage return
character. In others, the line feed character is used. Some systems (e.g., Win-
dows) use both. Lines need not all be of the same length.
     The great advantage of ASCII files is that they can be displayed and printed
as is, and they can be edited with any text editor. Furthermore, if large numbers
of programs use ASCII files for input and output, it is easy to connect the output
of one program to the input of another, as in shell pipelines. (The interprocess
plumbing is not any easier, but interpreting the information certainly is if a stan-
dard convention, such as ASCII, is used for expressing it.)
     Other files are binary files, which just means that they are not ASCII files.
Listing them on the printer gives an incomprehensible listing full of what is
apparently random junk. Usually, they have some internal structure known to
programs that use them.
     For example, in Fig. 5-3(a) we see a simple executable binary file taken from
an early version of UNIX. Although technically the file is just a sequence of
bytes, the operating system will only execute a file if it has the proper format. It
has five sections: header, text, data, relocation bits, and symbol table. The header
starts with a so-called magic number, identifying the file as an executable file (to
prevent the accidental execution of a file not in this format). Then come the sizes
of the various pieces of the file, the address at which execution starts, and some
flag bits. Following the header are the text and data of the program itself. These
are loaded into memory and relocated using the relocation bits. The symbol table
is used for debugging.
     Our second example of a binary file is an archive, also from UNIX. It consists
of a collection of library procedures (modules) compiled but not linked. Each one
is prefaced by a header telling its name, creation date, owner, protection code, and
size. Just as with the executable file, the module headers are full of binary
numbers. Copying them to the printer would produce complete gibberish.
     Every operating system must recognize at least one file type: its own execut-
able file, but some operating systems recognize more. The old TOPS-20 system
(for the DECsystem 20) went so far as to examine the creation time of any file to
be executed. Then it located the source file and saw if the source had been modi-
fied since the binary was made. If it had been, it automatically recompiled the
source. In UNIX terms, the make program had been built into the shell. The file
extensions were mandatory so the operating system could tell which binary pro-
gram was derived from which source.
SEC. 5.1                                        FILES                                         487

                                                                                  Module
           Magic number                                                           name
                                                       Header
              Text size
             Data size
                                                                                   Date
 Header

              BSS size
  
                                                       Object                     Owner
          Symbol table size
                                                       module
             Entry point                                                         Protection

                                                                                   Size
               Flags

                Text
                                                       Header

                                                       Object
                                                       module

                Data
                                                       Header

            Relocation
               bits
                                                       Object
                                                       module
              Symbol
               table

                (a)                                                        (b)

Figure 5-3. (a) An executable file. (b) An archive.

     Having strongly typed files like this causes problems whenever the user does
anything that the system designers did not expect. Consider, as an example, a sys-
tem in which program output files have extension .dat (data files). If a user writes
a program formatter that reads a .c file (C program), transforms it (e.g., by con-
verting it to a standard indentation layout), and then writes the transformed file as
output, the output file will be of type .dat. If the user tries to offer this to the C
compiler to compile it, the system will refuse because it has the wrong extension.
Attempts to copy file.dat to file.c will be rejected by the system as invalid (to pro-
tect the user against mistakes).
     While this kind of ‘‘user friendliness’’ may help novices, it drives experienced
users up the wall since they have to devote considerable effort to circumventing
the operating system’s idea of what is reasonable and what is not.

5.1.4 File Access

    Early operating systems provided only a single kind of file access: sequential
access. In these systems, a process could read all the bytes or records in a file in
order, starting at the beginning, but could not skip around and read them out of
order. Sequential files could be rewound, however, so they could be read as often
as needed. Sequential files were convenient when the storage medium was mag-
netic tape, rather than disk.
    When disks came into use for storing files, it became possible to read the
bytes or records of a file out of order, or to access records by key, rather than by
position. Files whose bytes or records can be read in any order are called random
access files. They are required by many applications.
    Random access files are essential for many applications, for example, data-
base systems. If an airline customer calls up and wants to reserve a seat on a par-
ticular flight, the reservation program must be able to access the record for that
flight without having to read the records for thousands of other flights first.
    Two methods are used for specifying where to start reading. In the first one,
every read operation gives the position in the file to start reading at. In the second
one, a special operation, seek, is provided to set the current position. After a
seek, the file can be read sequentially from the now-current position.
    In some older mainframe operating systems, files are classified as being either
sequential or random access at the time they are created. This allows the system
to use different storage techniques for the two classes. Modern operating systems
do not make this distinction. All their files are automatically random access.

5.1.5 File Attributes

     Every file has a name and its data. In addition, all operating systems associate
other information with each file, for example, the date and time the file was
created and the file’s size. We will call these extra items the file’s attributes al-
though some people called them metadata. The list of attributes varies consider-
ably from system to system. The table of Fig. 5-4 shows some of the possibilities,
but others also exist. No existing system has all of these, but each is present in
some system.
     The first four attributes relate to the file’s protection and tell who may access
it and who may not. All kinds of schemes are possible, some of which we will
study later. In some systems the user must present a password to access a file, in
which case the password must be one of the attributes.
     The flags are bits or short fields that control or enable some specific property.
Hidden files, for example, do not appear in listings of the files. The archive flag
is a bit that keeps track of whether the file has been backed up. The backup pro-
gram clears it, and the operating system sets it whenever a file is changed. In this
SEC. 5.1                                                                                             FILES                                                                                                                489

                                                                             
                                                      Attribute       ?                                                                   Meaning       ?
                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                  
                                                 Protection               ? Who can access the file and in what way                                         ?
            Password                                                       ? Password needed to access the file                                               ?
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                     
                                                 Creator                      ? ID of the person who created the file                                             ?
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                 Owner
                                                                                        
                                                                                                                   Current owner                                      ?
                                                                                         
                                                 Read-only flag                    ? 0 for read/write; 1 for read only                                                  ?
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                 Hidden flag                          ? 0 for normal; 1 for do not display in listings
                                                                                                                                                                             
                      System flag                                                      ? 0 for normal files; 1 for system file                                                ?
                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                               
                                                 Archive flag                             ? 0 for has been backed up; 1 for needs to be backed up ?
                         ASCII/binary flag                                                 ? 0 for ASCII file; 1 for binary file                                                  ?
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                  
                                                 Random access flag ? 0 for sequential access only; 1 for random access                                                               ?
                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                 Temporary flag                                 ? 0 for normal; 1 for delete file on process exit
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                               Lock flags                                                        ? 0 for unlocked; nonzero for locked                                                       ?
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                         
                                                 Record length                                      ? Number of bytes in a record                                                               ?
                                   Key position                                                      ? Offset of the key within each record                                                       ?
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                             
                                                 Key length                                             ? Number of bytes in the key field                                                            ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                 Creation time                                             ? Date and time the file was created
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                 
                                                 Time of last access ? Date and time the file was last accessed                                                                                             ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                 Time of last change ? Date and time the file has last changed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                              Current size                                                    ? Number of bytes in the file                                                                       ?
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                        
                                                 Maximum size                                                    ? Number of bytes the file may grow to                                                               ?

Figure 5-4. Some possible file attributes.

way, the backup program can tell which files need backing up. The temporary
flag allows a file to be marked for automatic deletion when the process that
created it terminates.
    The record length, key position, and key length fields are only present in files
whose records can be looked up using a key. They provide the information re-
quired to find the keys.
    The various times keep track of when the file was created, most recently
accessed and most recently modified. These are useful for a variety of purposes.
For example, a source file that has been modified after the creation of the
corresponding object file needs to be recompiled. These fields provide the neces-
sary information.
    The current size tells how big the file is at present. Some old mainframe oper-
ating systems require the maximum size to be specified when the file is created, in
order to let the operating system reserve the maximum amount of storage in ad-
vance. Modern operating systems are clever enough to do without this feature.

5.1.6 File Operations

    Files exist to store information and allow it to be retrieved later. Different
systems provide different operations to allow storage and retrieval. Below is a
discussion of the most common system calls relating to files.
      1. Create. The file is created with no data. The purpose of the call is to
         announce that the file is coming and to set some of the attributes.
      2. Delete. When the file is no longer needed, it has to be deleted to free
         up disk space. A system call for this purpose is always provided.
      3. Open. Before using a file, a process must open it. The purpose of
         the open call is to allow the system to fetch the attributes and list of
         disk addresses into main memory for rapid access on later calls.
      4. Close. When all the accesses are finished, the attributes and disk ad-
         dresses are no longer needed, so the file should be closed to free up
         some internal table space. Many systems encourage this by impos-
         ing a maximum number of open files on processes. A disk is written
         in blocks, and closing a file forces writing of the file’s last block,
         even though that block may not be entirely full yet.
      5. Read. Data are read from file. Usually, the bytes come from the cur-
         rent position. The caller must specify how much data are needed and
         must also provide a buffer to put them in.
      6. Write. Data are written to the file, again, usually at the current posi-
         tion. If the current position is the end of the file, the file’s size in-
         creases. If the current position is in the middle of the file, existing
         data are overwritten and lost forever.
      7. Append. This call is a restricted form of write. It can only add data
         to the end of the file. Systems that provide a minimal set of system
         calls do not generally have append, but many systems provide multi-
         ple ways of doing the same thing, and these systems sometimes have
         append.
      8. Seek. For random access files, a method is needed to specify from
         where to take the data. One common approach is a system call,
         seek, that repositions the file pointer to a specific place in the file.
         After this call has completed, data can be read from, or written to,
         that position.
      9. Get attributes . Processes often need to read file attributes to do their
         work. For example, the UNIX make program is commonly used to
         manage software development projects consisting of many source
         files. When make is called, it examines the modification times of all
SEC. 5.1                                FILES                                        491
           the source and object files and arranges for the minimum number of
           compilations required to bring everything up to date. To do its job, it
           must look at the attributes, namely, the modification times.
    10. Set attributes . Some of the attributes are user settable and can be
        changed after the file has been created. This system call makes that
        possible. The protection mode information is an obvious example.
        Most of the flags also fall in this category.
    11. Rename. It frequently happens that a user needs to change the name
        of an existing file. This system call makes that possible. It is not
        always strictly necessary, because the file can usually be copied to a
        new file with the new name, and the old file then deleted.
    12. Lock. Locking a file or a part of a file prevents multiple simultane-
        ous access by different process. For an airline reservation system, for
        instance, locking the database while making a reservation prevents
        reservation of a seat for two different travelers.

5.2 DIRECTORIES
    To keep track of files, file systems normally have directories or folders,
which, in many systems, are themselves files. In this section we will discuss
directories, their organization, their properties, and the operations that can be per-
formed on them.

5.2.1 Simple Directories

     A directory typically contains a number of entries, one per file. One possibil-
ity is shown in Fig. 5-5(a), in which each entry contains the file name, the file
attributes, and the disk addresses where the data are stored. Another possibility is
shown in Fig. 5-5(b). Here a directory entry holds the file name and a pointer to
another data structure where the attributes and disk addresses are found. Both of
these systems are commonly used.
     When a file is opened, the operating system searches its directory until it finds
the name of the file to be opened. It then extracts the attributes and disk addres-
ses, either directly from the directory entry or from the data structure pointed to,
and puts them in a table in main memory. All subsequent references to the file
use the information in main memory.
     The number of directories varies from system to system. The simplest form
of directory system is a single directory containing all files for all users, as illus-
trated in Fig. 5-6(a). On early personal computers, this single-directory system
was common, in part because there was only one user.

      games           attributes              games
      mail            attributes              mail
      news            attributes              news
      work            attributes              work

                (a)                                   (b)                              Data structure
                                                                                       containing the
                                                                                       attributes

Figure 5-5. (a) Attributes in the directory entry. (b) Attributes elsewhere.

     The problem with having only one directory in a system with multiple users is
that different users may accidentally use the same names for their files. For ex-
ample, if user A creates a file called mailbox, and then later user B also creates a
file called mailbox, B’s file will overwrite A’s file. Consequently, this scheme is
not used on multiuser systems any more, but could be used on a small embedded
system, for example, a handheld personal digital assistant or a cellular telephone.
     To avoid conflicts caused by different users choosing the same file name for
their own files, the next step up is giving each user a private directory. In that
way, names chosen by one user do not interfere with names chosen by a different
user and there is no problem caused by the same name occurring in two or more
directories. This design leads to the system of Fig. 5-6(b). This design could be
used, for example, on a multiuser computer or on a simple network of personal
computers that shared a common file server over a local area network.
     Implicit in this design is that when a user tries to open a file, the operating
system knows which user it is in order to know which directory to search. As a
consequence, some kind of login procedure is needed, in which the user specifies
a login name or identification, something not required with a single-level direc-
tory system.
     When this system is implemented in its most basic form, users can only
access files in their own directories.

5.2.2 Hierarchical Directory Systems

     The two-level hierarchy eliminates file name conflicts between users. But
another problem is that users with many files may want to group them in smaller
subgroups, for instance a professor might want to separate handouts for a class
from drafts of chapters of a new textbook. What is needed is a general hierarchy
(i.e., a tree of directories). With this approach, each user can have as many direc-
tories as are needed so that files can be grouped together in natural ways. This
approach is shown in Fig. 5-6(c). Here, the directories A, B, and C contained in
SEC. 5.2                                        DIRECTORIES                                                   493

                                                  Directory            File

                   Root directory                     Root directory                                  Root directory
                                                                  User
                                                                directory
 A   A         B    C                   A        B        C                   A             B                     C

                                    A       A    B    C   C    C              A        B    B       B             C       C

                                                       Files
                                                                                       B                  C               C

                                                                              User subdirectories
                                                                                                      C       C       C       C

         (a)                                    (b)                                             (c)

Figure 5-6. Three file system designs. (a) Single directory shared by all users.
          (b) One directory per user. (c) Arbitrary tree per user. The letters indicate the
          directory or file’s owner.

the root directory each belong to a different user, two of whom have created sub-
directories for projects they are working on.
    The ability to create an arbitrary number of subdirectories provides a powerful
structuring tool for users to organize their work. For this reason nearly all modern
PC and server file systems are organized this way.
    However, as we have pointed out before, history often repeats itself with new
technologies. Digital cameras have to record their images somewhere, usually on
a flash memory card. The very first digital cameras had a single directory and
named the files DSC0001.JPG, DSC0002.JPG, etc. However, it did not take very
long for camera manufacturers to build file systems with multiple directories, as
in Fig. 5-6(b). What difference does it make that none of the camera owners
understand how to use multiple directories, and probably could not conceive of
any use for this feature even if they did understand it? It is only (embedded)
software, after all, and thus costs the camera manufacturer next to nothing to pro-
vide. Can digital cameras with full-blown hierarchical file systems, multiple login
names, and 255-character file names be far behind?

5.2.3 Path Names

    When the file system is organized as a directory tree, some way is needed for
specifying file names. Two different methods are commonly used. In the first
method, each file is given an absolute path name consisting of the path from the
root directory to the file. As an example, the path /usr/ast/mailbox means that the
root directory contains a subdirectory usr/, which in turn contains a subdirectory

ast/, which contains the file mailbox. Absolute path names always start at the root
directory and are unique. In UNIX the components of the path are separated by /.
In Windows the separator is \ . Thus the same path name would be written as fol-
lows in these two systems:
    Windows      \usr\ast\mailbox
    UNIX         /usr/ast/mailbox
No matter which character is used, if the first character of the path name is the
separator, then the path is absolute.
    The other kind of name is the relative path name. This is used in conjunc-
tion with the concept of the working directory (also called the current direc-
tory). A user can designate one directory as the current working directory, in
which case all path names not beginning at the root directory are taken relative to
the working directory. For example, if the current working directory is /usr/ast,
then the file whose absolute path is /usr/ast/mailbox can be referenced simply as
mailbox. In other words, the UNIX command
    cp /usr/ast/mailbox /usr/ast/mailbox.bak
and the command
    cp mailbox mailbox.bak
do exactly the same thing if the working directory is /usr/ast/. The relative form
is often more convenient, but it does the same thing as the absolute form.
     Some programs need to access a specific file without regard to what the work-
ing directory is. In that case, they should always use absolute path names. For
example, a spelling checker might need to read /usr/lib/dictionary to do its work.
It should use the full, absolute path name in this case because it does not know
what the working directory will be when it is called. The absolute path name will
always work, no matter what the working directory is.
     Of course, if the spelling checker needs a large number of files from /usr/lib/,
an alternative approach is for it to issue a system call to change its working direc-
tory to /usr/lib/, and then use just dictionary as the first parameter to open. By
explicitly changing the working directory, it knows for sure where it is in the
directory tree, so it can then use relative paths.
     Each process has its own working directory, so when a process changes its
working directory and later exits, no other processes are affected and no traces of
the change are left behind in the file system. In this way it is always perfectly
safe for a process to change its working directory whenever that is convenient.
On the other hand, if a library procedure changes the working directory and does
not change back to where it was when it is finished, the rest of the program may
not work since its assumption about where it is may now suddenly be invalid. For
this reason, library procedures rarely change the working directory, and when they
must, they always change it back again before returning.
SEC. 5.2                                   DIRECTORIES                                      495
    Most operating systems that support a hierarchical directory system have two
special entries in every directory, ‘‘.’’ and ‘‘..’’, generally pronounced ‘‘dot’’ and
‘‘dotdot.’’ Dot refers to the current directory; dotdot refers to its parent. To see
how these are used, consider the UNIX file tree of Fig. 5-7. A certain process has
/usr/ast/ as its working directory. It can use .. to go up the tree. For example, it
can copy the file /usr/lib/dictionary to its own directory using the command
    cp ../lib/dictionary .
The first path instructs the system to go upward (to the usr directory), then to go
down to the directory lib/ to find the file dictionary.
                                             /
                                                 bin     Root directory
                                                 etc
                                                 lib
                                                 usr
                                                 tmp

           bin               etc                  lib              usr          tmp
                                                                   ast
                                                                   jim

                                                                   lib

                                                 ast        lib           jim
                                                                                 /usr/jim
                                                           dict.

Figure 5-7. A UNIX directory tree.

     The second argument (dot) names the current directory. When the cp com-
mand gets a directory name (including dot) as its last argument, it copies all the
files there. Of course, a more normal way to do the copy would be to type
    cp /usr/lib/dictionary .
Here the use of dot saves the user the trouble of typing dictionary a second time.

Nevertheless, typing
    cp /usr/lib/dictionary dictionary
also works fine, as does
    cp /usr/lib/dictionary /usr/ast/dictionary
All of these do exactly the same thing.
5.2.4 Directory Operations
    The system calls for managing directories exhibit more variation from system
to system than system calls for files. To give an impression of what they are and
how they work, we will give a sample (taken from UNIX).
      1. Create. A directory is created. It is empty except for dot and dotdot,
         which are put there automatically by the system (or in a few cases,
         by the mkdir program).
      2. Delete. A directory is deleted. Only an empty directory can be de-
         leted. A directory containing only dot and dotdot is considered em-
         pty as these cannot usually be deleted.
      3. Opendir. Directories can be read. For example, to list all the files in
         a directory, a listing program opens the directory to read out the
         names of all the files it contains. Before a directory can be read, it
         must be opened, analogous to opening and reading a file.
      4. Closedir . When a directory has been read, it should be closed to free
         up internal table space.
      5. Readdir. This call returns the next entry in an open directory. Form-
         erly, it was possible to read directories using the usual read system
         call, but that approach has the disadvantage of forcing the program-
         mer to know and deal with the internal structure of directories. In
         contrast, readdir always returns one entry in a standard format, no
         matter which of the possible directory structures is being used.
      6. Rename. In many respects, directories are just like files and can be
         renamed the same way files can be.
      7. Link. Linking is a technique that allows a file to appear in more than
         one directory. This system call specifies an existing file and a path
         name, and creates a link from the existing file to the name specified
         by the path. In this way, the same file may appear in multiple direc-
         tories. A link of this kind, which increments the counter in the file’s
         i-node (to keep track of the number of directory entries containing
         the file), is sometimes called a hard link.
SEC. 5.2                          DIRECTORIES                                      497
     8. Unlink. A directory entry is removed. If the file being unlinked is
        only present in one directory (the normal case), it is removed from
        the file system. If it is present in multiple directories, only the path
        name specified is removed. The others remain. In UNIX, the system
        call for deleting files (discussed earlier) is, in fact, unlink.

The above list gives the most important calls, but there are a few others as well,
for example, for managing the protection information associated with a directory.

5.3 FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION

    Now it is time to turn from the user’s view of the file system to the im-
plementer’s view. Users are concerned with how files are named, what operations
are allowed on them, what the directory tree looks like, and similar interface
issues. Implementers are interested in how files and directories are stored, how
disk space is managed, and how to make everything work efficiently and reliably.
In the following sections we will examine a number of these areas to see what the
issues and trade-offs are.

5.3.1 File System Layout

    File systems usually are stored on disks. We looked at basic disk layout in
Chap. 2, in the section on bootstrapping MINIX 3. To review this material briefly,
most disks can be divided up into partitions, with independent file systems on
each partition. Sector 0 of the disk is called the MBR (Master Boot Record) and
is used to boot the computer. The end of the MBR contains the partition table.
This table gives the starting and ending addresses of each partition. One of the
partitions in the table may be marked as active. When the computer is booted, the
BIOS reads in and executes the code in the MBR. The first thing the MBR pro-
gram does is locate the active partition, read in its first block, called the boot
block, and execute it. The program in the boot block loads the operating system
contained in that partition. For uniformity, every partition starts with a boot
block, even if it does not contain a bootable operating system. Besides, it might
contain one in the some time in the future, so reserving a boot block is a good idea
anyway.
    The above description must be true, regardless of the operating system in use,
for any hardware platform on which the BIOS is to be able to start more than one
operating system. The terminology may differ with different operating systems.
For instance the master boot record may sometimes be called the IPL (Initial
Program Loader), Volume Boot Code, or simply masterboot. Some operating

systems do not require a partition to be marked active to be booted, and provide a
menu for the user to choose a partition to boot, perhaps with a timeout after which
a default choice is automatically taken. Once the BIOS has loaded an MBR or
boot sector the actions may vary. For instance, more than one block of a partition
may be used to contain the program that loads the operating system. The BIOS
can be counted on only to load the first block, but that block may then load addi-
tional blocks if the implementer of the operating system writes the boot block that
way. An implementer can also supply a custom MBR, but it must work with a
standard partition table if multiple operating systems are to be supported.
     On PC-compatible systems there can be no more than four primary parti-
tions because there is only room for a four-element array of partition descriptors
between the master boot record and the end of the first 512-byte sector. Some
operating systems allow one entry in the partition table to be an extended parti-
tion which points to a linked list of logical partitions. This makes it possible to
have any number of additional partitions. The BIOS cannot start an operating sys-
tem from a logical partition, so initial startup from a primary partition is required
to load code that can manage logical partitions.
     An alternative to extended partitions is used by MINIX 3, which allows a parti-
tion to contain a subpartition table. An advantage of this is that the same code
that manages a primary partition table can manage a subpartition table, which has
the same structure. Potential uses for subpartitions are to have different ones for
the root device, swapping, the system binaries, and the users’ files. In this way,
problems in one subpartition cannot propagate to another one, and a new version
of the operating system can be easily installed by replacing the contents of some
of the subpartitions but not all.
     Not all disks are partitioned. Floppy disks usually start with a boot block in
the first sector. The BIOS reads the first sector of a disk and looks for a magic
number which identifies it as valid executable code, to prevent an attempt to exe-
cute the first sector of an unformatted or corrupted disk. A master boot record and
a boot block use the same magic number, so the executable code may be either
one. Also, what we say here is not limited to electromechanical disk devices. A
device such as a camera or personal digital assistant that uses nonvolatile (e.g.,
flash) memory typically has part of the memory organized to simulate a disk.
     Other than starting with a boot block, the layout of a disk partition varies con-
siderably from file system to file system. A UNIX-like file system will contain
some of the items shown in Fig. 5-8. The first one is the superblock. It contains
all the key parameters about the file system and is read into memory when the
computer is booted or the file system is first touched.
     Next might come information about free blocks in the file system. This might
be followed by the i-nodes, an array of data structures, one per file, telling all
about the file and where its blocks are located. After that might come the root
directory, which contains the top of the file system tree. Finally, the remainder of
the disk typically contains all the other directories and files.
SEC. 5.3                      FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                          499

                                            Entire disk

     Partition table                                Disk partition

   MBR

   Boot block   Super block    Free space mgmt       I-nodes         Root dir   Files and directories

Figure 5-8. A possible file system layout.

5.3.2 Implementing Files

    Probably the most important issue in implementing file storage is keeping
track of which disk blocks go with which file. Various methods are used in dif-
ferent operating systems. In this section, we will examine a few of them.

Contiguous Allocation

     The simplest allocation scheme is to store each file as a contiguous run of disk
blocks. Thus on a disk with 1-KB blocks, a 50-KB file would be allocated 50
consecutive blocks. Contiguous disk space allocation has two significant advan-
tages. First, it is simple to implement because keeping track of where a file’s
blocks are is reduced to remembering two numbers: the disk address of the first
block and the number of blocks in the file. Given the number of the first block,
the number of any other block can be found by a simple addition.
     Second, the read performance is excellent because the entire file can be read
from the disk in a single operation. Only one seek is needed (to the first block).
After that, no more seeks or rotational delays are needed so data come in at the
full bandwidth of the disk. Thus contiguous allocation is simple to implement and
has high performance.
     Unfortunately, contiguous allocation also has a major drawback: in time, the
disk becomes fragmented, consisting of files and holes. Initially, this fragmenta-
tion is not a problem since each new file can be written at the end of disk, follow-
ing the previous one. However, eventually the disk will fill up and it will become
necessary to either compact the disk, which is prohibitively expensive, or to reuse
the free space in the holes. Reusing the space requires maintaining a list of holes,
which is doable. However, when a new file is to be created, it is necessary to
know its final size in order to choose a hole of the correct size to place it in.

    As we mentioned in Chap. 1, history may repeat itself in computer science as
new generations of technology occur. Contiguous allocation was actually used on
magnetic disk file systems years ago due to its simplicity and high performance
(user friendliness did not count for much then). Then the idea was dropped due to
the nuisance of having to specify final file size at file creation time. But with the
advent of CD-ROMs, DVDs, and other write-once optical media, suddenly con-
tiguous files are a good idea again. For such media, contiguous allocation is
feasible and, in fact, widely used. Here all the file sizes are known in advance
and will never change during subsequent use of the CD-ROM file system. It is
thus important to study old systems and ideas that were conceptually clean and
simple because they may be applicable to future systems in surprising ways.

Linked List Allocation

    The second method for storing files is to keep each one as a linked list of disk
blocks, as shown in Fig. 5-9. The first word of each block is used as a pointer to
the next one. The rest of the block is for data.
                                                          File A
                                                                                            0

                           File            File            File             File            File
                          block           block           block            block           block
                            0               1               2                3               4

               Physical    4               7                2               10              12
                 block
                                                          File B
                                                                                    0

                                   File            File             File            File
                                  block           block            block           block
                                    0               1                2               3

                    Physical       6               3                11              14
                      block

Figure 5-9. Storing a file as a linked list of disk blocks.

     Unlike contiguous allocation, every disk block can be used in this method.
No space is lost to disk fragmentation (except for internal fragmentation in the last
block of each file). Also, it is sufficient for the directory entry to merely store the
disk address of the first block. The rest can be found starting there.
     On the other hand, although reading a file sequentially is straightforward, ran-
dom access is extremely slow. To get to block n, the operating system has to start
at the beginning and read the n − 1 blocks prior to it, one at a time. Clearly, doing
so many reads will be painfully slow.
SEC. 5.3                  FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                        501
    Also, the amount of data storage in a block is no longer a power of two be-
cause the pointer takes up a few bytes. While not fatal, having a peculiar size is
less efficient because many programs read and write in blocks whose size is a
power of two. With the first few bytes of each block occupied to a pointer to the
next block, reads of the full block size require acquiring and concatenating infor-
mation from two disk blocks, which generates extra overhead due to the copying.

Linked List Allocation Using a Table in Memory

     Both disadvantages of the linked list allocation can be eliminated by taking
the pointer word from each disk block and putting it in a table in memory. Figure
5-10 shows what the table looks like for the example of Fig. 5-9. In both figures,
we have two files. File A uses disk blocks 4, 7, 2, 10, and 12, in that order, and
file B uses disk blocks 6, 3, 11, and 14, in that order. Using the table of Fig. 5-10,
we can start with block 4 and follow the chain all the way to the end. The same
can be done starting with block 6. Both chains are terminated with a special
marker (e.g., −1) that is not a valid block number. Such a table in main memory
is called a FAT (File Allocation Table).
                    Physical
                      block
                          0
                           1
                           2            10
                           3            11
                           4            7                  File A starts here
                           5
                           6            3                  File B starts here
                           7            2
                           8
                           9
                          10            12
                          11            14
                          12            -1
                          13
                          14            -1
                          15                               Unused block

Figure 5-10. Linked list allocation using a file allocation table in main memory.

    Using this organization, the entire block is available for data. Furthermore,
random access is much easier. Although the chain must still be followed to find a
given offset within the file, the chain is entirely in memory, so it can be followed

without making any disk references. Like the previous method, it is sufficient for
the directory entry to keep a single integer (the starting block number) and still be
able to locate all the blocks, no matter how large the file is.
    The primary disadvantage of this method is that the entire table must be in
memory all the time. With a 20-GB disk and a 1-KB block size, the table needs
20 million entries, one for each of the 20 million disk blocks. Each entry has to
be a minimum of 3 bytes. For speed in lookup, they should be 4 bytes. Thus the
table will take up 60 MB or 80 MB of main memory all the time, depending on
whether the system is optimized for space or time. Conceivably the table could be
put in pageable memory, but it would still occupy a great deal of virtual memory
and disk space as well as generating paging traffic. MS-DOS and Windows 98 use
only FAT file systems and later versions of Windows also support it.

I-Nodes

     Our last method for keeping track of which blocks belong to which file is to
associate with each file a data structure called an i-node (index-node), which lists
the attributes and disk addresses of the file’s blocks. A simple example is dep-
icted in Fig. 5-11. Given the i-node, it is then possible to find all the blocks of the
file. The big advantage of this scheme over linked files using an in-memory table
is that the i-node need only be in memory when the corresponding file is open. If
each i-node occupies n bytes and a maximum of k files may be open at once, the
total memory occupied by the array holding the i-nodes for the open files is only
kn bytes. Only this much space need be reserved in advance.
     This array is usually far smaller than the space occupied by the file table de-
scribed in the previous section. The reason is simple. The table for holding the
linked list of all disk blocks is proportional in size to the disk itself. If the disk
has n blocks, the table needs n entries. As disks grow larger, this table grows
linearly with them. In contrast, the i-node scheme requires an array in memory
whose size is proportional to the maximum number of files that may be open at
once. It does not matter if the disk is 1 GB or 10 GB or 100 GB.
     One problem with i-nodes is that if each one has room for a fixed number of
disk addresses, what happens when a file grows beyond this limit? One solution
is to reserve the last disk address not for a data block, but instead for the address
of an indirect block containing more disk block addresses. This idea can be
extended to use double indirect blocks and triple indirect blocks, as shown in
Fig. 5-11.

5.3.3 Implementing Directories

    Before a file can be read, it must be opened. When a file is opened, the
operating system uses the path name supplied by the user to locate the directory
entry. Finding a directory entry means, of course, that the root directory must be
SEC. 5.3                              FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                    503

                  I-node
                 Attributes
                                       Single
                                      indirect
Disk addresses

                                       block
                                                  Double                                     Addresses of
                                                  indirect                                    data blocks
                                                   block

                                                                            Triple
                                                                           indirect
                                                                            block

Figure 5-11. An i-node with three levels of indirect blocks.

located first. The root directory may be in a fixed location relative to the start of a
partition. Alternatively, its position may be determined from other information,
for instance, in a classic UNIX file system the superblock contains information
about the size of the file system data structures that precede the data area. From
the superblock the location of the i-nodes can be found. The first i-node will point
to the root directory, which is created when a UNIX file system is made. In Win-
dows XP, information in the boot sector (which is really much bigger than one
sector) locates the MFT (Master File Table), which is used to locate other parts
of the file system.
     Once the root directory is located a search through the directory tree finds the
desired directory entry. The directory entry provides the information needed to
find the disk blocks. Depending on the system, this information may be the disk
address of the entire file (contiguous allocation), the number of the first block
(both linked list schemes), or the number of the i-node. In all cases, the main
function of the directory system is to map the ASCII name of the file onto the
information needed to locate the data.
     A closely related issue is where the attributes should be stored. Every file
system maintains file attributes, such as each file’s owner and creation time, and
they must be stored somewhere. One obvious possibility is to store them directly
in the directory entry. In its simplest form, a directory consists of a list of fixed-
size entries, one per file, containing a (fixed-length) file name, a structure of the

file attributes, and one or more disk addresses (up to some maximum) telling
where the disk blocks are, as we saw in Fig. 5-5(a).
     For systems that use i-nodes, another possibility for storing the attributes is in
the i-nodes, rather than in the directory entries, as in Fig. 5-5(b). In this case, the
directory entry can be shorter: just a file name and an i-node number.

Shared Files

     In Chap. 1 we briefly mentioned links between files, which make it easy for
several users working together on a project to share files. Figure 5-12 shows the
file system of Fig. 5-6(c) again, only with one of C’s files now present in one of
B’s directories as well.

                                             Root directory

                       A                 B                     C

                       A          B      B        B        C       C

                                  B               C                C

                                              ?        C       C       C

                                         Shared file

Figure 5-12. File system containing a shared file.

     In UNIX the use of i-nodes for storing file attributes makes sharing easy; any
number of directory entries can point to a single i-node. The i-node contains a
field which is incremented when a new link is added, and which is decremented
when a link is deleted. Only when the link count reaches zero are the actual data
and the i-node itself deleted.
     This kind of link is sometimes called a hard link. Sharing files using hard
links is not always possible. A major limitation is that directories and i-nodes are
data structures of a single file system (partition), so a directory in one file system
cannot point to an i-node on another file system. Also, a file can have only one
owner and one set of permissions. If the owner of a shared file deletes his own
directory entry for that file, another user could be stuck with a file in his directory
that he cannot delete if the permissions do not allow it.
 SEC. 5.3                    FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                         505
     An alternative way to share files is to create a new kind of file whose data is
 the path to another file. This kind of link will work across mounted file systems.
 In fact, if a means is provided for path names to include network addresses, such a
 link can refer to a file on a different computer. This second kind of link is called
 a symbolic link in UNIX-like systems, a shortcut in Windows, and an alias in
 Apple’s Mac OS. Symbolic links can be used on systems where attributes are
 stored within directory entries. A little thought should convince you that multiple
 directory entries containing file attributes would be difficult to synchronize. Any
 change to a file would have to affect every directory entry for that file. But the
 extra directory entries for symbolic links do not contain the attributes of the file to
 which they point. A disadvantage of symbolic links is that when a file is deleted,
 or even just renamed, a link becomes an orphan.

 Directories in Windows 98

        The file system of the original release of Windows 95 was identical to the
 MS-DOS file system, but a second release added support for longer file names and
 bigger files. We will refer to this as the Windows 98 file system, even though it is
 found on some Windows 95 systems. Two types of directory entry exist in Win-
 dows 98. We will call the first one, shown in Fig. 5-13, a base entry.

Bytes             8              3      1 1 1       4          2     2        4        2        4
                                          N     Creation     Last         Last write
              Base name         Ext                                                         File size
                                          T     date/time   access        date/time

                           Attributes
                                         Sec                  Upper 16 bits     Lower 16 bits
                                                               of starting       of starting
                                                                  block             block

Figure 5-13. A Windows 98 base directory entry.

      The base directory entry has all the information that was in the directory en-
 tries of older Windows versions, and more. The 10 bytes starting with the NT
 field are additions to the older Windows 95 structure, which fortunately (or more
 likely deliberately, with later improvement in mind) were not previously used.
 The most important upgrade is the field that increases the number of bits available
 for pointing to the starting block from 16 to 32. This increases the maximum
 potential size of the file system from 216 blocks to 232 blocks.
      This structure provides only for the old-style 8 + 3 character filenames inher-
 ited from MS-DOS (and CP/M). How about long file names? The answer to the
 problem of providing long file names while retaining compatibility with the older
 systems was to use additional directory entries. Fig. 5-14 shows an alternative
 form of directory entry that can contain up to 13 characters of a long file name.
 For files with long names a shortened form of the name is generated automatically

Bytes   1              10              1 1 1                    12                   2        4

                   5 characters             0               6 characters             0   2 characters

        Sequence              Attributes

                                      Checksum

Figure 5-14. An entry for (part of) a long file name in Windows 98.

 and placed in the Base name and Ext fields of an Fig. 5-13-style base directory
 entry. As many entries like that of Fig. 5-14 as are needed to contain the long file
 name are placed before the base entry, in reverse order. The Attributes field of
 each long name entry contains the value 0x0F, which is an impossible value for
 older (MS-DOS and Windows 95) files systems, so these entries will be ignored if
 the directory is read by an older system (on a floppy disk, for instance). A bit in
 the Sequence field tells the system which is the last entry.
     If this seems rather complex, well, it is. Providing backward compatibility so
 an earlier simpler system can continue to function while providing additional fea-
 tures for a newer system is likely to be messy. A purist might decide not to go to
 so much trouble. However, a purist would probably not become rich selling new
 versions of operating systems.

 Directories in UNIX

     The traditional UNIX directory structure is extremely simple, as shown in
 Fig. 5-15. Each entry contains just a file name and its i-node number. All the
 information about the type, size, times, ownership, and disk blocks is contained in
 the i-node. Some UNIX systems have a different layout, but in all cases, a direc-
 tory entry ultimately contains only an ASCII string and an i-node number.
                              Bytes   2                14

                                                   File name

                                   I-node
                                   number

Figure 5-15. A Version 7 UNIX directory entry.

      When a file is opened, the file system must take the file name supplied and
 locate its disk blocks. Let us consider how the path name /usr/ast/mbox is looked
 up. We will use UNIX as an example, but the algorithm is basically the same for
 all hierarchical directory systems. First the system locates the root directory. The
SEC. 5.3                 FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                         507
i-nodes form a simple array which is located using information in the superblock.
The first entry in this array is the i-node of the root directory.
     The file system looks up the first component of the path, usr, in the root direc-
tory to find the i-node number of the file /usr/. Locating an i-node from its
number is straightforward, since each one has a fixed location relative to the first
one. From this i-node, the system locates the directory for /usr/ and looks up the
next component, ast, in it. When it has found the entry for ast, it has the i-node
for the directory /usr/ast/. From this i-node it can find the directory itself and look
up mbox. The i-node for this file is then read into memory and kept there until the
file is closed. The lookup process is illustrated in Fig. 5-16.
                                         Block 132          I-node 26        Block 406
                        I-node 6           is /usr             is for        is /usr/ast
    Root directory     is for /usr       directory            /usr/ast        directory
      1    .                              6                                 26
                         Mode                                 Mode
      1    ..             size            1                    size          6
                         times                                times
      4    bin                          19    dick                          64    grants
      7    dev            132           30    erik             406          92    books
     14    lib                          51    jim                           60    mbox
      9    etc                          26    ast                           81    minix
      6    usr                          45    bal                           17    src
      8    tmp
                        I-node 6                            I-node 26
     Looking up        says that           /usr/ast          says that      /usr/ast/mbox
      usr yields        /usr is in        is i-node        /usr/ast is in      is i-node
       i-node 6        block 132              26            block 406              60

Figure 5-16. The steps in looking up /usr/ast/mbox.

     Relative path names are looked up the same way as absolute ones, only start-
ing from the working directory instead of starting from the root directory. Every
directory has entries for . and .. which are put there when the directory is created.
The entry . has the i-node number for the current directory, and the entry for ..
has the i-node number for the parent directory. Thus, a procedure looking up
../dick/prog.c simply looks up .. in the working directory, finds the i-node number
for the parent directory, and searches that directory for dick. No special mechan-
ism is needed to handle these names. As far as the directory system is concerned,
they are just ordinary ASCII strings, just the same as any other names.

Directories in NTFS

     Microsoft’s NTFS (New Technology File System) is the default file system.
We do not have space for a detailed description of NTFS, but will just briefly look
at some of the problems NTFS deals with and the solutions used.

     One problem is long file and path names. NTFS allows long file names (up to
255 characters) and path names (up to 32,767 characters). But since older ver-
sions of Windows cannot read NTFS file systems, a complicated backward-
compatible directory structure is not needed, and filename fields are variable
length. Provision is made to have a second 8 + 3 character name so an older sys-
tem can access NTFS files over a network.
     NTFS provides for multiple character sets by using Unicode for filenames.
Unicode uses 16 bits for each character, enough to represent multiple languages
with very large symbol sets (e.g., Japanese). But using multiple languages raises
problems in addition to representation of different character sets. Even among
Latin-derived languages there are subtleties. For instance, in Spanish some com-
binations of two characters count as single characters when sorting. Words begin-
ning with ‘‘ch’’ or ‘‘ll’’ should appear in sorted lists after words that begin with
‘‘cz’’ or ‘‘lz’’, respectively. The problem of case mapping is more complex. If
the default is to make filenames case sensitive, there may still be a need to do
case-insensitive searches. For Latin-based languages it is obvious how to do that,
at least to native users of these languages. In general, if only one language is in
use, users will probably know the rules. However, Unicode allows a mixture of
languages: Greek, Russian, and Japanese filenames could all appear in a single
directory at an international organization. The NTFS solution is an attribute for
each file that defines the case conventions for the language of the filename.
     More attributes is the NTFS solution to many problems. In UNIX, a file is a
sequence of bytes. In NTFS a file is a collection of attributes, and each attribute
is a stream of bytes. The basic NTFS data structure is the MFT (Master File
Table) that provides for 16 attributes, each of which can have a length of up to 1
KB within the MFT. If that is not enough, an attribute within the MFT can be a
header that points to an additional file with an extension of the attribute values.
This is known as a nonresident attribute. The MFT itself is a file, and it has an
entry for every file and directory in the file system. Since it can grow very large,
when an NTFS file system is created about 12.5% of the space on the partition is
reserved for growth of the MFT. Thus it can grow without becoming fragmented,
at least until the initial reserved space is used, after which another large chunk of
space will be reserved. So if the MFT becomes fragmented it will consists of a
small number of very large fragments.
     What about data in NTFS? Data is just another attribute. In fact an NTFS file
may have more than one data stream. This feature was originally provided to
allow Windows servers to serve files to Apple MacIntosh clients. In the original
MacIntosh operating system (through Mac OS 9) all files had two data streams,
called the resource fork and the data fork. Multiple data streams have other uses,
for instance a large graphic image may have a smaller thumbnail image associated
with it. A stream can contain up to 264 bytes. At the other extreme, NTFS can
handle small files by putting a few hundred bytes in the attribute header. This is
called an immediate file (Mullender and Tanenbaum, 1984).
SEC. 5.3                 FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                509
     We have only touched upon a few ways that NTFS deals with issues not
addressed by older and simpler file systems. NTFS also provides features such as
a sophisticated protection system, encryption, and data compression. Describing
all these features and their implementation would require much more space than
we can spare here. For a more throrough look at NTFS see Tanenbaum (2001) or
look on the World Wide Web for more information.

5.3.4 Disk Space Management

    Files are normally stored on disk, so management of disk space is a major
concern to file system designers. Two general strategies are possible for storing
an n byte file: n consecutive bytes of disk space are allocated, or the file is split up
into a number of (not necessarily) contiguous blocks. The same trade-off is
present in memory management systems between pure segmentation and paging.
    As we have seen, storing a file as a contiguous sequence of bytes has the ob-
vious problem that if a file grows, it will probably have to be moved on the disk.
The same problem holds for segments in memory, except that moving a segment
in memory is a relatively fast operation compared to moving a file from one disk
position to another. For this reason, nearly all file systems chop files up into
fixed-size blocks that need not be adjacent.

Block Size

     Once it has been decided to store files in fixed-size blocks, the question arises
of how big the blocks should be. Given the way disks are organized, the sector,
the track and the cylinder are obvious candidates for the unit of allocation
(although these are all device dependent, which is a minus). In a paging system,
the page size is also a major contender. However, having a large allocation unit,
such as a cylinder, means that every file, even a 1-byte file, ties up an entire cyl-
inder.
     On the other hand, using a small allocation unit means that each file will con-
sist of many blocks. Reading each block normally requires a seek and a rotational
delay, so reading a file consisting of many small blocks will be slow.
     As an example, consider a disk with 131,072 bytes/track, a rotation time of
8.33 msec, and an average seek time of 10 msec. The time in milliseconds to read
a block of k bytes is then the sum of the seek, rotational delay, and transfer times:
                           10 + 4.165 + (k /131072) × 8.33
The solid curve of Fig. 5-17 shows the data rate for such a disk as a function of
block size.
    To compute the space efficiency, we need to make an assumption about the
mean file size. An early study showed that the mean file size in UNIX environ-
ments is about 1 KB (Mullender and Tanenbaum, 1984). A measurement made in

2005 at the department of one of the authors (AST), which has 1000 users and
over 1 million UNIX disk files, gives a median size of 2475 bytes, meaning that
half the files are smaller than 2475 bytes and half are larger. As an aside, the
median is a better metric than the mean because a very small number of files can
influence the mean enormously, but not the median. A few 100-MB hardware
manuals or a promotional videos or to can greatly skew the mean but have little
effect on the median.
    In an experiment to see if Windows NT file usage was appreciably different
from UNIX file usage, Vogels (1999) made measurements on files at Cornell
University. He observed that NT file usage is more complicated than on UNIX.
He wrote:
                      When we type a few characters in the notepad text editor, saving this to a
                      file will trigger 26 system calls, including 3 failed open attempts, 1 file
                      overwrite and 4 additional open and close sequences.
Nevertheless, he observed a median size (weighted by usage) of files just read at 1
KB, files just written as 2.3 KB and files read and written as 4.2 KB. Given the
fact that Cornell has considerable large-scale scientific computing and the differ-
ence in measurement technique (static versus dynamic), the results are reasonably
consistent with a median file size of around 2 KB.
    For simplicity, let us assume all files are 2 KB, which leads to the dashed
curve in Fig. 5-17 for the disk space efficiency.

                     1000                                                                                   100
                                       Disk space utilization

                                                                                                                  Disk space utilization
Data rate (KB/sec)

                     800                                                                                    80

                     600                                                                                    60          (percent)

                     400                                                                                    40

                     200                                                                                    20
                                           Data rate
                        0                                                                                   0
                            0   128      256       512       1K        2K       4K     8K       16K     0
                                                           Block size (bytes)

Figure 5-17. The solid curve (left-hand scale) gives the data rate of a disk. The
                            dashed curve (right-hand scale) gives the disk space efficiency. All files are 2
                            KB.

    The two curves can be understood as follows. The access time for a block is
completely dominated by the seek time and rotational delay, so given that it is
going to cost 14 msec to access a block, the more data that are fetched, the better.
Hence the data rate goes up with block size (until the transfers take so long that
the transfer time begins to dominate). With small blocks that are powers of two
SEC. 5.3                   FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                              511
and 2-KB files, no space is wasted in a block. However, with 2-KB files and 4
KB or larger blocks, some disk space is wasted. In reality, few files are a multiple
of the disk block size, so some space is always wasted in the last block of a file.
     What the curves show, however, is that performance and space utilization are
inherently in conflict. Small blocks are bad for performance but good for disk
space utilization. A compromise size is needed. For this data, 4 KB might be a
good choice, but some operating systems made their choices a long time ago,
when the disk parameters and file sizes were different. For UNIX, 1 KB is com-
monly used. For MS-DOS the block size can be any power of two from 512 bytes
to 32 KB, but is determined by the disk size and for reasons unrelated to these
arguments (the maximum number of blocks on a disk partition is 216 , which
forces large blocks on large disks).

Keeping Track of Free Blocks

     Once a block size has been chosen, the next issue is how to keep track of free
blocks. Two methods are widely used, as shown in Fig. 5-18. The first one con-
sists of using a linked list of disk blocks, with each block holding as many free
disk block numbers as will fit. With a 1-KB block and a 32-bit disk block
number, each block on the free list holds the numbers of 255 free blocks. (One
slot is needed for the pointer to the next block). A 256-GB disk needs a free list
of maximum 1,052,689 blocks to hold all 228 disk block numbers. Often free
blocks are used to hold the free list.
                     Free disk blocks: 16, 17, 18

             42                   230                 86                       1001101101101100
             136                  162                 234                      0110110111110111
             210                  612                 897                      1010110110110110
             97                   342                 422                      0110110110111011
             41                   214                 140                      1110111011101111
             63                   160                 223                      1101101010001111
             21                   664                 223                      0000111011010111
             48                   216                 160                      1011101101101111
             262                  320                 126                      1100100011101111

             310                  180                 142                      0111011101110111
             516                  482                 141                      1101111101110111

 A 1-KB disk block can hold 256                                                         A bitmap
  32-bit disk block numbers
                                  (a)                                                     (b)

Figure 5-18. (a) Storing the free list on a linked list. (b) A bitmap.

    The other free space management technique is the bitmap. A disk with n
blocks requires a bitmap with n bits. Free blocks are represented by 1s in the
map, allocated blocks by 0s (or vice versa). A 256-GB disk has 228 1-KB blocks
and thus requires 228 bits for the map, which requires 32,768 blocks. It is not
surprising that the bitmap requires less space, since it uses 1 bit per block, versus
32 bits in the linked list model. Only if the disk is nearly full (i.e., has few free
blocks) will the linked list scheme require fewer blocks than the bitmap. On the
other hand, if there are many blocks free, some of them can be borrowed to hold
the free list without any loss of disk capacity.
    When the free list method is used, only one block of pointers need be kept in
main memory. When a file is created, the needed blocks are taken from the block
of pointers. When it runs out, a new block of pointers is read in from the disk.
Similarly, when a file is deleted, its blocks are freed and added to the block of
pointers in main memory. When this block fills up, it is written to disk.

5.3.5 File System Reliability
     Destruction of a file system is often a far greater disaster than destruction of a
computer. If a computer is destroyed by fire, lightning surges, or a cup of coffee
poured onto the keyboard, it is annoying and will cost money, but generally a
replacement can be purchased with a minimum of fuss. Inexpensive personal
computers can even be replaced within an hour by just going to the dealer (except
at universities, where issuing a purchase order takes three committees, five signa-
tures, and 90 days).
     If a computer’s file system is irrevocably lost, whether due to hardware, soft-
ware, or rats gnawing on the backup tapes, restoring all the information will be
difficult and time consuming at best, and in many cases will be impossible. For
the people whose programs, documents, customer files, tax records, databases,
marketing plans, or other data are gone forever, the consequences can be catas-
trophic. While the file system cannot offer any protection against physical des-
truction of the equipment and media, it can help protect the information. In this
section we will look at some of the issues involved in safeguarding the file sys-
tem.
     Floppy disks are generally perfect when they leave the factory, but they can
develop bad blocks during use. It is arguable that this is more likely now than it
was in the days when floppy disks were more widely used. Networks and large
capacity removable devices such as writeable CDs have led to floppy disks being
used infrequently. Cooling fans draw air and airborne dust in through floppy disk
drives, and a drive that has not been used for a long time may be so dirty that it
ruins the next disk that is inserted. A floppy drive that is used frequently is less
likely to damage a disk.
     Hard disks frequently have bad blocks right from the start: it is just too expen-
sive to manufacture them completely free of all defects. As we saw in Chap. 3,
bad blocks on hard disks are generally handled by the controller by replacing bad
SEC. 5.3                FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                513
sectors with spares provided for that purpose. On these disks, tracks are at least
one sector bigger than needed, so that at least one bad spot can be skipped by
leaving it in a gap between two consecutive sectors. A few spare sectors are pro-
vided on each cylinder so the controller can do automatic sector remapping if it
notices that a sector needs more than a certain number of retries to be read or writ-
ten. Thus the user is usually unaware of bad blocks or their management. Never-
theless, when a modern IDE or SCSI disk fails, it will usually fail horribly,
because it has run out of spare sectors. SCSI disks provide a ‘‘recovered error’’
when they remap a block. If the driver notes this and displays a message on the
monitor the user will know it is time to buy a new disk when these messages
begin to appear frequently.
     A simple software solution to the bad block problem exists, suitable for use on
older disks. This approach requires the user or file system to carefully construct a
file containing all the bad blocks. This technique removes them from the free list,
so they will never occur in data files. As long as the bad block file is never read
or written, no problems will arise. Care has to be taken during disk backups to
avoid reading this file and trying to back it up.

Backups

    Most people do not think making backups of their files is worth the time and
effort—until one fine day their disk abruptly dies, at which time most of them
undergo a deathbed conversion. Companies, however, (usually) well understand
the value of their data and generally do a backup at least once a day, usually to
tape. Modern tapes hold tens or sometimes even hundreds of gigabytes and cost
pennies per gigabyte. Nevertheless, making backups is not quite as trivial as it
sounds, so we will examine some of the related issues below.
    Backups to tape are generally made to handle one of two potential problems:
     1. Recover from disaster.
     2. Recover from stupidity.

The first one covers getting the computer running again after a disk crash, fire,
flood, or other natural catastrophe. In practice, these things do not happen very
often, which is why many people do not bother with backups. These people also
tend not to have fire insurance on their houses for the same reason.
    The second reason is that users often accidentally remove files that they later
need again. This problem occurs so often that when a file is ‘‘removed’’ in Win-
dows, it is not deleted at all, but just moved to a special directory, the recycle bin,
so it can be fished out and restored easily later. Backups take this principle
further and allow files that were removed days, even weeks ago, to be restored
from old backup tapes.
    Making a backup takes a long time and occupies a large amount of space, so
doing it efficiently and conveniently is important. These considerations raise the

following issues. First, should the entire file system be backed up or only part of
it? At many installations, the executable (binary) programs are kept in a limited
part of the file system tree. It is not necessary to back up these files if they can all
be reinstalled from the manufacturers’ CD-ROMs. Also, most systems have a
directory for temporary files. There is usually no reason to back it up either. In
UNIX, all the special files (I/O devices) are kept in a directory /dev/. Not only is
backing up this directory not necessary, it is downright dangerous because the
backup program would hang forever if it tried to read each of these to completion.
In short, it is usually desirable to back up only specific directories and everything
in them rather than the entire file system.
     Second, it is wasteful to back up files that have not changed since the last
backup, which leads to the idea of incremental dumps. The simplest form of
incremental dumping is to make a complete dump (backup) periodically, say
weekly or monthly, and to make a daily dump of only those files that have been
modified since the last full dump. Even better is to dump only those files that
have changed since they were last dumped. While this scheme minimizes dump-
ing time, it makes recovery more complicated because first the most recent full
dump has to be restored, followed by all the incremental dumps in reverse order,
oldest one first. To ease recovery, more sophisticated incremental dumping
schemes are often used.
     Third, since immense amounts of data are typically dumped, it may be desir-
able to compress the data before writing them to tape. However, with many com-
pression algorithms, a single bad spot on the backup tape can foil the decompres-
sion algorithm and make an entire file or even an entire tape unreadable. Thus the
decision to compress the backup stream must be carefully considered.
     Fourth, it is difficult to perform a backup on an active file system. If files and
directories are being added, deleted, and modified during the dumping process,
the resulting dump may be inconsistent. However, since making a dump may take
hours, it may be necessary to take the system offline for much of the night to
make the backup, something that is not always acceptable. For this reason, algo-
rithms have been devised for making rapid snapshots of the file system state by
copying critical data structures, and then requiring future changes to files and
directories to copy the blocks instead of updating them in place (Hutchinson et al.,
1999). In this way, the file system is effectively frozen at the moment of the
snapshot, so it can be backed up at leisure afterward.
     Fifth and last, making backups introduces many nontechnical problems into
an organization. The best online security system in the world may be useless if
the system administrator keeps all the backup tapes in his office and leaves it open
and unguarded whenever he walks down the hall to get output from the printer.
All a spy has to do is pop in for a second, put one tiny tape in his pocket, and
saunter off jauntily. Goodbye security. Also, making a daily backup has little use
if the fire that burns down the computers also burns up all the backup tapes. For
this reason, backup tapes should be kept off-site, but that introduces more security
SEC. 5.3                FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                515
risks. For a thorough discussion of these and other practical administration issues,
see Nemeth et al. (2001). Below we will discuss only the technical issues
involved in making file system backups.
     Two strategies can be used for dumping a disk to tape: a physical dump or a
logical dump. A physical dump starts at block 0 of the disk, writes all the disk
blocks onto the output tape in order, and stops when it has copied the last one.
Such a program is so simple that it can probably be made 100% bug free, some-
thing that can probably not be said about any other useful program.
     Nevertheless, it is worth making several comments about physical dumping.
For one thing, there is no value in backing up unused disk blocks. If the dumping
program can get access to the free block data structure, it can avoid dumping
unused blocks. However, skipping unused blocks requires writing the number of
each block in front of the block (or the equivalent), since it is no longer true that
block k on the tape was block k on the disk.
     A second concern is dumping bad blocks. If all bad blocks are remapped by
the disk controller and hidden from the operating system as we described in Sec.
5.4.4, physical dumping works fine. On the other hand, if they are visible to the
operating system and maintained in one or more ‘‘bad block files’’ or bitmaps, it is
absolutely essential that the physical dumping program get access to this informa-
tion and avoid dumping them to prevent endless disk read errors during the dump-
ing process.
     The main advantages of physical dumping are simplicity and great speed
(basically, it can run at the speed of the disk). The main disadvantages are the
inability to skip selected directories, make incremental dumps, and restore indivi-
dual files upon request. For these reasons, most installations make logical dumps.
     A logical dump starts at one or more specified directories and recursively
dumps all files and directories found there that have changed since some given
base date (e.g., the last backup for an incremental dump or system installation for
a full dump). Thus in a logical dump, the dump tape gets a series of carefully
identified directories and files, which makes it easy to restore a specific file or
directory upon request.
     In order to be able to properly restore even a single file correctly, all informa-
tion needed to recreate the path to that file must be saved to the backup medium.
Thus the first step in doing a logical dump is doing an analysis of the directory
tree. Obviously, we need to save any file or directory that has been modified. But
for proper restoration, all directories, even unmodified ones, that lie on the path to
a modified file or directory must be saved. This means saving not just the data
(file names and pointers to i-nodes), all the attributes of the directories must be
saved, so they can be restored with the original permissions. The directories and
their attributes are written to the tape first, and then modified files (with their
attributes) are saved. This makes it possible to restore the dumped files and direc-
tories to a fresh file system on a different computer. In this way, the dump and
restore programs can be used to transport entire file systems between computers.

      A second reason for dumping unmodified directories above modified files is
to make it possible to incrementally restore a single file (possibly to handle
recovery from accidental deletion). Suppose that a full file system dump is done
Sunday evening and an incremental dump is done on Monday evening. On Tues-
day the directory /usr/jhs/proj/nr3/ is removed, along with all the directories and
files under it. On Wednesday morning bright and early, a user wants to restore
the file /usr/jhs/proj/nr3/plans/summary However, is not possible to just restore
the file summary because there is no place to put it. The directories nr3/ and
plans/ must be restored first. To get their owners, modes, times, etc., correct,
these directories must be present on the dump tape even though they themselves
were not modified since the previous full dump.
      Restoring a file system from the dump tapes is straightforward. To start with,
an empty file system is created on the disk. Then the most recent full dump is
restored. Since the directories appear first on the tape, they are all restored first,
giving a skeleton of the file system. Then the files themselves are restored. This
process is then repeated with the first incremental dump made after the full dump,
then the next one, and so on.
      Although logical dumping is straightforward, there are a few tricky issues.
For one, since the free block list is not a file, it is not dumped and hence it must be
reconstructed from scratch after all the dumps have been restored. Doing so is
always possible since the set of free blocks is just the complement of the set of
blocks contained in all the files combined.
      Another issue is links. If a file is linked to two or more directories, it is im-
portant that the file is restored only one time and that all the directories that are
supposed to point to it do so.
      Still another issue is the fact that UNIX files may contain holes. It is legal to
open a file, write a few bytes, then seek to a distant file offset and write a few
more bytes. The blocks in between are not part of the file and should not be
dumped and not be restored. Core dump files often have a large hole between the
data segment and the stack. If not handled properly, each restored core file will
fill this area with zeros and thus be the same size as the virtual address space (e.g.,
232 bytes, or worse yet, 264 bytes).
      Finally, special files, named pipes, and the like should never be dumped, no
matter in which directory they may occur (they need not be confined to /dev/).
For more information about file system backups, see Chervenak et al. (1998) and
Zwicky (1991).

File System Consistency

     Another area where reliability is an issue is file system consistency. Many
file systems read blocks, modify them, and write them out later. If the system
crashes before all the modified blocks have been written out, the file system can
SEC. 5.3                 FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                 517
be left in an inconsistent state. This problem is especially critical if some of the
blocks that have not been written out are i-node blocks, directory blocks, or
blocks containing the free list.
     To deal with the problem of inconsistent file systems, most computers have a
utility program that checks file system consistency. For example, UNIX has fsck
and Windows has chkdsk (or scandisk in earlier versions). This utility can be run
whenever the system is booted, especially after a crash. The description below
tells how fsck works. Chkdsk is somewhat different because it works on a dif-
ferent file system, but the general principle of using the file system’s inherent
redundancy to repair it is still valid. All file system checkers verify each file sys-
tem (disk partition) independently of the other ones.
     Two kinds of consistency checks can be made: blocks and files. To check for
block consistency, the program builds two tables, each one containing a counter
for each block, initially set to 0. The counters in the first table keep track of how
many times each block is present in a file; the counters in the second table record
how often each block is present in the free list (or the bitmap of free blocks).
     The program then reads all the i-nodes. Starting from an i-node, it is possible
to build a list of all the block numbers used in the corresponding file. As each
block number is read, its counter in the first table is incremented. The program
then examines the free list or bitmap, to find all the blocks that are not in use.
Each occurrence of a block in the free list results in its counter in the second table
being incremented.
     If the file system is consistent, each block will have a 1 either in the first table
or in the second table, as illustrated in Fig. 5-19(a). However, as a result of a
crash, the tables might look like Fig. 5-19(b), in which block 2 does not occur in
either table. It will be reported as being a missing block. While missing blocks
do no real harm, they do waste space and thus reduce the capacity of the disk.
The solution to missing blocks is straightforward: the file system checker just
adds them to the free list.
     Another situation that might occur is that of Fig. 5-19(c). Here we see a
block, number 4, that occurs twice in the free list. (Duplicates can occur only if
the free list is really a list; with a bitmap it is impossible.) The solution here is
also simple: rebuild the free list.
     The worst thing that can happen is that the same data block is present in two
or more files, as shown in Fig. 5-19(d) with block 5. If either of these files is
removed, block 5 will be put on the free list, leading to a situation in which the
same block is both in use and free at the same time. If both files are removed, the
block will be put onto the free list twice.
     The appropriate action for the file system checker to take is to allocate a free
block, copy the contents of block 5 into it, and insert the copy into one of the files.
In this way, the information content of the files is unchanged (although almost
assuredly one is garbled), but the file system structure is at least made consistent.
The error should be reported, to allow the user to inspect the damage.

           Block number                                            Block number
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415
1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 Blocks in use          1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 Blocks in use

0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 Free blocks            0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 Free blocks

                       (a)                                                     (b)

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415
1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 Blocks in use          1 1 0 1 0 2 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 Blocks in use

0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 Free blocks            0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 Free blocks

                       (c)                                                     (d)

Figure 5-19. File system states. (a) Consistent. (b) Missing block. (c) Dupli-
        cate block in free list. (d) Duplicate data block.

     In addition to checking to see that each block is properly accounted for, the
file system checker also checks the directory system. It, too, uses a table of
counters, but these are per file, rather than per block. It starts at the root directory
and recursively descends the tree, inspecting each directory in the file system.
For every file in every directory, it increments a counter for that file’s usage
count. Remember that due to hard links, a file may appear in two or more direc-
tories. Symbolic links do not count and do not cause the counter for the target file
to be incremented.
     When it is all done, it has a list, indexed by i-node number, telling how many
directories contain each file. It then compares these numbers with the link counts
stored in the i-nodes themselves. These counts start at 1 when a file is created and
are incremented each time a (hard) link is made to the file. In a consistent file
system, both counts will agree. However, two kinds of errors can occur: the link
count in the i-node can be too high or it can be too low.
     If the link count is higher than the number of directory entries, then even if all
the files are removed from the directories, the count will still be nonzero and the
i-node will not be removed. This error is not serious, but it wastes space on the
disk with files that are not in any directory. It should be fixed by setting the link
count in the i-node to the correct value.
     The other error is potentially catastrophic. If two directory entries are linked
to a file, but the i-node says that there is only one, when either directory entry is
removed, the i-node count will go to zero. When an i-node count goes to zero, the
file system marks it as unused and releases all of its blocks. This action will re-
sult in one of the directories now pointing to an unused i-node, whose blocks may
soon be assigned to other files. Again, the solution is just to force the link count
in the i-node to the actual number of directory entries.
SEC. 5.3                FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                519
     These two operations, checking blocks and checking directories, are often in-
tegrated for efficiency reasons (i.e., only one pass over the i-nodes is required).
Other checks are also possible. For example, directories have a definite format,
with i-node numbers and ASCII names. If an i-node number is larger than the
number of i-nodes on the disk, the directory has been damaged.
     Furthermore, each i-node has a mode, some of which are legal but strange,
such as 0007, which allows the owner and his group no access at all, but allows
outsiders to read, write, and execute the file. It might be useful to at least report
files that give outsiders more rights than the owner. Directories with more than,
say, 1000 entries are also suspicious. Files located in user directories, but which
are owned by the superuser and have the SETUID bit on, are potential security
problems because such files acquire the powers of the superuser when executed
by any user. With a little effort, one can put together a fairly long list of techni-
cally legal but still peculiar situations that might be worth reporting.
     The previous paragraphs have discussed the problem of protecting the user
against crashes. Some file systems also worry about protecting the user against
himself. If the user intends to type
    rm *.o
to remove all the files ending with .o (compiler generated object files), but
accidentally types
    rm * .o
(note the space after the asterisk), rm will remove all the files in the current direc-
tory and then complain that it cannot find .o. In some systems, when a file is
removed, all that happens is that a bit is set in the directory or i-node marking the
file as removed. No disk blocks are returned to the free list until they are actually
needed. Thus, if the user discovers the error immediately, it is possible to run a
special utility program that ‘‘unremoves’’ (i.e., restores) the removed files. In
Windows, files that are removed are placed in the recycle bin, from which they
can later be retrieved if need be. Of course, no storage is reclaimed until they are
actually deleted from this directory.
     Mechanisms like this are insecure. A secure system would actually overwrite
the data blocks with zeros or random bits when a disk is deleted, so another user
could not retrieve it. Many users are unaware how long data can live. Confiden-
tial or sensitive data can often be recovered from disks that have been discarded
(Garfinkel and Shelat, 2003).

5.3.6 File System Performance

   Access to disk is much slower than access to memory. Reading a memory
word might take 10 nsec. Reading from a hard disk might proceed at 10 MB/sec,
which is forty times slower per 32-bit word, and to this must be added 5–10 msec

to seek to the track and then wait for the desired sector to arrive under the read
head. If only a single word is needed, the memory access is on the order of a mil-
lion times as fast as disk access. As a result of this difference in access time,
many file systems have been designed with various optimizations to improve per-
formance. In this section we will cover three of them.

Caching

     The most common technique used to reduce disk accesses is the block cache
or buffer cache. (Cache ispronounced ‘‘cash’’ and is derived from the French ca-
cher, meaning to hide.) In this context, a cache is a collection of blocks that log-
ically belong on the disk but are being kept in memory for performance reasons.
     Various algorithms can be used to manage the cache, but a common one is to
check all read requests to see if the needed block is in the cache. If it is, the read
request can be satisfied without a disk access. If the block is not in the cache, it is
first read into the cache, and then copied to wherever it is needed. Subsequent
requests for the same block can be satisfied from the cache.
     Operation of the cache is illustrated in Fig. 5-20. Since there are many (often
thousands of) blocks in the cache, some way is needed to determine quickly if a
given block is present. The usual way is to hash the device and disk address and
look up the result in a hash table. All the blocks with the same hash value are
chained together on a linked list so the collision chain can be followed.
      Hash table   Front (LRU)                                          Rear (MRU)

Figure 5-20. The buffer cache data structures.

    When a block has to be loaded into a full cache, some block has to be re-
moved (and rewritten to the disk if it has been modified since being brought in).
This situation is very much like paging, and all the usual page replacement algo-
rithms described in Chap. 4, such as FIFO, second chance, and LRU, are applica-
ble. One pleasant difference between paging and caching is that cache references
are relatively infrequent, so that it is feasible to keep all the blocks in exact LRU
order with linked lists.
    In Fig. 5-20, we see that in addition to the collision chains starting at the hash
table, there is also a bidirectional list running through all the blocks in the order of
SEC. 5.3                FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                               521
usage, with the least recently used block on the front of this list and the most
recently used block at the end of this list. When a block is referenced, it can be
removed from its position on the bidirectional list and put at the end. In this way,
exact LRU order can be maintained.
     Unfortunately, there is a catch. Now that we have a situation in which exact
LRU is possible, it turns out that LRU is undesirable. The problem has to do with
the crashes and file system consistency discussed in the previous section. If a crit-
ical block, such as an i-node block, is read into the cache and modified, but not
rewritten to the disk, a crash will leave the file system in an inconsistent state. If
the i-node block is put at the end of the LRU chain, it may be quite a while before
it reaches the front and is rewritten to the disk.
     Furthermore, some blocks, such as i-node blocks, are rarely referenced twice
within a short interval. These considerations lead to a modified LRU scheme, tak-
ing two factors into account:
     1. Is the block likely to be needed again soon?
     2. Is the block essential to the consistency of the file system?

For both questions, blocks can be divided into categories such as i-node blocks,
indirect blocks, directory blocks, full data blocks, and partially full data blocks.
Blocks that will probably not be needed again soon go on the front, rather than the
rear of the LRU list, so their buffers will be reused quickly. Blocks that might be
needed again soon, such as a partly full block that is being written, go on the end
of the list, so they will stay around for a long time.
     The second question is independent of the first one. If the block is essential to
the file system consistency (basically, everything except data blocks), and it has
been modified, it should be written to disk immediately, regardless of which end
of the LRU list it is put on. By writing critical blocks quickly, we greatly reduce
the probability that a crash will wreck the file system. While a user may be un-
happy if one of his files is ruined in a crash, he is likely to be far more unhappy if
the whole file system is lost.
     Even with this measure to keep the file system integrity intact, it is undesir-
able to keep data blocks in the cache too long before writing them out. Consider
the plight of someone who is using a personal computer to write a book. Even if
our writer periodically tells the editor to write the file being edited to the disk,
there is a good chance that everything will still be in the cache and nothing on the
disk. If the system crashes, the file system structure will not be corrupted, but a
whole day’s work will be lost.
     This situation need not happen very often before we have a fairly unhappy
user. Systems take two approaches to dealing with it. The UNIX way is to have a
system call, sync, which forces all the modified blocks out onto the disk immedi-
ately. When the system is started up, a program, usually called update, is started
up in the background to sit in an endless loop issuing sync calls, sleeping for 30

sec between calls. As a result, no more than 30 seconds of work is lost due to a
system crash, a comforting thought for many people.
     The Windows way is to write every modified block to disk as soon as it has
been written. Caches in which all modified blocks are written back to the disk
immediately are called write-through caches. They require more disk I/O than
nonwrite-through caches. The difference between these two approaches can be
seen when a program writes a 1-KB block full, one character at a time. UNIX will
collect all the characters in the cache and write the block out once every 30
seconds, or whenever the block is removed from the cache. Windows will make a
disk access for every character written. Of course, most programs do internal buf-
fering, so they normally write not a character, but a line or a larger unit on each
write system call.
     A consequence of this difference in caching strategy is that just removing a
(floppy) disk from a UNIX system without doing a sync will almost always result
in lost data, and frequently in a corrupted file system as well. With Windows, no
problem arises. These differing strategies were chosen because UNIX was de-
veloped in an environment in which all disks were hard disks and not removable,
whereas Windows started out in the floppy disk world. As hard disks became the
norm, the UNIX approach, with its better efficiency, became the norm, and is also
used now on Windows for hard disks.

Block Read Ahead

     A second technique for improving perceived file system performance is to try
to get blocks into the cache before they are needed to increase the hit rate. In par-
ticular, many files are read sequentially. When the file system is asked to produce
block k in a file, it does that, but when it is finished, it makes a sneaky check in
the cache to see if block k + 1 is already there. If it is not, it schedules a read for
block k + 1 in the hope that when it is needed, it will have already arrived in the
cache. At the very least, it will be on the way.
     Of course, this read ahead strategy only works for files that are being read se-
quentially. If a file is being randomly accessed, read ahead does not help. In fact,
it hurts by tying up disk bandwidth reading in useless blocks and removing poten-
tially useful blocks from the cache (and possibly tying up more disk bandwidth
writing them back to disk if they are dirty). To see whether read ahead is worth
doing, the file system can keep track of the access patterns to each open file. For
example, a bit associated with each file can keep track of whether the file is in
‘‘sequential access mode’’ or ‘‘random access mode.’’ Initially, the file is given
the benefit of the doubt and put in sequential access mode. However, whenever a
seek is done, the bit is cleared. If sequential reads start happening again, the bit is
set once again. In this way, the file system can make a reasonable guess about
whether it should read ahead or not. If it gets it wrong once it a while, it is not a
disaster, just a little bit of wasted disk bandwidth.
SEC. 5.3                  FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                            523
Reducing Disk Arm Motion

     Caching and read ahead are not the only ways to increase file system perfor-
mance. Another important technique is to reduce the amount of disk arm motion
by putting blocks that are likely to be accessed in sequence close to each other,
preferably in the same cylinder. When an output file is written, the file system
has to allocate the blocks one at a time, as they are needed. If the free blocks are
recorded in a bitmap, and the whole bitmap is in main memory, it is easy enough
to choose a free block as close as possible to the previous block. With a free list,
part of which is on disk, it is much harder to allocate blocks close together.
     However, even with a free list, some block clustering can be done. The trick
is to keep track of disk storage not in blocks, but in groups of consecutive blocks.
If sectors consist of 512 bytes, the system could use 1-KB blocks (2 sectors) but
allocate disk storage in units of 2 blocks (4 sectors). This is not the same as hav-
ing a 2-KB disk blocks, since the cache would still use 1-KB blocks and disk
transfers would still be 1 KB but reading a file sequentially on an otherwise idle
system would reduce the number of seeks by a factor of two, considerably im-
proving performance. A variation on the same theme is to take account of rota-
tional positioning. When allocating blocks, the system attempts to place consecu-
tive blocks in a file in the same cylinder.
     Another performance bottleneck in systems that use i-nodes or anything
equivalent to i-nodes is that reading even a short file requires two disk accesses:
one for the i-node and one for the block. The usual i-node placement is shown in
Fig. 5-21(a). Here all the i-nodes are near the beginning of the disk, so the aver-
age distance between an i-node and its blocks will be about half the number of
cylinders, requiring long seeks.
                          I-nodes are                            Disk is divided into
                          located near                           cylinder groups, each
                          the start                              with its own i-nodes
                          of the disk

                                                                               Cylinder group

                (a)                                        (b)

Figure 5-21. (a) I-nodes placed at the start of the disk. (b) Disk divided into
        cylinder groups, each with its own blocks and i-nodes.
    One easy performance improvement is to put the i-nodes in the middle of the
disk, rather than at the start, thus reducing the average seek between the i-node

and the first block by a factor of two. Another idea, shown in Fig. 5-21(b), is to
divide the disk into cylinder groups, each with its own i-nodes, blocks, and free
list (McKusick et al., 1984). When creating a new file, any i-node can be chosen,
but an attempt is made to find a block in the same cylinder group as the i-node. If
none is available, then a block in a nearby cylinder group is used.

5.3.7 Log-Structured File Systems

     Changes in technology are putting pressure on current file systems. In partic-
ular, CPUs keep getting faster, disks are becoming much bigger and cheaper (but
not much faster), and memories are growing exponentially in size. The one
parameter that is not improving by leaps and bounds is disk seek time. The com-
bination of these factors means that a performance bottleneck is arising in many
file systems. Research done at Berkeley attempted to alleviate this problem by
designing a completely new kind of file system, LFS (the Log-structured File
System). In this section we will briefly describe how LFS works. For a more
complete treatment, see Rosenblum and Ousterhout (1991).
     The idea that drove the LFS design is that as CPUs get faster and RAM mem-
ories get larger, disk caches are also increasing rapidly. Consequently, it is now
possible to satisfy a very substantial fraction of all read requests directly from the
file system cache, with no disk access needed. It follows from this observation,
that in the future, most disk accesses will be writes, so the read-ahead mechanism
used in some file systems to fetch blocks before they are needed no longer gains
much performance.
     To make matters worse, in most file systems, writes are done in very small
chunks. Small writes are highly inefficient, since a 50-µsec disk write is often
preceded by a 10-msec seek and a 4-msec rotational delay. With these parame-
ters, disk efficiency drops to a fraction of 1 percent.
     To see where all the small writes come from, consider creating a new file on a
UNIX system. To write this file, the i-node for the directory, the directory block,
the i-node for the file, and the file itself must all be written. While these writes
can be delayed, doing so exposes the file system to serious consistency problems
if a crash occurs before the writes are done. For this reason, the i-node writes are
generally done immediately.
     From this reasoning, the LFS designers decided to re-implement the UNIX file
system in such a way as to achieve the full bandwidth of the disk, even in the face
of a workload consisting in large part of small random writes. The basic idea is to
structure the entire disk as a log. Periodically, and also when there is a special
need for it, all the pending writes being buffered in memory are collected into a
single segment and written to the disk as a single contiguous segment at the end of
the log. A single segment may thus contain i-nodes, directory blocks, data blocks,
and other kinds of blocks all mixed together. At the start of each segment is a
SEC. 5.3                FILE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION                                525
segment summary, telling what can be found in the segment. If the average seg-
ment can be made to be about 1 MB, almost the full bandwidth of the disk can be
utilized.
     In this design, i-nodes still exist and have the same structure as in UNIX, but
they are now scattered all over the log, instead of being at a fixed position on the
disk. Nevertheless, when an i-node is located, locating the blocks is done in the
usual way. Of course, finding an i-node is now much harder, since its address
cannot simply be calculated from its i-node number, as in UNIX. To make it pos-
sible to find i-nodes, an i-node map, indexed by i-node number, is maintained.
Entry i in this map points to i-node i on the disk. The map is kept on disk, but it is
also cached, so the most heavily used parts will be in memory most of the time in
order to improve performance.
     To summarize what we have said so far, all writes are initially buffered in
memory, and periodically all the buffered writes are written to the disk in a single
segment, at the end of the log. Opening a file now consists of using the map to
locate the i-node for the file. Once the i-node has been located, the addresses of
the blocks can be found from it. All of the blocks will themselves be in segments,
somewhere in the log.
     If disks were infinitely large, the above description would be the entire story.
However, real disks are finite, so eventually the log will occupy the entire disk, at
which time no new segments can be written to the log. Fortunately, many existing
segments may have blocks that are no longer needed, for example, if a file is
overwritten, its i-node will now point to the new blocks, but the old ones will still
be occupying space in previously written segments.
     To deal with this problem, LFS has a cleaner thread that spends its time scan-
ning the log circularly to compact it. It starts out by reading the summary of the
first segment in the log to see which i-nodes and files are there. It then checks the
current i-node map to see if the i-nodes are still current and file blocks are still in
use. If not, that information is discarded. The i-nodes and blocks that are still in
use go into memory to be written out in the next segment. The original segment is
then marked as free, so the log can use it for new data. In this manner, the cleaner
moves along the log, removing old segments from the back and putting any live
data into memory for rewriting in the next segment. Consequently, the disk is a
big circular buffer, with the writer thread adding new segments to the front and
the cleaner thread removing old ones from the back.
     The bookkeeping here is nontrivial, since when a file block is written back to
a new segment, the i-node of the file (somewhere in the log) must be located,
updated, and put into memory to be written out in the next segment. The i-node
map must then be updated to point to the new copy. Nevertheless, it is possible to
do the administration, and the performance results show that all this complexity is
worthwhile. Measurements given in the papers cited above show that LFS outper-
forms UNIX by an order of magnitude on small writes, while having a perfor-
mance that is as good as or better than UNIX for reads and large writes.

5.4 SECURITY
    File systems generally contain information that is highly valuable to their
users. Protecting this information against unauthorized usage is therefore a major
concern of all file systems. In the following sections we will look at a variety of
issues concerned with security and protection. These issues apply equally well to
timesharing systems as to networks of personal computers connected to shared
servers via local area networks.

5.4.1 The Security Environment

     People frequently use the terms ‘‘security’’ and ‘‘protection’’ interchangeably.
Nevertheless, it is frequently useful to make a distinction between the general
problems involved in making sure that files are not read or modified by unauthor-
ized persons, which include technical, administrative, legal, and political issues on
the one hand, and the specific operating system mechanisms used to provide secu-
rity, on the other. To avoid confusion, we will use the term security to refer to
the overall problem, and the term protection mechanisms to refer to the specific
operating system mechanisms used to safeguard information in the computer. The
boundary between them is not well defined, however. First we will look at secu-
rity to see what the nature of the problem is. Later on in the chapter we will look
at the protection mechanisms and models available to help achieve security.
     Security has many facets. Three of the more important ones are the nature of
the threats, the nature of intruders, and accidental data loss. We will now look at
these in turn.

Threats

     From a security perspective, computer systems have three general goals, with
corresponding threats to them, as listed in Fig. 5-22. The first one, data confi-
dentiality, is concerned with having secret data remain secret. More specifically,
if the owner of some data has decided that these data are only to be made avail-
able to certain people and no others, the system should guarantee that release of
the data to unauthorized people does not occur. As a bare minimum, the owner
should be able to specify who can see what, and the system should enforce these
specifications.
     The second goal, data integrity, means that unauthorized users should not be
able to modify any data without the owner’s permission. Data modification in this
context includes not only changing the data, but also removing data and adding
false data as well. If a system cannot guarantee that data deposited in it remain
unchanged until the owner decides to change them, it is not worth much as an in-
formation system. Integrity is usually more important than confidentiality.

                                                             
                                     Goal           ?          Threat           ?
                                                               
                                                                                   
                                                                  
                              Data confidentiality ? Exposure of data               ?
                           Data integrity               ? Tampering with data ?
                                                                    
                                                                                       
                                                                      
                              System availability ?? Denial of service                  ??

Figure 5-22. Security goals and threats.

     The third goal, system availability, means that nobody can disturb the system
to make it unusable. Such denial of service attacks are increasingly common.
For example, if a computer is an Internet server, sending a flood of requests to it
may cripple it by eating up all of its CPU time just examining and discarding in-
coming requests. If it takes, say, 100 µsec to process an incoming request to read
a Web page, then anyone who manages to send 10,000 requests/sec can wipe it
out. Reasonable models and technology for dealing with attacks on confidential-
ity and integrity are available; foiling denial-of-services attacks is much harder.
     Another aspect of the security problem is privacy: protecting individuals from
misuse of information about them. This quickly gets into many legal and moral
issues. Should the government compile dossiers on everyone in order to catch X-
cheaters, where X is ‘‘welfare’’ or ‘‘tax,’’ depending on your politics? Should the
police be able to look up anything on anyone in order to stop organized crime?
Do employers and insurance companies have rights? What happens when these
rights conflict with individual rights? All of these issues are extremely important
but are beyond the scope of this book.

Intruders

    Most people are pretty nice and obey the law, so why worry about security?
Because there are unfortunately a few people around who are not so nice and want
to cause trouble (possibly for their own commercial gain). In the security litera-
ture, people who are nosing around places where they have no business being are
called intruders or sometimes adversaries. Intruders act in two different ways.
Passive intruders just want to read files they are not authorized to read. Active
intruders are more malicious; they want to make unauthorized changes. When
designing a system to be secure against intruders, it is important to keep in mind
the kind of intruder one is trying to protect against. Some common categories are
     1. Casual prying by nontechnical users. Many people have personal
        computers on their desks that are connected to a shared file server,
        and human nature being what it is, some of them will read other
        people’s electronic mail and other files if no barriers are placed in
        the way. Most UNIX systems, for example, have the default that all
        newly created files are publicly readable.

      2. Snooping by insiders. Students, system programmers, operators, and
         other technical personnel often consider it to be a personal challenge
         to break the security of the local computer system. They often are
         highly skilled and are willing to devote a substantial amount of time
         to the effort.
      3. Determined attempts to make money. Some bank programmers have
         attempted to steal from the bank they were working for. Schemes
         have varied from changing the software to truncate rather than round
         interest, keeping the fraction of a cent for themselves, to siphoning
         off accounts not used in years, to blackmail (‘‘Pay me or I will des-
         troy all the bank’s records.’’).
      4. Commercial or military espionage. Espionage refers to a serious and
         well-funded attempt by a competitor or a foreign country to steal
         programs, trade secrets, patentable ideas, technology, circuit designs,
         business plans, and so forth. Often this attempt will involve wiretap-
         ping or even erecting antennas directed at the computer to pick up its
         electromagnetic radiation.

It should be clear that trying to keep a hostile foreign government from stealing
military secrets is quite a different matter from trying to keep students from insert-
ing a funny message-of-the-day into the system. The amount of effort needed for
security and protection clearly depends on who the enemy is thought to be.

Malicious Programs

    Another category of security pest is malicious programs, sometimes called
malware. In a sense, a writer of malware is also an intruder, often with high
technical skills. The difference between a conventional intruder and malware is
that the former refers to a person who is personally trying to break into a system
to cause damage whereas the latter is a program written by such a person and then
released into the world. Some malware seems to have been written just to cause
damage, but some is targeted more specifically. It is becoming a huge problem
and a great deal has been written about it (Aycock and Barker, 2005; Cerf, 2005;
Ledin, 2005; McHugh and Deek, 2005; Treese, 2004; and Weiss, 2005)
    The most well known kind of malware is the virus. Basically a virus is a
piece of code that can reproduce itself by attaching a copy of itself to another pro-
gram, analogous to how biological viruses reproduce. The virus can do other
things in addition to reproducing itself. For example, it can type a message, dis-
play an image on the screen, play music, or something else harmless. Unfortun-
ately, it can also modify, destroy, or steal files (by e-mailing them somewhere).
    Another thing a virus can do is to render the computer unusable as long as the
virus is running. This is called a DOS (Denial Of Service) attack. The usual ap-
SEC. 5.4                             SECURITY                                     529
proach is to consume resources wildly, such as the CPU, or filling up the disk
with junk. Viruses (and the other forms of malware to be described) can also be
used to cause a DDOS (Distributed Denial Of Service) attack. In this case the
virus does not do anything immediately upon infecting a computer. At a predeter-
mined date and time thousands of copies of the virus on computers all over the
world start requesting web pages or other network services from their target, for
instance the Web site of a political party or a corporation. This can overload the
targeted server and the networks that service it.
     Malware is frequently created for profit. Much (if not most) unwanted junk
e-mail (‘‘spam’’) is relayed to its final destinations by networks of computers that
have been infected by viruses or other forms of malware. A computer infected by
such a rogue program becomes a slave, and reports its status to its master, some-
where on the Internet. The master then sends spam to be relayed to all the e-mail
addresses that can be gleaned from e-mail address books and other files on the
slave. Another kind of malware for profit scheme installs a key logger on an
infected computer. A key logger records everything typed at the keyboard. It is
not too difficult to filter this data and extract information such as username—
password combinations or credit card numbers and expiration dates. This infor-
mation is then sent back to a master where it can be used or sold for criminal use.
     Related to the virus is the worm. Whereas a virus is spread by attaching itself
to another program, and is executed when its host program is executed, a worm is
a free-standing program. Worms spread by using networks to transmit copies of
themselves to other computers. Windows systems always have a Startup direc-
tory for each user; any program in that folder will be executed when the user logs
in. So all the worm has to do is arrange to put itself (or a shortcut to itself) in the
Startup directory on a remote system. Other ways exist, some much more diffi-
cult to detect, to cause a remote computer to execute a program file that has been
copied to its file system. The effects of a worm can be the same as those of a
virus. Indeed, the distinction between a virus and a worm is not always clear;
some malware uses both methods to spread.
     Another category of malware is the Trojan horse. This is a program that
apparently performs a valid function—perhaps it is a game or a supposedly
‘‘improved’’ version of a useful utility. But when the Trojan horse is executed
some other function is performed, perhaps launching a worm or virus or perform-
ing one of the nasty things that malware does. The effects of a Trojan horse are
likely to be subtle and stealthy. Unlike worms and viruses, Trojan horses are vol-
untarily downloaded by users, and as soon as they are recognized for what they
are and the word gets out, a Trojan horse will be deleted from reputable download
sites.
     Another kind of malware is the logic bomb. This device is a piece of code
written by one of a company’s (currently employed) programmers and secretly
inserted into the production operating system. As long as the programmer feeds it
its daily password, it does nothing. However, if the programmer is suddenly fired

and physically removed from the premises without warning, the next day the logic
bomb does not get its password, so it goes off.
     Going off might involve clearing the disk, erasing files at random, carefully
making hard-to-detect changes to key programs, or encrypting essential files. In
the latter case, the company has a tough choice about whether to call the police
(which may or may not result in a conviction many months later) or to give in to
this blackmail and to rehire the ex-programmer as a ‘‘consultant’’ for an astro-
nomical sum to fix the problem (and hope that he does not plant new logic bombs
while doing so).
     Yet another form of malware is spyware. This is usually obtained by visiting
a Web site. In its simplest form spyware may be nothing more than a cookie.
Cookies are small files exchanged between web browsers and web servers. They
have a legitimate purpose. A cookie contains some information that will allow
the Web site to identify you. It is like the ticket you get when you leave a bicycle
to be repaired. When you return to the shop, your half of the ticket gets matched
with your bicycle (and its repair bill). Web connections are not persistent, so, for
example, if you indicate an interest in buying this book when visiting an online
bookstore, the bookstore asks your browser to accept a cookie. When you have
finished browsing and perhaps have selected other books to buy, you click on the
page where your order is finalized. At that point the web server asks your
browser to return the cookies it has stored from the current session, It can use the
information in these to generate the list of items you have said you want to buy.
     Normally, cookies used for a purpose like this expire quickly. They are quite
useful, and e-commerce depends upon them. But some Web sites use cookies for
purposes that are not so benign. For instance, advertisements on Web sites are
often furnished by companies other than the information provider. Advertisers
pay Web site owners for this privilege. If a cookie is placed when you visit a
page with information about, say, bicycle equipment, and you then go to another
Web site that sells clothing, the same advertising company may provide ads on
this page, and may collect cookies you obtained elsewhere. Thus you may sud-
denly find yourself viewing ads for special gloves or jackets especially made for
cyclists. Advertisers can collect a lot of information about your interests this way;
you may not want to share so much information about yourself.
     What is worse, there are various ways a Web site may be able to download
executable program code to your computer. Most browsers accept plug-ins to
add additional function, such as displaying new kinds of files. Users often accept
offers for new plugins without knowing much about what the plugin does. Or a
user may willingly accept an offer to be provided with a new cursor for the desk-
top that looks like a dancing kitten. And a bug in a web browser may allow a re-
mote site to install an unwanted program, perhaps after luring the user to a page
that has been carefully constructed to take advantage of the vulnerability. Any
time a program is accepted from another source, voluntarily or not, there is a risk
it could contain code that does you harm.
Accidental Data Loss

    In addition to threats caused by malicious intruders, valuable data can be lost
by accident. Some of the common causes of accidental data loss are
     1. Acts of God: fires, floods, earthquakes, wars, riots, or rats gnawing
        tapes or floppy disks.
     2. Hardware or software errors: CPU malfunctions, unreadable disks or
        tapes, telecommunication errors, program bugs.
     3. Human errors: incorrect data entry, wrong tape or disk mounted,
        wrong program run, lost disk or tape, or some other mistake.
Most of these can be dealt with by maintaining adequate backups, preferably far
away from the original data. While protecting data against accidental loss may
seem mundane compared to protecting against clever intruders, in practice, prob-
ably more damage is caused by the former than the latter.

5.4.2 Generic Security Attacks

     Finding security flaws is not easy. The usual way to test a system’s security
is to hire a group of experts, known as tiger teams or penetration teams, to see if
they can break in. Hebbard et al. (1980) tried the same thing with graduate stu-
dents. In the course of the years, these penetration teams have discovered a
number of areas in which systems are likely to be weak. Below we have listed
some of the more common attacks that are often successful. When designing a
system, be sure it can withstand attacks like these.
     1. Request memory pages, disk space, or tapes and just read them.
        Many systems do not erase them before allocating them, and they
        may be full of interesting information written by the previous owner.
     2. Try illegal system calls, or legal system calls with illegal parameters,
        or even legal system calls with legal but unreasonable parameters.
        Many systems can easily be confused.
     3. Start logging in and then hit DEL, RUBOUT or BREAK halfway
        through the login sequence. In some systems, the password checking
        program will be killed and the login considered successful.
     4. Try modifying complex operating system structures kept in user
        space (if any). In some systems (especially on mainframes), to open
        a file, the program builds a large data structure containing the file
        name and many other parameters and passes it to the system. As the
        file is read and written, the system sometimes updates the structure
        itself. Changing these fields can wreak havoc with the security.

      5. Spoof the user by writing a program that types ‘‘login:’’ on the
         screen and go away. Many users will walk up to the terminal and
         willingly tell it their login name and password, which the program
         carefully records for its evil master.
      6. Look for manuals that say ‘‘Do not do X.’’ Try as many variations of
         X as possible.
      7. Convince a system programmer to change the system to skip certain
         vital security checks for any user with your login name. This attack
         is known as a trapdoor.
      8. All else failing, the penetrator might find the computer center
         director’s secretary and offer a large bribe. The secretary probably
         has easy access to all kinds of wonderful information, and is usually
         poorly paid. Do not underestimate problems caused by personnel.
These and other attacks are discussed by Linde (1975). Many other sources of
information on security and testing security can be found, especially on the Web.
A recent Windows-oriented work is Johansson and Riley (2005).

5.4.3 Design Principles for Security

     Saltzer and Schroeder (1975) have identified several general principles that
can be used as a guide to designing secure systems. A brief summary of their
ideas (based on experience with MULTICS ) is given below.
     First, the system design should be public. Assuming that the intruder will not
know how the system works serves only to delude the designers.
     Second, the default should be no access. Errors in which legitimate access is
refused will be reported much faster than errors in which unauthorized access is
allowed.
     Third, check for current authority. The system should not check for permis-
sion, determine that access is permitted, and then squirrel away this information
for subsequent use. Many systems check for permission when a file is opened,
and not afterward. This means that a user who opens a file, and keeps it open for
weeks, will continue to have access, even if the owner has long since changed the
file protection.
     Fourth, give each process the least privilege possible. If an editor has only the
authority to access the file to be edited (specified when the editor is invoked), edi-
tors with Trojan horses will not be able to do much damage. This principle im-
plies a fine-grained protection scheme. We will discuss such schemes later in this
chapter.
     Fifth, the protection mechanism should be simple, uniform, and built into the
lowest layers of the system. Trying to retrofit security to an existing insecure sys-
tem is nearly impossible. Security, like correctness, is not an add-on feature.
    Sixth, the scheme chosen must be psychologically acceptable. If users feel
that protecting their files is too much work, they just will not do it. Nevertheless,
they will complain loudly if something goes wrong. Replies of the form ‘‘It is
your own fault’’ will generally not be well received.

5.4.4 User Authentication

    Many protection schemes are based on the assumption that the system knows
the identity of each user. The problem of identifying users when they log in is
called user authentication. Most authentication methods are based on identify-
ing something the user knows, something the user has, or something the user is.

Passwords

    The most widely used form of authentication is to require the user to type a
password. Password protection is easy to understand and easy to implement. In
UNIX it works like this: The login program asks the user to type his name and
password. The password is immediately encrypted. The login program then reads
the password file, which is a series of ASCII lines, one per user, until it finds the
line containing the user’s login name. If the (encrypted) password contained in
this line matches the encrypted password just computed, the login is permitted,
otherwise it is refused.
    Password authentication is easy to defeat. One frequently reads about groups
of high school, or even junior high school students who, with the aid of their
trusty home computers, have broken into some top secret system owned by a large
corporation or government agency. Virtually all the time the break-in consists of
guessing a user name and password combination.
    Although more recent studies have been made (e.g., Klein, 1990) the classic
work on password security remains the one done by Morris and Thompson (1979)
on UNIX systems. They compiled a list of likely passwords: first and last names,
street names, city names, words from a moderate-sized dictionary (also words
spelled backward), license plate numbers, and short strings of random characters.
    They then encrypted each of these using the known password encryption algo-
rithm and checked to see if any of the encrypted passwords matched entries in
their list. Over 86 percent of all passwords turned up in their list.
    If all passwords consisted of 7 characters chosen at random from the 95 print-
able ASCII characters, the search space becomes 957 , which is about 7 × 1013 .
At 1000 encryptions per second, it would take 2000 years to build the list to check
the password file against. Furthermore, the list would fill 20 million magnetic
tapes. Even requiring passwords to contain at least one lowercase character, one
uppercase character, and one special character, and be at least seven characters
long would be a major improvement over unrestricted user-chosen passwords.

     Even if it is considered politically impossible to require users to pick reason-
able passwords, Morris and Thompson have described a technique that renders
their own attack (encrypting a large number of passwords in advance) almost use-
less. Their idea is to associate an n-bit random number with each password. The
random number is changed whenever the password is changed. The random
number is stored in the password file in unencrypted form, so that everyone can
read it. Instead of just storing the encrypted password in the password file, the
password and the random number are first concatenated and then encrypted
together. This encrypted result is stored in the password file.
     Now consider the implications for an intruder who wants to build up a list of
likely passwords, encrypt them, and save the results in a sorted file, f, so that any
encrypted password can be looked up easily. If an intruder suspects that Marilyn
might be a password, it is no longer sufficient just to encrypt Marilyn and put the
result in f. He has to encrypt 2n strings, such as Marilyn0000, Marilyn0001, Mari-
lyn0002, and so forth and enter all of them in f. This technique increases the size
of f by 2n . UNIX uses this method with n = 12. It is known as salting the pass-
word file. Some versions of UNIX make the password file itself unreadable but
provide a program to look up entries upon request, adding just enough delay to
greatly slow down any attacker.
     Although this method offers protection against intruders who try to precom-
pute a large list of encrypted passwords, it does little to protect a user David
whose password is also David. One way to encourage people to pick better pass-
words is to have the computer offer advice. Some computers have a program that
generates random easy-to-pronounce nonsense words, such as fotally, garbungy,
or bipitty that can be used as passwords (preferably with some upper case and spe-
cial characters thrown in).
     Other computers require users to change their passwords regularly, to limit
the damage done if a password leaks out. The most extreme form of this approach
is the one-time password. When one-time passwords are used, the user gets a
book containing a list of passwords. Each login uses the next password in the list.
If an intruder ever discovers a password, it will not do him any good, since next
time a different password must be used. It is suggested that the user try to avoid
losing the password book.
     It goes almost without saying that while a password is being typed in, the
computer should not display the typed characters, to keep them from prying eyes
near the terminal. What is less obvious is that passwords should never be stored
in the computer in unencrypted form. Furthermore, not even the computer center
management should have unencrypted copies. Keeping unencrypted passwords
anywhere is looking for trouble.
     A variation on the password idea is to have each new user provide a long list
of questions and answers that are then stored in the computer in encrypted form.
The questions should be chosen so that the user does not need to write them down.
In other words, they should be things no one forgets. Typical questions are:
     1. Who is Marjolein’s sister?
     2. On what street was your elementary school?
     3. What did Mrs. Woroboff teach?

At login, the computer asks one of them at random and checks the answer.
    Another variation is challenge-response . When this is used, the user picks an
algorithm when signing up as a user, for example x 2 . When the user logs in, the
computer types an argument, say 7, in which case the user types 49. The algo-
rithm can be different in the morning and afternoon, on different days of the week,
from different terminals, and so on.

Physical Identification

     A completely different approach to authorization is to check to see if the user
has some item, normally a plastic card with a magnetic stripe on it. The card is
inserted into the terminal, which then checks to see whose card it is. This method
can be combined with a password, so a user can only log in if he (1) has the card
and (2) knows the password. Automated cash-dispensing machines usually work
this way.
     Yet another approach is to measure physical characteristics that are hard to
forge. For example, a fingerprint or a voiceprint reader in the terminal could ver-
ify the user’s identity. (It makes the search go faster if the user tells the computer
who he is, rather than making the computer compare the given fingerprint to the
entire data base.) Direct visual recognition is not yet feasible but may be one day.
     Another technique is signature analysis. The user signs his name with a spe-
cial pen connected to the terminal, and the computer compares it to a known
specimen stored on line. Even better is not to compare the signature, but compare
the pen motions made while writing it. A good forger may be able to copy the
signature, but will not have a clue as to the exact order in which the strokes were
made.
     Finger length analysis is surprisingly practical. When this is used, each termi-
nal has a device like the one of Fig. 5-23. The user inserts his hand into it, and the
length of each of his fingers is measured and checked against the data base.
     We could go on and on with more examples, but two more will help make an
important point. Cats and other animals mark off their territory by urinating
around its perimeter. Apparently cats can identify each other this way. Suppose
that someone comes up with a tiny device capable of doing an instant urinalysis,
thereby providing a foolproof identification. Each terminal could be equipped
with one of these devices, along with a discreet sign reading: ‘‘For login, please
deposit sample here.’’ This might be an absolutely unbreakable system, but it
would probably have a fairly serious user acceptance problem.

                                                          Spring

                                                           Pressure plate

Figure 5-23. A device for measuring finger length.

     The same could be said of a system consisting of a thumbtack and a small
spectrograph. The user would be requested to jab his thumb against the
thumbtack, thus extracting a drop of blood for spectrographic analysis. The point
is that any authentication scheme must be psychologically acceptable to the user
community. Finger-length measurements probably will not cause any problem,
but even something as nonintrusive as storing fingerprints on line may be unac-
ceptable to many people.

Countermeasures

    Computer installations that are really serious about security—and few are
until the day after an intruder has broken in and done major damage—often take
steps to make unauthorized entry much harder. For example, each user could be
allowed to log in only from a specific terminal, and only during certain days of the
week and hours of the day.
    Dial-up telephone lines could be made to work as follows. Anyone can dial
up and log in, but after a successful login, the system immediately breaks the con-
nection and calls the user back at an agreed upon number. This measure means
than an intruder cannot just try breaking in from any phone line; only the user’s
(home) phone will do. In any event, with or without call back, the system should
take at least 10 seconds to check any password typed in on a dial-up line, and
should increase this time after several consecutive unsuccessful login attempts, in
SEC. 5.4                            SECURITY                                   537
order to reduce the rate at which intruders can try. After three failed login at-
tempts, the line should be disconnected for 10 minutes and security personnel
notified.
     All logins should be recorded. When a user logs in, the system should report
the time and terminal of the previous login, so he can detect possible break ins.
     The next step up is laying baited traps to catch intruders. A simple scheme is
to have one special login name with an easy password (e.g., login name: guest,
password: guest). Whenever anyone logs in using this name, the system security
specialists are immediately notified. Other traps can be easy-to-find bugs in the
operating system and similar things, designed for the purpose of catching
intruders in the act. Stoll (1989) has written an entertaining account of the traps
he set to track down a spy who broke into a university computer in search of mili-
tary secrets.

5.5 PROTECTION MECHANISMS

    In the previous sections we have looked at many potential problems, some of
them technical, some of them not. In the following sections we will concentrate
on some of the detailed technical ways that are used in operating systems to pro-
tect files and other things. All of these techniques make a clear distinction
between policy (whose data are to be protected from whom) and mechanism (how
the system enforces the policy). The separation of policy and mechanism is dis-
cussed by Sandhu (1993). Our emphasis will be on mechanisms, not policies.
    In some systems, protection is enforced by a program called a reference
monitor. Every time an access to a potentially protected resource is attempted,
the system first asks the reference monitor to check its legality. The reference
monitor then looks at its policy tables and makes a decision. Below we will
describe the environment in which a reference monitor operates.

5.5.1 Protection Domains

     A computer system contains many ‘‘objects’’ that need to be protected. These
objects can be hardware (e.g., CPUs, memory segments, disk drives, or printers),
or they can be software (e.g., processes, files, databases, or semaphores).
     Each object has a unique name by which it is referenced, and a finite set of
operations that processes are allowed to carry out on it. The read and write opera-
tions are appropriate to a file; up and down make sense on a semaphore.
     It is obvious that a way is needed to prohibit processes from accessing objects
that they are not authorized to access. Furthermore, this mechanism must also
make it possible to restrict processes to a subset of the legal operations when that
is needed. For example, process A may be entitled to read, but not write, file F.

     In order to discuss different protection mechanisms, it is useful to introduce
the concept of a domain. A domain is a set of (object, rights) pairs. Each pair
specifies an object and some subset of the operations that can be performed on it.
A right in this context means permission to perform one of the operations. Often
a domain corresponds to a single user, telling what the user can do and not do, but
a domain can also be more general than just one user.
     Figure 5-24 shows three domains, showing the objects in each domain and the
rights [Read, Write, eXecute] available on each object. Note that Printer1 is in
two domains at the same time. Although not shown in this example, it is possible
for the same object to be in multiple domains, with different rights in each one.
                 Domain 1                        Domain 2            Domain 3

                 File1[ R ]              File3 [ R ]                       File6 [ RW X ]
                                         File4 [ RW X ]   Printer1 [ W ]
                 File2 [ RW ]            File5 [ RW ]                      Plotter2 [ W ]

Figure 5-24. Three protection domains.
     At every instant of time, each process runs in some protection domain. In
other words, there is some collection of objects it can access, and for each object
it has some set of rights. Processes can also switch from domain to domain during
execution. The rules for domain switching are highly system dependent.
     To make the idea of a protection domain more concrete, let us look at UNIX.
In UNIX, the domain of a process is defined by its UID and GID. Given any
(UID, GID) combination, it is possible to make a complete list of all objects (files,
including I/O devices represented by special files, etc.) that can be accessed, and
whether they can be accessed for reading, writing, or executing. Two processes
with the same (UID, GID) combination will have access to exactly the same set of
objects. Processes with different (UID, GID) values will have access to a dif-
ferent set of files, although there may be considerable overlap in most cases.
     Furthermore, each process in UNIX has two halves: the user part and the ker-
nel part. When the process does a system call, it switches from the user part to
the kernel part. The kernel part has access to a different set of objects from the
user part. For example, the kernel can access all the pages in physical memory,
the entire disk, and all the other protected resources. Thus, a system call causes a
domain switch.
     When a process does an exec on a file with the SETUID or SETGID bit on, it
acquires a new effective UID or GID. With a different (UID, GID) combination,
it has a different set of files and operations available. Running a program with
SETUID or SETGID is also a domain switch, since the rights available change.
     An important question is how the system keeps track of which object belongs
to which domain. Conceptually, at least, one can envision a large matrix, with the
  SEC. 5.5                             PROTECTION MECHANISMS                                                539
  rows being domains and the columns being objects. Each box lists the rights, if
  any, that the domain contains for the object. The matrix for Fig. 5-24 is shown in
  Fig. 5-25. Given this matrix and the current domain number, the system can tell if
  an access to a given object in a particular way from a specified domain is allowed.

                                                            Object
                 File1       File2       File3      File4            File5        File6     Printer1   Plotter2
  Domain
                             Read
         1       Read
                             Write
                                                   Read
                                                                  Read
         2                              Read       Write                                     Write
                                                                  Write
                                                  Execute
                                                                                  Read
         3                                                                        Write      Write      Write
                                                                                 Execute

Figure 5-25. A protection matrix.

      Domain switching itself can be easily included in the matrix model by realiz-
  ing that a domain is itself an object, with the operation enter. Figure 5-26 shows
  the matrix of Fig. 5-25 again, only now with the three domains as objects them-
  selves. Processes in domain 1 can switch to domain 2, but once there, they cannot
  go back. This situation models executing a SETUID program in UNIX. No other
  domain switches are permitted in this example.
                                                             Object
         File1       File2     File3    File4    File5       File6      Printer1 Plotter2 Domain1 Domain2 Domain3
Domain
                     Read
     1   Read                                                                                          Enter
                     Write
                                        Read
                                                 Read
     2                        Read      Write                            Write
                                                 Write
                                       Execute
                                                             Read
     3                                                       Write       Write      Write
                                                            Execute

Figure 5-26. A protection matrix with domains as objects.

  5.5.2 Access Control Lists

      In practice, actually storing the matrix of Fig. 5-26 is rarely done because it is
  large and sparse. Most domains have no access at all to most objects, so storing a
  very large, mostly empty, matrix is a waste of disk space. Two methods that are
  practical, however, are storing the matrix by rows or by columns, and then storing

only the nonempty elements. The two approaches are surprisingly different. In
this section we will look at storing it by column; in the next one we will study
storing it by row.
    The first technique consists of associating with each object an (ordered) list
containing all the domains that may access the object, and how. This list is called
the Access Control List or ACL and is illustrated in Fig. 5-27. Here we see three
processes, each belonging to a different domain. A, B, and C, and three files F1,
F2, and F3. For simplicity, we will assume that each domain corresponds to
exactly one user, in this case, users A, B, and C. Often in the security literature,
the users are called subjects or principals, to contrast them with the things
owned, the objects, such as files.

                           Owner
      Process
                                                                                   User
                     A                    B                       C               space

       File     F1         A: RW; B: A                ACL

                F2         A: R; B:RW; C:R                                        Kernel
                                                                                  space
                F3          B:RWX; C: RX

Figure 5-27. Use of access control lists to manage file access.

    Each file has an ACL associated with it. File F1 has two entries in its ACL
(separated by a semicolon). The first entry says that any process owned by user A
may read and write the file. The second entry says that any process owned by
user B may read the file. All other accesses by these users and all accesses by
other users are forbidden. Note that the rights are granted by user, not by process.
As far as the protection system goes, any process owned by user A can read and
write file F1. It does not matter if there is one such process or 100 of them. It is
the owner, not the process ID, that matters.
    File F2 has three entries in its ACL: A, B, and C can all read the file, and in
addition B can also write it. No other accesses are allowed. File F3 is apparently
an executable program, since B and C can both read and execute it. B can also
write it.
    This example illustrates the most basic form of protection with ACLs. More
sophisticated systems are often used in practice. To start with, we have only
shown three rights so far: read, write, and execute. There may be additional rights
as well. Some of these may be generic, that is, apply to all objects, and some may
be object specific. Examples of generic rights are destroy object and copy object.
SEC. 5.5                       PROTECTION MECHANISMS                                      541
These could hold for any object, no matter what type it is. Object-specific rights
might include append message for a mailbox object and sort alphabetically for a
directory object.
    So far, our ACL entries have been for individual users. Many systems sup-
port the concept of a group of users. Groups have names and can be included in
ACLs. Two variations on the semantics of groups are possible. In some systems,
each process has a user ID (UID) and group ID (GID). In such systems, an ACL
entry contains entries of the form
    UID1, GID1: rights1; UID2, GID2: rights2; ...

Under these conditions, when a request is made to access an object, a check is
made using the caller’s UID and GID. If they are present in the ACL, the rights
listed are available. If the (UID, GID) combination is not in the list, the access is
not permitted.
     Using groups this way effectively introduces the concept of a role. Consider
an installation in which Tana is system administrator, and thus in the group
sysadm. However, suppose that the company also has some clubs for employees
and Tana is a member of the pigeon fanciers club. Club members belong to the
group pigfan and have access to the company’s computers for managing their
pigeon database. A portion of the ACL might be as shown in Fig. 5-28.
                                                                         
                   File               ? Access control list                     ?
                                                                      
                                                                                   
                                                                       
                       Password          ? tana, sysadm: RW                         ?
                      Pigeon ? data ? bill, pigfan: RW; tana, pigfan: RW; ... ?
                                                                         
                                                                                       

Figure 5-28. Two access control lists.

    If Tana tries to access one of these files, the result depends on which group
she is currently logged in as. When she logs in, the system may ask her to choose
which of her groups she is currently using, or there might even be different login
names and/or passwords to keep them separate. The point of this scheme is to
prevent Tana from accessing the password file when she currently has her pigeon
fancier’s hat on. She can only do that when logged in as the system administrator.
    In some cases, a user may have access to certain files independent of which
group she is currently logged in as. That case can be handled by introducing
wildcards, which mean everyone. For example, the entry
    tana, *: RW
for the password file would give Tana access no matter which group she was
currently in as.
    Yet another possibility is that if a user belongs to any of the groups that have
certain access rights, the access is permitted. In this case, a user belonging to
multiple groups does not have to specify which group to use at login time. All of

them count all of the time. A disadvantage of this approach is that it provides less
encapsulation: Tana can edit the password file during a pigeon club meeting.
    The use of groups and wildcards introduces the possibility of selectively
blocking a specific user from accessing a file. For example, the entry
    virgil, *: (none); *, *: RW
gives the entire world except for Virgil read and write access to the file. This
works because the entries are scanned in order, and the first one that applies is
taken; subsequent entries are not even examined. A match is found for Virgil on
the first entry and the access rights, in this case, (none) are found and applied.
The search is terminated at that point. The fact that the rest of the world has ac-
cess is never even seen.
    The other way of dealing with groups is not to have ACL entries consist of
(UID, GID) pairs, but to have each entry be a UID or a GID. For example, an
entry for the file pigeon ? data could be
    debbie: RW; phil: RW; pigfan: RW
meaning that Debbie and Phil, and all members of the pigfan group have read and
write access to the file.
    It sometimes occurs that a user or a group has certain permissions with respect
to a file that the file owner later wishes to revoke. With access control lists, it is
relatively straightforward to revoke a previously granted access. All that has to be
done is edit the ACL to make the change. However, if the ACL is checked only
when a file is opened, most likely the change will only take effect on future calls
to open. Any file that is already open will continue to have the rights it had when
it was opened, even if the user is no longer authorized to access the file at all.

5.5.3 Capabilities

     The other way of slicing up the matrix of Fig. 5-26 is by rows. When this
method is used, associated with each process is a list of objects that may be
accessed, along with an indication of which operations are permitted on each, in
other words, its domain. This list is called a capability list or C-list and the indi-
vidual items on it are called capabilities (Dennis and Van Horn, 1966; Fabry,
1974). A set of three processes and their capability lists is shown in Fig. 5-29.
     Each capability grants the owner certain rights on a certain object. In Fig. 5-
29, the process owned by user A can read files F1 and F2, for example. Usually, a
capability consists of a file (or more generally, an object) identifier and a bitmap
for the various rights. In a UNIX-like system, the file identifier would probably be
the i-node number. Capability lists are themselves objects and may be pointed to
from other capability lists, thus facilitating sharing of subdomains.
     It is fairly obvious that capability lists must be protected from user tampering.
Three methods of protecting them are known. The first way requires a tagged
SEC. 5.5                      PROTECTION MECHANISMS                                             543

                            Owner
    Process
                                                                                         User
                    A                       B                      C                    space

       F1        F1:R                   F1:R                     F2:R

       F2        F2:R                   F2:RW                    F3:RX                  Kernel
                                                                                        space
                                        F3:RWX
       F3
                                                                           C-list

Figure 5-29. When capabilities are used, each process has a capability list.

architecture, a hardware design in which each memory word has an extra (or tag)
bit that tells whether the word contains a capability or not. The tag bit is not used
by arithmetic, comparison, or similar ordinary instructions, and it can be modified
only by programs running in kernel mode (i.e., the operating system). Tagged-
architecture machines have been built and can be made to work well (Feustal,
1972). The IBM AS/400 is a popular example.
     The second way is to keep the C-list inside the operating system. Capabilities
are then referred to by their position in the capability list. A process might say:
‘‘Read 1 KB from the file pointed to by capability 2.’’ This form of addressing is
similar to using file descriptors in UNIX . Hydra worked this way (Wulf et al., 1974).
     The third way is to keep the C-list in user space, but manage the capabilities
cryptographically so that users cannot tamper with them. This approach is partic-
ularly suited to distributed systems and works as follows. When a client process
sends a message to a remote server, for example, a file server, to create an object
for it, the server creates the object and generates a long random number, the check
field, to go with it. A slot in the server’s file table is reserved for the object and
the check field is stored there along with the addresses of the disk blocks, etc. In
UNIX terms, the check field is stored on the server in the i-node. It is not sent
back to the user and never put on the network. The server then generates and
returns a capability to the user of the form shown in Fig. 5-30.

       Server            Object         Rights                f(Objects,Rights,Check)

Figure 5-30. A cryptographically-protected capability.

   The capability returned to the user contains the server’s identifier, the object
number (the index into the server’s tables, essentially, the i-node number), and the

rights, stored as a bitmap. For a newly created object, all the rights bits are turned
on. The last field consists of the concatenation of the object, rights, and check
field run through a cryptographically-secure one-way function, f, of the kind we
discussed earlier.
     When the user wishes to access the object, it sends the capability to the server
as part of the request. The server then extracts the object number to index into its
tables to find the object. It then computes f(Object, Rights, Check) taking the
first two parameters from the capability itself and the third one from its own
tables. If the result agrees with the fourth field in the capability, the request is
honored; otherwise, it is rejected. If a user tries to access someone else’s object,
he will not be able to fabricate the fourth field correctly since he does not know
the check field, and the request will be rejected.
     A user can ask the server to produce and return a weaker capability, for exam-
ple, for read-only access. First the server verifies that the capability is valid. If
so, if computes f (Object,New?rights,Check) and generates a new capability put-
ting this value in the fourth field. Note that the original Check value is used
because other outstanding capabilities depend on it.
     This new capability is sent back to the requesting process. The user can now
give this to a friend by just sending it in a message. If the friend turns on rights
bits that should be off, the server will detect this when the capability is used since
the f value will not correspond to the false rights field. Since the friend does not
know the true check field, he cannot fabricate a capability that corresponds to the
false rights bits. This scheme was developed for the Amoeba system and used
extensively there (Tanenbaum et al., 1990).
     In addition to the specific object-dependent rights, such as read and execute,
capabilities (both kernel and cryptographically-protected) usually have generic
rights which are applicable to all objects. Examples of generic rights are
      1. Copy capability: create a new capability for the same object.
      2. Copy object: create a duplicate object with a new capability.
      3. Remove capability: delete an entry from the C-list; object unaffected.
      4. Destroy object: permanently remove an object and a capability.

    A last remark worth making about capability systems is that revoking access
to an object is quite difficult in the kernel-managed version. It is hard for the sys-
tem to find all the outstanding capabilities for any object to take them back, since
they may be stored in C-lists all over the disk. One approach is to have each
capability point to an indirect object, rather than to the object itself. By having
the indirect object point to the real object, the system can always break that con-
nection, thus invalidating the capabilities. (When a capability to the indirect
object is later presented to the system, the user will discover that the indirect
object is now pointing to a null object.)
SEC. 5.5                   PROTECTION MECHANISMS                                 545
     In the Amoeba scheme, revocation is easy. All that needs to be done is
change the check field stored with the object. In one blow, all existing capabili-
ties are invalidated. However, neither scheme allows selective revocation, that is,
taking back, say, John’s permission, but nobody else’s. This defect is generally
recognized to be a problem with all capability systems.
     Another general problem is making sure the owner of a valid capability does
not give a copy to 1000 of his best friends. Having the kernel manage capabili-
ties, as in Hydra, solves this problem, but this solution does not work well in a dis-
tributed system such as Amoeba.
     On the other hand, capabilities solve the problem of sandboxing mobile code
very elegantly. When a foreign program is started, it is given a capability list con-
taining only those capabilities that the machine owner wants to give it, such as the
ability to write on the screen and the ability to read and write files in one scratch
directory just created for it. If the mobile code is put into its own process with
only these limited capabilities, it will not be able to access any other system
resources and thus be effectively confined to a sandbox without the need to
modify its code or run it interpretively. Running code with as few access rights as
possible is known as the principle of least privilege and is a powerful guideline
for producing secure systems.
     Briefly summarized, ACLs and capabilities have somewhat complementary
properties. Capabilities are very efficient because if a process says ‘‘Open the file
pointed to by capability 3,’’ no checking is needed. With ACLs, a (potentially
long) search of the ACL may be needed. If groups are not supported, then grant-
ing everyone read access to a file requires enumerating all users in the ACL.
Capabilities also allow a process to be encapsulated easily, whereas ACLs do not.
On the other hand, ACLs allow selective revocation of rights, which capabilities
do not. Finally, if an object is removed and the capabilities are not or the capabil-
ities are removed and an object is not, problems arise. ACLs do not suffer from
this problem.

5.5.4 Covert Channels

     Even with access control lists and capabilities, security leaks can still occur.
In this section we discuss how information can still leak out even when it has been
rigorously proven that such leakage is mathematically impossible. These ideas
are due to Lampson (1973).
     Lampson’s model was originally formulated in terms of a single timesharing
system, but the same ideas can be adapted to LANs and other multiuser environ-
ments. In the purest form, it involves three processes on some protected machine.
The first process is the client, which wants some work performed by the second
one, the server. The client and the server do not entirely trust each other. For
example, the server’s job is to help clients with filling out their tax forms. The

clients are worried that the server will secretly record their financial data, for
example, maintaining a secret list of who earns how much, and then selling the
list. The server is worried that the clients will try to steal the valuable tax pro-
gram.
     The third process is the collaborator, which is conspiring with the server to
indeed steal the client’s confidential data. The collaborator and server are typi-
cally owned by the same person. These three processes are shown in Fig. 5-31.
The object of this exercise is to design a system in which it is impossible for the
server process to leak to the collaborator process the information that it has legiti-
mately received from the client process. Lampson called this the confinement
problem.
            Client     Server   Collaborator           Encapsulated server

                     Kernel                                Kernel                Covert
                                                                                channel

                      (a)                                    (b)

Figure 5-31. (a) The client, server, and collaborator processes. (b) The encap-
        sulated server can still leak to the collaborator via covert channels.

     From the system designer’s point of view, the goal is to encapsulate or con-
fine the server in such a way that it cannot pass information to the collaborator.
Using a protection matrix scheme we can easily guarantee that the server cannot
communicate with the collaborator by writing a file to which the collaborator has
read access. We can probably also ensure that the server cannot communicate
with the collaborator using the system’s normal interprocess communication
mechanism.
     Unfortunately, more subtle communication channels may be available. For
example, the server can try to communicate a binary bit stream as follows: To
send a 1 bit, it computes as hard as it can for a fixed interval of time. To send a 0
bit, it goes to sleep for the same length of time.
     The collaborator can try to detect the bit stream by carefully monitoring its
response time. In general, it will get better response when the server is sending a
0 than when the server is sending a 1. This communication channel is known as a
covert channel, and is illustrated in Fig. 5-31(b).
     Of course, the covert channel is a noisy channel, containing a lot of extrane-
ous information, but information can be reliably sent over a noisy channel by
using an error-correcting code (e.g., a Hamming code, or even something more
sophisticated). The use of an error-correcting code reduces the already low band-
SEC. 5.5                        PROTECTION MECHANISMS                                     547
width of the covert channel even more, but it still may be enough to leak substan-
tial information. It is fairly obvious that no protection model based on a matrix of
objects and domains is going to prevent this kind of leakage.
     Modulating the CPU usage is not the only covert channel. The paging rate
can also be modulated (many page faults for a 1, no page faults for a 0). In fact,
almost any way of degrading system performance in a clocked way is a candidate.
If the system provides a way of locking files, then the server can lock some file to
indicate a 1, and unlock it to indicate a 0. On some systems, it may be possible
for a process to detect the status of a lock even on a file that it cannot access.
This covert channel is illustrated in Fig. 5-32, with the file locked or unlocked for
some fixed time interval known to both the server and collaborator. In this exam-
ple, the secret bit stream 11010100 is being transmitted.

     Server

     Server locks                                                                     Server unlocks
     file to send 1                                                                    file to send 0

                      1         1        0         1        0        1        0   0         Bit stream sent

Collaborator

                                                 Time

Figure 5-32. A covert channel using file locking.

     Locking and unlocking a prearranged file, S is not an especially noisy chan-
nel, but it does require fairly accurate timing unless the bit rate is very low. The
reliability and performance can be increased even more using an acknowledge-
ment protocol. This protocol uses two more files, F1 and F2, locked by the server
and collaborator, respectively to keep the two processes synchronized. After the
server locks or unlocks S, it flips the lock status of F1 to indicate that a bit has
been sent. As soon as the collaborator has read out the bit, it flips F2’s lock status
to tell the server it is ready for another bit and waits until F1 is flipped again to
indicate that another bit is present in S. Since timing is no longer involved, this
protocol is fully reliable, even in a busy system and can proceed as fast as the two
processes can get scheduled. To get higher bandwidth, why not use two files per
bit time, or make it a byte-wide channel with eight signaling files, S0 through S7.
     Acquiring and releasing dedicated resources (tape drives, plotters, etc.) can
also be used for signaling. The server acquires the resource to send a 1 and
releases it to send a 0. In UNIX, the server could create a file to indicate a 1 and
remove it to indicate a 0; the collaborator could use the access system call to see

if the file exists. This call works even though the collaborator has no permission
to use the file. Unfortunately, many other covert channels exist.
     Lampson also mentioned a way of leaking information to the (human) owner
of the server process. Presumably the server process will be entitled to tell its
owner how much work it did on behalf of the client, so the client can be billed. If
the actual computing bill is, say, $100 and the client’s income is $53,000 dollars,
the server could report the bill as $100.53 to its owner.
     Just finding all the covert channels, let alone blocking them, is extremely dif-
ficult. In practice, there is little that can be done. Introducing a process that
causes page faults at random, or otherwise spends its time degrading system per-
formance in order to reduce the bandwidth of the covert channels is not an attrac-
tive proposition.

5.6 OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM
    Like any file system, the MINIX 3 file system must deal with all the issues we
have just studied. It must allocate and deallocate space for files, keep track of
disk blocks and free space, provide some way to protect files against unauthorized
usage, and so on. In the remainder of this chapter we will look closely at MINIX 3
to see how it accomplishes these goals.
    In the first part of this chapter, we have repeatedly referred to UNIX rather
than to MINIX 3 for the sake of generality, although the external interfaces of the
two is virtually identical. Now we will concentrate on the internal design of
MINIX 3. For information about the UNIX internals, see Thompson (1978), Bach
(1987), Lions (1996), and Vahalia (1996).
    The MINIX 3 file system is just a big C program that runs in user space (see
Fig. 2-29). To read and write files, user processes send messages to the file sys-
tem telling what they want done. The file system does the work and then sends
back a reply. The file system is, in fact, a network file server that happens to be
running on the same machine as the caller.
    This design has some important implications. For one thing, the file system
can be modified, experimented with, and tested almost completely independently
of the rest of MINIX 3. For another, it is very easy to move the file system to any
computer that has a C compiler, compile it there, and use it as a free-standing
UNIX-like remote file server. The only changes that need to be made are in the
area of how messages are sent and received, which differs from system to system.
    In the following sections, we will present an overview of many of the key
areas of the file system design. Specifically, we will look at messages, the file
system layout, the bitmaps, i-nodes, the block cache, directories and paths, file
descriptors, file locking, and special files (plus pipes). After studying these
topics, we will show a simple example of how the pieces fit together by tracing
what happens when a user process executes the read system call.
SEC. 5.6                                                                                                  OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          549

                                                                                          
      Messages from users ? Input parameters                                                                                                                                                                                                              ? Reply value                                                                                               ?
                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                               
                                                                                         access                  ? File name, access mode                                                                                                                    ? Status                                                                                                     ?
          chdir                                                                                                   ? Name of new working directory                                                                                                             ? Status                                                                                                      ?
                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                                                                                         chmod                       ? File name, new mode                                                                                                                       ? Status                                                                                                       ?
              chown                                                                                                   ? File name, new owner, group                                                                                                               ? Status                                                                                                        ?
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                       
                                                                                         chroot                          ? Name of new root directory                                                                                                                ? Status                                                                                                         ?
                  close                                                                                                   ? File descriptor of file to close                                                                                                          ? Status                                                                                                          ?
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                         creat                               ? Name of file to be created, mode                                                                                                          ? File descriptor                                                                                                  ?
                      dup                                                                                                     ? File descriptor (for dup2, two fds)                                                                                                       ? New file descriptor                                                                                               ?
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                               
                                                                                         fcntl                                   ? File descriptor, function code, arg                                                                                                       ? Depends on function ?
                          fstat                                                                                                   ? Name of file, buffer                                                                                                                      ? Status                                                                                                            ?
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                         ioctl                                       ? File descriptor, function code, arg                                                                                                       ? Status                                                                                                             ?
                              link                                                                                                    ? Name of file to link to, name of link                                                                                                     ? Status                                                                                                              ?
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                         lseek                                           ? File descriptor, offset, whence                                                                                                           ? New position                                                                                                         ?
                                  mkdir                                                                                                   ? File name, mode                                                                                                                           ? Status                                                                                                                ?
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                         mknod                                               ? Name of dir or special, mode, address                                                                                                     ? Status                                                                                                                 ?
                                      mount                                                                                                   ? Special file, where to mount, ro flag                                                                                                     ? Status                                                                                                                  ?
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                         open                                                    ? Name of file to open, r/w flag                                                                                                            ? File descriptor                                                                                                          ?
                                          pipe                                                                                                    ? Pointer to 2 file descriptors (modified)                                                                                                  ? Status                                                                                                                    ?
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                         read                                                        ? File descriptor, buffer, how many bytes                                                                                                   ? # Bytes read                                                                                                               ?
                                              rename                                                                                                  ? File name, file name                                                                                                                      ? Status                                                                                                                      ?
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                         rmdir                                                           ? File name                                                                                                                                 ? Status                                                                                                                       ?
                                                  stat                                                                                                    ? File name, status buffer                                                                                                                  ? Status                                                                                                                        ?
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                         stime                                                               ? Pointer to current time                                                                                                                   ? Status                                                                                                                         ?
                                                      sync                                                                                                    ? (None)                                                                                                                                    ? Always OK                                                                                                                       ?
                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                         time                                                                    ?                                         Pointer to   place   where   current time goes                                                    ?                                        Status                                                                                    ?
                                                          times                                                                                                    ? Pointer to buffer for process and child times ? Status                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ?
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                         umask                                                                        ?                                    Complement       of mode    mask                                                                      ?                                    Always  OK                                                                                      ?
                                                              umount                                                                                                    ? Name of special file to unmount                                                                                                          ? Status                                                                                                                             ?
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                         unlink                                                                            ?                               Name   of  file to unlink                                                                                  ?                               Status                                                                                                ?
                                                                  utime                                                                                                      ? File name, file times                                                                                                                    ? Always OK                                                                                                                           ?
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                         write                                                                                  ?                          File descriptor,    buffer, how  many   bytes                                                                   ?                          # Bytes written                                                                                             ?
                                                                      Messages from PM                                                                                            ? Input parameters                                                                                                                         ? Reply value                                                                                                                          ?
                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                         exec                                                                                        ?                     Pid                                                                                                                  ?                     Status                                                                                                            ?
                                                                          exit                                                                                                         ? Pid                                                                                                                                      ? Status                                                                                                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                         fork                                                                                             ?                Parent  pid,   child pid                                                                                                  ?                Status                                                                                                                  ?
                                                                              setgid                                                                                                        ? Pid, real and effective gid                                                                                                              ? Status                                                                                                                                 ?
                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                         setsid                                                                                                ?           Pid                                                                                                                            ?           Status                                                                                                                        ?
                                                                                  setuid                                                                                                         ? Pid, real and effective uid                                                                                                              ? Status                                                                                                                                  ?
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                         Other
                                                                                                messages                                                                                            ?      Input  parameters                                                                                                                   ?      Reply  value                                                                                                                        ?
                                                                                     revive                                                                                                           ? Process to revive                                                                                                                        ? (No reply)                                                                                                                               ?
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                         unpause                                                                                                         ? Process   to  check                                                                                                                      ? (See text)                                                                                                                                ?

Figure 5-33. File system messages. File name parameters are always pointers
                                    to the name. The code status as reply value means OK or ERROR.

5.6.1 Messages

    The file system accepts 39 types of messages requesting work. All but two
are for MINIX 3 system calls. The two exceptions are messages generated by oth-
er parts of MINIX 3. Of the system calls, 31 are accepted from user processes.
Six system call messages are for system calls which are handled first by the pro-
cess manager, which then calls the file system to do a part of the work. Two other
messages are also handled by the file system. The messages are shown in Fig. 5-33.
    The structure of the file system is basically the same as that of the process
manager and all the I/O device drivers. It has a main loop that waits for a mes-
sage to arrive. When a message arrives, its type is extracted and used as an index
into a table containing pointers to the procedures within the file system that han-
dle all the types. Then the appropriate procedure is called, it does its work and
returns a status value. The file system then sends a reply back to the caller and
goes back to the top of the loop to wait for the next message.

5.6.2 File System Layout

     A MINIX 3 file system is a logical, self-contained entity with i-nodes, direc-
tories, and data blocks. It can be stored on any block device, such as a floppy disk
or a hard disk partition. In all cases, the layout of the file system has the same
structure. Figure 5-34 shows this layout for a floppy disk or a small hard disk par-
tition with 64 i-nodes and a 1-KB block size. In this simple example, the zone bit-
map is just one 1-KB block, so it can keep track of no more than 8192 1-KB zones
(blocks), thus limiting the file system to 8 MB. Even for a floppy disk, only 64 i-
nodes puts a severe limit on the number of files, so rather than the four blocks
reserved for i-nodes in the figure, more would probably be used. Reserving eight
blocks for i-nodes would be more practical but our diagram would not look as
nice. For a modern hard disk, both the i-node and zone bitmaps will be much
larger than 1 block, of course. The relative size of the various components in
Fig. 5-34 may vary from file system to file system, depending on their sizes, how
many files are allowed maximum, and so on. But all the components are always
present and in the same order.
     Each file system begins with a boot block. This contains executable code.
The size of a boot block is always 1024 bytes (two disk sectors), even though
MINIX 3 may (and by default does) use a larger block size elsewhere. When the
computer is turned on, the hardware reads the boot block from the boot device
into memory, jumps to it, and begins executing its code. The boot block code
begins the process of loading the operating system itself. Once the system has
been booted, the boot block is not used any more. Not every disk drive can be
used as a boot device, but to keep the structure uniform, every block device has a
block reserved for boot block code. At worst this strategy wastes one block.To
prevent the hardware from trying to boot an unbootable device, a magic number
SEC. 5.6              OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                                   551

           Boot    Super
           block   block
                           I-nodes           One disk block

                                                        Data
            I-nodes    Zone
            bit map   bit map

Figure 5-34. Disk layout for a floppy disk or small hard disk partition, with 64
        i-nodes and a 1-KB block size (i.e., two consecutive 512-byte sectors are treated
        as a single block).

is placed at a known location in the boot block when and only when the execut-
able code is written to the device. When booting from a device, the hardware
(actually, the BIOS code) will refuse to attempt to load from a device lacking the
magic number. Doing this prevents inadvertently using garbage as a boot pro-
gram.
     The superblock contains information describing the layout of the file system.
Like the boot block, the superblock is always 1024 bytes, regardless of the block
size used for the rest of the file system. It is illustrated in Fig. 5-35.
     The main function of the superblock is to tell the file system how big the vari-
ous pieces of the file system are. Given the block size and the number of i-nodes,
it is easy to calculate the size of the i-node bitmap and the number of blocks of i-
nodes. For example, for a 1-KB block, each block of the bitmap has 1024 bytes
(8192 bits), and thus can keep track of the status of up to 8192 i-nodes. (Actually
the first block can handle only up to 8191 i-nodes, since there is no 0th i-node, but
it is given a bit in the bitmap, anyway). For 10,000 i-nodes, two bitmap blocks
are needed. Since i-nodes each occupy 64 bytes, a 1-KB block holds up to 16 i-
nodes. With 64 i-nodes, four disk blocks are needed to contain them all.
     We will explain the difference between zones and blocks in detail later, but
for the time being it is sufficient to say that disk storage can be allocated in units
(zones) of 1, 2, 4, 8, or in general 2n blocks. The zone bitmap keeps track of free
storage in zones, not blocks. For all standard disks used by MINIX 3 the zone and
block sizes are the same (4 KB by default), so to a first approximation a zone is
the same as a block on these devices. Until we come to the details of storage allo-
cation later in the chapter, it is adequate to think ‘‘block’’ whenever you see
‘‘zone.’’
     Note that the number of blocks per zone is not stored in the superblock, as it is
never needed. All that is needed is the base 2 logarithm of the zone to block ratio,
which is used as the shift count to convert zones to blocks and vice versa. For
example, with 8 blocks per zone, log2 8 = 3, so to find the zone containing block
128 we shift 128 right 3 bits to get zone 16.

                                   Number of i-nodes

                                   (unused)
                                   Number of i-node bitmap blocks
                                   Number of zone bitmap blocks
                                   First data zone
                                   Log2 (block/zone)
                     Present
                     on disk       Padding
                      and in
                     memory        Maximum file size

                                   Number of zones

                                   Magic number
                                   padding
                                   Block size (bytes)
                                   FS sub-version
                                   Pointer to i-node for root of
                                   mounted file system
                                   Pointer to i-node mounted
                                   upon
                                   i-nodes/block
                      Present      Device number
                    in memory
                                   Read-only flag
                      but not
                      on disk      Native or byte-swapped flag
                                   FS version
                                   Direct zones/i-node
                                   Indirect zones/indirect block
                                   First free bit in i-node bitmap
                                   First free bit in zone bitmap

Figure 5-35. The MINIX 3 superblock.

    The zone bitmap includes only the data zones (i.e., the blocks used for the bit-
maps and i-nodes are not in the map), with the first data zone designated zone 1 in
the bitmap. As with the i-node bitmap, bit 0 in the map is unused, so the first
block in the zone bitmap can map 8191 zones and subsequent blocks can map
8192 zones each. If you examine the bitmaps on a newly formatted disk, you will
find that both the i-node and zone bitmaps have 2 bits set to 1. One is for the
nonexistent 0th i-node or zone; the other is for the i-node and zone used by the
root directory on the device, which is placed there when the file system is created.
    The information in the superblock is redundant because sometimes it is
needed in one form and sometimes in another. With 1 KB devoted to the super-
block, it makes sense to compute this information in all the forms it is needed,
rather than having to recompute it frequently during execution. The zone number
SEC. 5.6            OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                           553
of the first data zone on the disk, for example, can be calculated from the block
size, zone size, number of i-nodes, and number of zones, but it is faster just to
keep it in the superblock. The rest of the superblock is wasted anyhow, so using
up another word of it costs nothing.
     When MINIX 3 is booted, the superblock for the root device is read into a
table in memory. Similarly, as other file systems are mounted, their superblocks
are also brought into memory. The superblock table holds a number of fields not
present on the disk. These include flags that allow a device to be specified as
read-only or as following a byte-order convention opposite to the standard, and
fields to speed access by indicating points in the bitmaps below which all bits are
marked used. In addition, there is a field describing the device from which the
superblock came.
     Before a disk can be used as a MINIX 3 file system, it must be given the struc-
ture of Fig. 5-34. The utility program mkfs has been provided to build file sys-
tems. This program can be called either by a command like
    mkfs /dev/fd1 1440
to build an empty 1440 block file system on the floppy disk in drive 1, or it can be
given a prototype file listing directories and files to include in the new file system.
This command also puts a magic number in the superblock to identify the file sys-
tem as a valid MINIX file system. The MINIX file system has evolved, and some
aspects of the file system (for instance, the size of i-nodes) were different previ-
ously. The magic number identifies the version of mkfs that created the file sys-
tem, so differences can be accommodated. Attempts to mount a file system not in
MINIX 3 format, such as an MS-DOS diskette, will be rejected by the mount system
call, which checks the superblock for a valid magic number and other things.

5.6.3 Bitmaps

     MINIX 3 keeps tracks of which i-nodes and zones are free by using two bit-
maps. When a file is removed, it is then a simple matter to calculate which block
of the bitmap contains the bit for the i-node being freed and to find it using the
normal cache mechanism. Once the block is found, the bit corresponding to the
freed i-node is set to 0. Zones are released from the zone bitmap in the same way.
     Logically, when a file is to be created, the file system must search through the
bit-map blocks one at a time for the first free i-node. This i-node is then allocated
for the new file. In fact, the in-memory copy of the superblock has a field which
points to the first free i-node, so no search is necessary until after a node is used,
when the pointer must be updated to point to the new next free i-node, which will
often turn out to be the next one, or a close one. Similarly, when an i-node is
freed, a check is made to see if the free i-node comes before the currently-
pointed-to one, and the pointer is updated if necessary. If every i-node slot on the

disk is full, the search routine returns a 0, which is why i-node 0 is not used (i.e.,
so it can be used to indicate the search failed). (When mkfs creates a new file sys-
tem, it zeroes i-node 0 and sets the lowest bit in the bitmap to 1, so the file system
will never attempt to allocate it.) Everything that has been said here about the i-
node bitmaps also applies to the zone bitmap; logically it is searched for the first
free zone when space is needed, but a pointer to the first free zone is maintained
to eliminate most of the need for sequential searches through the bitmap.
     With this background, we can now explain the difference between zones and
blocks. The idea behind zones is to help ensure that disk blocks that belong to the
same file are located on the same cylinder, to improve performance when the file
is read sequentially. The approach chosen is to make it possible to allocate sev-
eral blocks at a time. If, for example, the block size is 1 KB and the zone size is 4
KB, the zone bitmap keeps track of zones, not blocks. A 20-MB disk has 5K
zones of 4 KB, hence 5K bits in its zone map.
     Most of the file system works with blocks. Disk transfers are always a block
at a time, and the buffer cache also works with individual blocks. Only a few
parts of the system that keep track of physical disk addresses (e.g., the zone bit-
map and the i-nodes) know about zones.
     Some design decisions had to be made in developing the MINIX 3 file system.
In 1985, when MINIX was conceived, disk capacities were small, and it was
expected that many users would have only floppy disks. A decision was made to
restrict disk addresses to 16 bits in the V1 file system, primarily to be able to store
many of them in the indirect blocks. With a 16-bit zone number and a 1-KB zone,
only 64-KB zones can be addressed, limiting disks to 64 MB. This was an enor-
mous amount of storage in those days, and it was thought that as disks got larger,
it would be easy to switch to 2-KB or 4-KB zones, without changing the block
size. The 16-bit zone numbers also made it easy to keep the i-node size to 32
bytes.
     As MINIX developed, and larger disks became much more common, it was
obvious that changes were desirable. Many files are smaller than 1 KB, so
increasing the block size would mean wasting disk bandwidth, reading and writ-
ing mostly empty blocks and wasting precious main memory storing them in the
buffer cache. The zone size could have been increased, but a larger zone size
means more wasted disk space, and it was still desirable to retain efficient opera-
tion on small disks. Another reasonable alternative would have been to have dif-
ferent zone sizes on large and small devices.
     In the end it was decided to increase the size of disk pointers to 32 bits. This
made it possible for the MINIX V2 file system to deal with device sizes up to 4
terabytes with 1-KB blocks and zones and 16 TB with 4-KB blocks and zones (the
default value now). However, other factors restrict this size (e.g., with 32-bit
pointers, raw devices are limited to 4 GB). Increasing the size of disk pointers
required an increase in the size of i-nodes. This is not necessarily a bad thing—it
means the MINIX V2 (and now, V3) i-node is compatible with standard UNIX i-
SEC. 5.6            OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                         555
nodes, with room for three time values, more indirect and double indirect zones,
and room for later expansion with triple indirect zones.
    Zones also introduce an unexpected problem, best illustrated by a simple
example, again with 4-KB zones and 1-KB blocks. Suppose that a file is of length
1-KB, meaning that one zone has been allocated for it. The three blocks between
offsets 1024 and 4095 contain garbage (residue from the previous owner), but no
structural harm is done to the file system because the file size is clearly marked in
the i-node as 1 KB In fact, the blocks containing garbage will not be read into the
block cache, since reads are done by blocks, not by zones. Reads beyond the end
of a file always return a count of 0 and no data.
    Now someone seeks to 32,768 and writes 1 byte. The file size is now set to
32,769. Subsequent seeks to byte 1024 followed by attempts to read the data will
now be able to read the previous contents of the block, a major security breach.
    The solution is to check for this situation when a write is done beyond the end
of a file, and explicitly zero all the not-yet-allocated blocks in the zone that was
previously the last one. Although this situation rarely occurs, the code has to deal
with it, making the system slightly more complex.

5.6.4 I-Nodes

     The layout of the MINIX 3 i-node is given in Fig. 5-36. It is almost the same
as a standard UNIX i-node. The disk zone pointers are 32-bit pointers, and there
are only 9 pointers, 7 direct and 2 indirect. The MINIX 3 i-nodes occupy 64 bytes,
the same as standard UNIX i-nodes, and there is space available for a 10th (triple
indirect) pointer, although its use is not supported by the standard version of the
FS. The MINIX 3 i-node access, modification time and i-node change times are
standard, as in UNIX. The last of these is updated for almost every file operation
except a read of the file.
     When a file is opened, its i-node is located and brought into the inode table in
memory, where it remains until the file is closed. The inode table has a few addi-
tional fields not present on the disk, such as the i-node’s device and number, so
the file system knows where to rewrite the i-node if it is modified while in
memory. It also has a counter per i-node. If the same file is opened more than
once, only one copy of the i-node is kept in memory, but the counter is incre-
mented each time the file is opened and decremented each time the file is closed.
Only when the counter finally reaches zero is the i-node removed from the table.
If it has been modified since being loaded into memory, it is also rewritten to the
disk.
     The main function of a file’s i-node is to tell where the data blocks are. The
first seven zone numbers are given right in the i-node itself. For the standard dis-
tribution, with zones and blocks both 1 KB, files up to 7 KB do not need indirect
blocks. Beyond 7 KB, indirect zones are needed, using the scheme of Fig. 5-10,

                               16 bits

                   Mode                             File type and rwx bits
                   Number of links                  Directory entries for this file
                   Uid                              Identifies user who owns file
                   Gid                              Owner’s group

                   File size                        Number of bytes in the file

                   Access time

                                                    Times are all in seconds since
                   Modification time                Jan 1, 1970

                   Status change time

                   Zone 0

                   Zone 1
      64 bytes
                   Zone 2

                   Zone 3                           Zone numbers for
                                                    the first seven data
                                                    zones in the file
                   Zone 4

                   Zone 5

                   Zone 6

                   Indirect zone
                                                    Used for files larger
                                                    than 7 zones
                   Double indirect zone

                   Unused                           (Could be used for triple indirect zone)

Figure 5-36. The MINIX i-node.

except that only the single and double indirect blocks are used. With 1-KB blocks
and zones and 32-bit zone numbers, a single indirect block holds 256 entries,
representing a quarter megabyte of storage. The double indirect block points to
256 single indirect blocks, giving access to up to 64 megabytes. With 4-KB
blocks, the double indirect block leads to 1024 × 1024 blocks, which is over a mil-
lion 4-KB blocks, making the maximum file zie over 4 GB. In practice the use of
32-bit numbers as file offsets limits the maximum file size to 232 − 1 bytes. As a
SEC. 5.6            OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                                  557
consequence of these numbers, when 4-KB disk blocks are used MINIX 3 has no
need for triple indirect blocks; the maximum file size is limited by the pointer
size, not the ability to keep track of enough blocks.
     The i-node also holds the mode information, which tells what kind of a file it
is (regular, directory, block special, character special, or pipe), and gives the pro-
tection and SETUID and SETGID bits. The link field in the i-node records how
many directory entries point to the i-node, so the file system knows when to re-
lease the file’s storage. This field should not be confused with the counter
(present only in the inode table in memory, not on the disk) that tells how many
times the file is currently open, typically by different processes.
     As a final note on i-nodes, we mention that the structure of Fig. 5-36 may be
modified for special purposes. An example used in MINIX 3 is the i-nodes for
block and character device special files. These do not need zone pointers,
because they don’t have to reference data areas on the disk. The major and minor
device numbers are stored in the Zone-0 space in Fig. 5-36. Another way an i-
node could be used, although not implemented in MINIX 3, is as an immediate file
with a small amount of data stored in the i-node itself.

5.6.5 The Block Cache

    MINIX 3 uses a block cache to improve file system performance. The cache is
implemented as a fixed array of buffers, each consisting of a header containing
pointers, counters, and flags, and a body with room for one disk block. All the
buffers that are not in use are chained together in a double-linked list, from most
recently used (MRU) to least recently used (LRU) as illustrated in Fig. 5-37.

      Hash table   Front (LRU)                                              Rear (MRU)

Figure 5-37. The linked lists used by the block cache.

    In addition, to be able to quickly determine if a given block is in the cache or
not, a hash table is used. All the buffers containing a block that has hash code k
are linked together on a single-linked list pointed to by entry k in the hash table.
The hash function just extracts the low-order n bits from the block number, so

blocks from different devices appear on the same hash chain. Every buffer is on
one of these chains. When the file system is initialized after MINIX 3 is booted,
all buffers are unused, of course, and all are in a single chain pointed to by the 0th
hash table entry. At that time all the other hash table entries contain a null
pointer, but once the system starts, buffers will be removed from the 0th chain and
other chains will be built.
     When the file system needs to acquire a block, it calls a procedure, get ? block,
which computes the hash code for that block and searches the appropriate list.
Get ? block is called with a device number as well as a block number, and the
search compares both numbers with the corresponding fields in the buffer chain.
If a buffer containing the block is found, a counter in the buffer header is incre-
mented to show that the block is in use, and a pointer to it is returned. If a block
is not found on the hash list, the first buffer on the LRU list can be used; it is
guaranteed not to be still in use, and the block it contains may be evicted to free
up the buffer.
     Once a block has been chosen for eviction from the block cache, another flag
in its header is checked to see if the block has been modified since being read in.
If so, it is rewritten to the disk. At this point the block needed is read in by send-
ing a message to the disk driver. The file system is suspended until the block
arrives, at which time it continues and a pointer to the block is returned to the
caller.
     When the procedure that requested the block has completed its job, it calls
another procedure, put ? block, to free the block. Normally, a block will be used
immediately and then released, but since it is possible that additional requests for
a block will be made before it has been released, put ? block decrements the use
counter and puts the buffer back onto the LRU list only when the use counter has
gone back to zero. While the counter is nonzero, the block remains in limbo.
     One of the parameters to put ? block tells what class of block (e.g., i-nodes,
directory, data) is being freed. Depending on the class, two key decisions are
made:
      1. Whether to put the block on the front or rear of the LRU list.
      2. Whether to write the block (if modified) to disk immediately or not.

Almost all blocks go on the rear of the list in true LRU fashion. The exception is
blocks from the RAM disk; since they are already in memory there is little advan-
tage to keeping them in the block cache.
    A modified block is not rewritten until either one of two events occurs:
      1. It reaches the front of the LRU chain and is evicted.
      2. A sync system call is executed.

Sync does not traverse the LRU chain but instead indexes through the array of
SEC. 5.6            OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                         559
buffers in the cache. Even if a buffer has not been released yet, if it has been
modified, sync will find it and ensure that the copy on disk is updated.
     Policies like this invite tinkering. In an older version of MINIX a superblock
was modified when a file system was mounted, and was always rewritten immedi-
ately to reduce the chance of corrupting the file system in the event of a crash.
Superblocks are modified only if the size of a RAM disk must be adjusted at
startup time because the RAM disk was created bigger than the RAM image
device. However, the superblock is not read or written as a normal block, because
it is always 1024 bytes in size, like the boot block, regardless of the block size
used for blocks handled by the cache. Another abandoned experiment is that in
older versions of MINIX there was a ROBUST macro definable in the system con-
figuration file, include/minix/config.h, which, if defined, caused the file system to
mark i-node, directory, indirect, and bit-map blocks to be written immediately
upon release. This was intended to make the file system more robust; the price
paid was slower operation. It turned out this was not effective. A power failure
occurring when all blocks have not been yet been written is going to cause a
headache whether it is an i-node or a data block that is lost.
     Note that the header flag indicating that a block has been modified is set by
the procedure within the file system that requested and used the block. The pro-
cedures get ? block and put ? block are concerned just with manipulating the linked
lists. They have no idea which file system procedure wants which block or why.

5.6.6 Directories and Paths

    Another important subsystem within the file system manages directories and
path names. Many system calls, such as open, have a file name as a parameter.
What is really needed is the i-node for that file, so it is up to the file system to
look up the file in the directory tree and locate its i-node.
    A MINIX directory is a file that in previous versions contained 16-byte entries,
2 bytes for an i-node number and 14 bytes for the file name. This design limited
disk partitions to 64-KB files and file names to 14 characters, the same as V7
UNIX. As disks have grown file names have also grown. In MINIX 3 the V3 file
system provides 64 bytes directory entries, with 4 bytes for the i-node number and
60 bytes for the file name. Having up to 4 billion files per disk partition is effec-
tively infinite and any programmer choosing a file name longer than 60 characters
should be sent back to programming school.
    Note that paths such as
    /usr/ast/course ?material?for?this?year/operating ?systems/examination-1.ps
are not limited to 60 characters—just the individual component names. The use
of fixed-length directory entries, in this case, 64 bytes, is an example of a trade-
off involving simplicity, speed, and storage. Other operating systems typically

organize directories as a heap, with a fixed header for each file pointing to a name
on the heap at the end of the directory. The MINIX 3 scheme is very simple and
required practically no code changes from V2. It is also very fast for both looking
up names and storing new ones, since no heap management is ever required. The
price paid is wasted disk storage, because most files are much shorter than 60
characters.
     It is our firm belief that optimizing to save disk storage (and some RAM
storage since directories are occasionally in memory) is the wrong choice. Code
simplicity and correctness should come first and speed should come second. With
modern disks usually exceeding 100 GB, saving a small amount of disk space at
the price of more complicated and slower code is generally not a good idea.
Unfortunately, many programmers grew up in an era of tiny disks and even tinier
RAMs, and were trained from day 1 to resolve all trade-offs between code com-
plexity, speed, and space in favor of minimizing space requirements. This impli-
cit assumption really has to be reexamined in light of current realities.
     Now let us see how the path /usr/ast/mbox/ is looked up. The system first
looks up usr in the root directory, then it looks up ast in /usr/, and finally it looks
up mbox in /usr/ast/. The actual lookup proceeds one path component at a time,
as illustrated in Fig. 5-16.
     The only complication is what happens when a mounted file system is en-
countered. The usual configuration for MINIX 3 and many other UNIX-like sys-
tems is to have a small root file system containing the files needed to start the sys-
tem and to do basic system maintenance, and to have the majority of the files,
including users’ directories, on a separate device mounted on /usr. This is a good
time to look at how mounting is done. When the user types the command
    mount /dev/c0d1p2 /usr

on the terminal, the file system contained on hard disk 1, partition 2 is mounted on
top of /usr/ in the root file system. The file systems before and after mounting are
shown in Fig. 5-38.
    The key to the whole mount business is a flag set in the memory copy of the
i-node of /usr after a successful mount. This flag indicates that the i-node is
mounted on. The mount call also loads the superblock for the newly mounted file
system into the super ? block table and sets two pointers in it. Furthermore, it puts
the root i-node of the mounted file system in the inode table.
    In Fig. 5-35 we see that superblocks in memory contain two fields related to
mounted file systems. The first of these, the i-node-for-root-of-mounted-file-
system, is set to point to the root i-node of the newly mounted file system. The
second, the i-node-mounted-upon, is set to point to the i-node mounted on, in this
case, the i-node for /usr. These two pointers serve to connect the mounted file
system to the root and represent the ‘‘glue’’ that holds the mounted file system to
the root [shown as the dots in Fig. 5-38(c)]. This glue is what makes mounted file
systems work.
SEC. 5.6                     OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                                                 561

       Root file                       Unmounted
       system                          file system                              After mounting
           /                                 /                                        /

/lib           /bin   /usr      /bal             /jim   /ast             /lib             /bin     /usr

                                                                                                 …
                                        /ast/f1                /ast/f2

                                                                         /usr/bal                         /usr/ast

                                                                                                             /usr/ast/f2

           (a)                                   (b)                                         (c)

Figure 5-38. (a) Root file system. (b) An unmounted file system. (c) The
           result of mounting the file system of (b) on /usr/.

     When a path such as /usr/ast/f2 is being looked up, the file system will see a
flag in the i-node for /usr/ and realize that it must continue searching at the root i-
node of the file system mounted on /usr/. The question is: ‘‘How does it find this
root i-node?’’
     The answer is straightforward. The system searches all the superblocks in
memory until it finds the one whose i-node mounted on field points to /usr/. This
must be the superblock for the file system mounted on /usr/. Once it has the
superblock, it is easy to follow the other pointer to find the root i-node for the
mounted file system. Now the file system can continue searching. In this exam-
ple, it looks for ast in the root directory of hard disk partition 2.

5.6.7 File Descriptors

    Once a file has been opened, a file descriptor is returned to the user process
for use in subsequent read and write calls. In this section we will look at how file
descriptors are managed within the file system.
    Like the kernel and the process manager, the file system maintains part of the
process table within its address space. Three of its fields are of particular interest.
The first two are pointers to the i-nodes for the root directory and the working
directory. Path searches, such as that of Fig. 5-16, always begin at one or the
other, depending on whether the path is absolute or relative. These pointers are

changed by the chroot and chdir system calls to point to the new root or new
working directory, respectively.
     The third interesting field in the process table is an array indexed by file de-
scripttor number. It is used to locate the proper file when a file descriptor is
presented. At first glance, it might seem sufficient to have the k-th entry in this
array just point to the i-node for the file belonging to file descriptor k. After all,
the i-node is fetched into memory when the file is opened and kept there until it is
closed, so it is sure to be available.
     Unfortunately, this simple plan fails because files can be shared in subtle
ways in MINIX 3 (as well as in UNIX). The trouble arises because associated with
each file is a 32-bit number that indicates the next byte to be read or written. It is
this number, called the file position, that is changed by the lseek system call. The
problem can be stated easily: ‘‘Where should the file pointer be stored?’’
     The first possibility is to put it in the i-node. Unfortunately, if two or more
processes have the same file open at the same time, they must all have their own
file pointers, since it would hardly do to have an lseek by one process affect the
next read of a different process. Conclusion: the file position cannot go in the i-
node.
     What about putting it in the process table? Why not have a second array,
paralleling the file descriptor array, giving the current position of each file? This
idea does not work either, but the reasoning is more subtle. Basically, the trouble
comes from the semantics of the fork system call. When a process forks, both the
parent and the child are required to share a single pointer giving the current posi-
tion of each open file.
     To better understand the problem, consider the case of a shell script whose
output has been redirected to a file. When the shell forks off the first program, its
file position for standard output is 0. This position is then inherited by the child,
which writes, say, 1 KB of output. When the child terminates, the shared file
position must now be 1024.
     Now the shell reads some more of the shell script and forks off another child.
It is essential that the second child inherit a file position of 1024 from the shell, so
it will begin writing at the place where the first program left off. If the shell did
not share the file position with its children, the second program would overwrite
the output from the first one, instead of appending to it.
     As a result, it is not possible to put the file position in the process table. It
really must be shared. The solution used in UNIX and MINIX 3 is to introduce a
new, shared table, filp, which contains all the file positions. Its use is illustrated
in Fig. 5-39. By having the file position truly shared, the semantics of fork can be
implemented correctly, and shell scripts work properly.
     Although the only thing that the filp table really must contain is the shared file
position, it is convenient to put the i-node pointer there, too. In this way, all that
the file descriptor array in the process table contains is a pointer to a filp entry.
The filp entry also contains the file mode (permission bits), some flags indicating
SEC. 5.6             OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                               563

                                                                       i-node
                                           filp table                   table
                  Process
                   table
                                        File position
                                        i-node pointer
                  Parent

                   Child

Figure 5-39. How file positions are shared between a parent and a child.

whether the file was opened in a special mode, and a count of the number of proc-
esses using it, so the file system can tell when the last process using the entry has
terminated, in order to reclaim the slot.

5.6.8 File Locking

     Yet another aspect of file system management requires a special table. This is
file locking. MINIX 3 supports the POSIX interprocess communication mechanism
of advisory file locking. This permits any part, or multiple parts, of a file to be
marked as locked. The operating system does not enforce locking, but processes
are expected to be well behaved and to look for locks on a file before doing any-
thing that would conflict with another process.
     The reasons for providing a separate table for locks are similar to the justifica-
tions for the filp table discussed in the previous section. A single process can
have more than one lock active, and different parts of a file may be locked by
more than one process (although, of course, the locks cannot overlap), so neither
the process table nor the filp table is a good place to record locks. Since a file
may have more than one lock placed upon it, the i-node is not a good place either.
     MINIX 3 uses another table, the file ? lock table, to record all locks. Each slot
in this table has space for a lock type, indicating if the file is locked for reading or
writing, the process ID holding the lock, a pointer to the i-node of the locked file,
and the offsets of the first and last bytes of the locked region.

5.6.9 Pipes and Special Files

    Pipes and special files differ from ordinary files in an important way. When a
process tries to read or write a block of data from a disk file, it is almost certain
that the operation will complete within a few hundred milliseconds at most. In the
worst case, two or three disk accesses might be needed, not more. When reading

from a pipe, the situation is different: if the pipe is empty, the reader will have to
wait until some other process puts data in the pipe, which might take hours. Simi-
larly, when reading from a terminal, a process will have to wait until somebody
types something.
     As a consequence, the file system’s normal rule of handling a request until it
is finished does not work. It is necessary to suspend these requests and restart
them later. When a process tries to read or write from a pipe, the file system can
check the state of the pipe immediately to see if the operation can be completed.
If it can be, it is, but if it cannot be, the file system records the parameters of the
system call in the process table, so it can restart the process when the time comes.
     Note that the file system need not take any action to have the caller
suspended. All it has to do is refrain from sending a reply, leaving the caller
blocked waiting for the reply. Thus, after suspending a process, the file system
goes back to its main loop to wait for the next system call. As soon as another
process modifies the pipe’s state so that the suspended process can complete, the
file system sets a flag so that next time through the main loop it extracts the
suspended process’ parameters from the process table and executes the call.
     The situation with terminals and other character special files is slightly dif-
ferent. The i-node for each special file contains two numbers, the major device
and the minor device. The major device number indicates the device class (e.g.,
RAM disk, floppy disk, hard disk, terminal). It is used as an index into a file sys-
tem table that maps it onto the number of the corresponding I/O device driver. In
effect, the major device determines which I/O driver to call. The minor device
number is passed to the driver as a parameter. It specifies which device is to be
used, for example, terminal 2 or drive 1.
     In some cases, most notably terminal devices, the minor device number en-
codes some information about a category of devices handled by a driver. For in-
stance, the primary MINIX 3 console, /dev/console, is device 4, 0 (major, minor).
Virtual consoles are handled by the same part of the driver software. These are
devices /dev/ttyc1 (4,1), /dev/ttyc2 (4,2), and so on. Serial line terminals need dif-
ferent low-level software, and these devices, /dev/tty00, and /dev/tty01 are
assigned device numbers 4, 16 and 4, 17. Similarly, network terminals use
pseudo-terminal drivers, and these also need different low-level software. In
MINIX 3 these devices, ttyp0, ttyp1, etc., are assigned device numbers such as 4,
128 and 4, 129. These pseudo devices each have an associated device, ptyp0,
ptyp1, etc. The major, minor device number pairs for these are 4,192 and 4,193,
etc. These numbers are chosen to make it easy for the device driver to call the
low-level functions required for each group of devices. It is not expected that
anyone is going to equip a MINIX 3 system with 192 or more terminals.
     When a process reads from a special file, the file system extracts the major
and minor device numbers from the file’s i-node, and uses the major device
number as an index into a file system table to map it onto the process number of
the corresponding device driver. Once it has identified the driver, the file system
SEC. 5.6            OVERVIEW OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                           565
sends it a message, including as parameters the minor device, the operation to be
performed, the caller’s process number and buffer address, and the number of
bytes to be transferred. The format is the same as in Fig. 3-15, except that POSI-
TION is not used.
     If the driver is able to carry out the work immediately (e.g., a line of input has
already been typed on the terminal), it copies the data from its own internal
buffers to the user and sends the file system a reply message saying that the work
is done. The file system then sends a reply message to the user, and the call is fin-
ished. Note that the driver does not copy the data to the file system. Data from
block devices go through the block cache, but data from character special files do
not.
     On the other hand, if the driver is not able to carry out the work, it records the
message parameters in its internal tables, and immediately sends a reply to the file
system saying that the call could not be completed. At this point, the file system
is in the same situation as having discovered that someone is trying to read from
an empty pipe. It records the fact that the process is suspended and waits for the
next message.
     When the driver has acquired enough data to complete the call, it transfers
them to the buffer of the still-blocked user and then sends the file system a mes-
sage reporting what it has done. All the file system has to do is send a reply mes-
sage to the user to unblock it and report the number of bytes transferred.

5.6.10 An Example: The READ System Call

    As we shall see shortly, most of the code of the file system is devoted to car-
rying out system calls. Therefore, it is appropriate that we conclude this overview
with a brief sketch of how the most important call, read, works.
    When a user program executes the statement
    n = read(fd, buffer, nbytes);
to read an ordinary file, the library procedure read is called with three parameters.
It builds a message containing these parameters, along with the code for read as
the message type, sends the message to the file system, and blocks waiting for the
reply. When the message arrives, the file system uses the message type as an
index into its tables to call the procedure that handles reading.
     This procedure extracts the file descriptor from the message and uses it to
locate the filp entry and then the i-node for the file to be read (see Fig. 5-39). The
request is then broken up into pieces such that each piece fits within a block. For
example, if the current file position is 600 and 1024 bytes have been requested,
the request is split into two parts, for 600 to 1023, and for 1024 to 1623 (assuming
1-KB blocks).
     For each of these pieces in turn, a check is made to see if the relevant block is
in the cache. If the block is not present, the file system picks the least recently

used buffer not currently in use and claims it, sending a message to the disk
device driver to rewrite it if it is dirty. Then the disk driver is asked to fetch the
block to be read.
     Once the block is in the cache, the file system sends a message to the system
task asking it to copy the data to the appropriate place in the user’s buffer (i.e.,
bytes 600 to 1023 to the start of the buffer, and bytes 1024 to 1623 to offset 424
within the buffer). After the copy has been done, the file system sends a reply
message to the user specifying how many bytes have been copied.
     When the reply comes back to the user, the library function read extracts the
reply code and returns it as the function value to the caller.
     One extra step is not really part of the read call itself. After the file system
completes a read and sends a reply, it initiates reading additional blocks, provided
that the read is from a block device and certain other conditions are met. Since
sequential file reads are common, it is reasonable to expect that the next blocks in
a file will be requested in the next read request, and this makes it likely that the
desired block will already be in the cache when it is needed. The number of
blocks requested depends upon the size of the block cache; as many as 32 addi-
tional blocks may be requested. The device driver does not necessarily return this
many blocks, and if at least one block is returned a request is considered success-
ful.

5.7 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM
     The MINIX 3 file system is relatively large (more than 100 pages of C) but
quite straightforward. Requests to carry out system calls come in, are carried out,
and replies are sent. In the following sections we will go through it a file at a
time, pointing out the highlights. The code itself contains many comments to aid
the reader.
     In looking at the code for other parts of MINIX 3 we have generally looked at
the main loop of a process first and then looked at the routines that handle the dif-
ferent message types. We will organize our approach to the file system differ-
ently. First we will go through the major subsystems (cache management, i-node
management, etc.). Then we will look at the main loop and the system calls that
operate upon files. Next we will look at systems call that operate upon direc-
tories, and then, we will discuss the remaining system calls that fall into neither
category. Finally we will see how device special files are handled.

5.7.1 Header Files and Global Data Structures

    Like the kernel and process manager, various data structures and tables used
in the file system are defined in header files. Some of these data structures are
placed in system-wide header files in include/ and its subdirectories. For instance,
SEC. 5.7       IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                         567
include/sys/stat.h defines the format by which system calls can provide i-node
information to other programs and the structure of a directory entry is defined in
include/sys/dir.h. Both of these files are required by POSIX. The file system is
affected by a number of definitions contained in the global configuration file
include/minix/config.h, such as NR ? BUFS and NR ? BUF ? HASH, which control
the size of the block cache.

File System Headers

    The file system’s own header files are in the file system source directory
src/fs/. Many file names will be familiar from studying other parts of the MINIX 3
system. The FS master header file, fs.h (line 20900), is quite analogous to
src/kernel/kernel.h and src/pm/pm.h. It includes other header files needed by all
the C source files in the file system. As in the other parts of MINIX 3, the file sys-
tem master header includes the file system’s own const.h, type.h, proto.h, and
glo.h. We will look at these next.
    Const.h (line 21000) defines some constants, such as table sizes and flags, that
are used throughout the file system. MINIX 3 already has a history. Earlier ver-
sions of MINIX had different file systems. Although MINIX 3 does not support the
old V1 and V2 file systems, some definitions have been retained, both for refer-
ence and in expectation that someone will add support for these later. Support for
older versions is useful not only for accessing files on older MINIX file systems, it
may also be useful for exchanging files.
    Other operating systems may use older MINIX file systems—for instance,
Linux originally used and still supports MINIX file systems. (It is perhaps some-
what ironic that Linux still supports the original MINIX file system but MINIX 3
does not.) Some utilities are available for MS-DOS and Windows to access older
MINIX directories and files. The superblock of a file system contains a magic
number to allow the operating system to identify the file system’s type; the con-
stants SUPER ? MAGIC, SUPER ? V2, and SUPER ? V3 define these numbers for
the three versions of the MINIX file system. There are also ?REV-suffixed ver-
sions of these for V1 and V2, in which the bytes of the magic number are
reversed. These were used with ports of older MINIX versions to systems with a
different byte order (little-endian rather than big-endian) so a removable disk writ-
ten on a machine with a different byte order could be identified as such. As of the
release of MINIX 3.1.0 defining a SUPER ? V3 ? REV magic number has not been
necessary, but it is likely this definition will be added in the future.
    Type.h (line 21100) defines both the old V1 and new V2 i-node structures as
they are laid out on the disk. The i-node is one structure that did not change in
MINIX 3, so the V2 i-node is used with the V-3 file system. The V2 i-node is
twice as big as the old one, which was designed for compactness on systems with
no hard drive and 360-KB diskettes. The new version provides space for the three
time fields which UNIX systems provide. In the V1 i-node there was only one

time field, but a stat or fstat would ‘‘fake it’’ and return a stat structure containing
all three fields. There is a minor difficulty in providing support for the two file
system versions. This is flagged by the comment on line 21116. Older MINIX 3
software expected the gid ? t type to be an 8-bit quantity, so d2 ? gid must be
declared as type u16 ? t.
      Proto.h (line 21200) provides function prototypes in forms acceptable to
either old K&R or newer ANSI Standard C compilers. It is a long file, but not of
great interest. However, there is one point to note: because there are so many dif-
ferent system calls handled by the file system, and because of the way the file sys-
tem is organized, the various do ? XXX functions are scattered through a number of
files. Proto.h is organized by file and is a handy way to find the file to consult
when you want to see the code that handles a particular system call.
      Finally, glo.h (line 21400) defines global variables. The message buffers for
the incoming and reply messages are also here. The now-familiar trick with the
EXTERN macro is used, so these variables can be accessed by all parts of the file
system. As in the other parts of MINIX 3, the storage space will be reserved when
table.c is compiled.
      The file system’s part of the process table is contained in fproc.h (line 21500).
The fproc array is declared with the EXTERN macro. It holds the mode mask,
pointers to the i-nodes for the current root directory and working directory, the file
descriptor array, uid, gid, and terminal number for each process. The process id
and the process group id are also found here. The process id is duplicated in the
part of the process table located in the process manager.
      Several fields are used to store the parameters of those system calls that may
be suspended part way through, such as reads from an empty pipe. The fields
fp ? suspended and fp ? revived actually require only single bits, but nearly all com-
pilers generate better code for characters than bit fields. There is also a field for
the FD ? CLOEXEC bits called for by the POSIX standard. These are used to indi-
cate that a file should be closed when an exec call is made.
      Now we come to files that define other tables maintained by the file system.
The first, buf.h (line 21600), defines the block cache. The structures here are all
declared with EXTERN. The array buf holds all the buffers, each of which con-
tains a data part, b, and a header full of pointers, flags, and counters. The data
part is declared as a union of five types (lines 21618 to 21632) because sometimes
it is convenient to refer to the block as a character array, sometimes as a directory,
etc.
      The truly proper way to refer to the data part of buffer 3 as a character array is
buf[3].b.b ? ? data because buf[3].b refers to the union as a whole, from which the
b ? ? data field is selected. Although this syntax is correct, it is cumbersome, so
on line 21649 we define a macro b ? data, which allows us to write buf[3].b ? data
instead. Note that b ? ? data (the field of the union) contains two underscores,
whereas b ? data (the macro) contains just one, to distinguish them. Macros for
other ways of accessing the block are defined on lines 21650 to 21655.
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                         569
     The buffer hash table, buf ? hash, is defined on line 21657. Each entry points
to a list of buffers. Originally all the lists are empty. Macros at the end of buf.h
define different block types. The WRITE ? IMMED bit signals that a block must
be rewritten to the disk immediately if it is changed, and the ONE ? SHOT bit is
used to indicate a block is unlikely to be needed soon. Neither of these is used
currently but they remain available for anyone who has a bright idea about
improving performance or reliability by modifying the way blocks in the cache
are queued.
     Finally, in the last line HASH ? MASK is defined, based upon the value of
NR ? BUF ? HASH configured in include/minix/config.h. HASH ? MASK is ANDed
with a block number to determine which entry in buf ? hash to use as the starting
point in a search for a block buffer.
     File.h (line 21700) contains the intermediate table filp (declared as EXTERN),
used to hold the current file position and i-node pointer (see Fig. 5-39). It also
tells whether the file was opened for reading, writing, or both, and how many file
descriptors are currently pointing to the entry.
     The file locking table, file ? lock (declared as EXTERN), is in lock.h (line
21800). The size of the array is determined by NR ? LOCKS, which is defined as 8
in const.h. This number should be increased if it is desired to implement a multi-
user data base on a MINIX 3 system.
     In inode.h (line 21900) the i-node table inode is declared (using EXTERN). It
holds i-nodes that are currently in use. As we said earlier, when a file is opened
its i-node is read into memory and kept there until the file is closed. The inode
structure definition provides for information that is kept in memory, but is not
written to the disk i-node. Notice that there is only one version, and nothing is
version-specific here. When the i-node is read in from the disk, differences
between V1 and V2/V3 file systems are handled. The rest of the file system does
not need to know about the file system format on the disk, at least until the time
comes to write back modified information.
     Most of the fields should be self-explanatory at this point. However, i ? seek
deserves some comment. It was mentioned earlier that, as an optimization, when
the file system notices that a file is being read sequentially, it tries to read blocks
into the cache even before they are asked for. For randomly accessed files there
is no read ahead. When an lseek call is made, the field i ? seek is set to inhibit
read ahead.
     The file param.h (line 22000) is analogous to the file of the same name in the
process manager. It defines names for message fields containing parameters, so
the code can refer to, for example, m ? in.buffer, instead of m ? in.m1 ? p1, which
selects one of the fields of the message buffer m ? in.
     In super.h (line 22100), we have the declaration of the superblock table.
When the system is booted, the superblock for the root device is loaded here. As
file systems are mounted, their superblocks go here as well. As with other tables,
super ? block is declared as EXTERN.

File System Storage Allocation

     The last file we will discuss in this section is not a header. However, just as
we did when discussing the process manager, it seems appropriate to discuss
table.c immediately after reviewing the header files, since they are all included
when table.c (line 22200) is compiled. Most of the data structures we have
mentioned—the block cache, the filp table, and so on—are defined with the
EXTERN macro, as are also the file system’s global variables and the file system’s
part of the process table. In the same way we have seen in other parts of the
MINIX 3 system, the storage is actually reserved when table.c is compiled. This
file also contains one major initialized array. Call ? vector contains the pointer
array used in the main loop for determining which procedure handles which sys-
tem call number. We saw a similar table inside the process manager.

5.7.2 Table Management

    Associated with each of the main tables—blocks, i-nodes, superblocks, and so
forth—is a file that contains procedures that manage the table. These procedures
are heavily used by the rest of the file system and form the principal interface
between tables and the file system. For this reason, it is appropriate to begin our
study of the file system code with them.

Block Management

     The block cache is managed by the procedures in the file cache.c. This file
contains the nine procedures listed in Fig. 5-40. The first one, get ? block (line
22426), is the standard way the file system gets data blocks. When a file system
procedure needs to read a user data block, a directory block, a superblock, or any
other kind of block, it calls get ? block, specifying the device and block number.
     When get ? block is called, it first examines the block cache to see if the re-
quested block is there. If so, it returns a pointer to it. Otherwise, it has to read the
block in. The blocks in the cache are linked together on NR ? BUF ? HASH linked
lists. NR ? BUF ? HASH is a tunable parameter, along with NR ? BUFS, the size of
the block cache. Both of these are set in include/minix/config.h. At the end of
this section we will say a few words about optimizing the size of the block cache
and the hash table. The HASH ? MASK is NR ? BUF ? HASH − 1. With 256 hash
lists, the mask is 255, so all the blocks on each list have block numbers that end
with the same string of 8 bits, that is 00000000, 00000001, ..., or 11111111.
     The first step is usually to search a hash chain for a block, although there is a
special case, when a hole in a sparse file is being read, where this search is
skipped. This is the reason for the test on line 22454. Otherwise, the next two
SEC. 5.7             IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                                                                          571

                                                                          
                 Procedure ?                                                      Function              ?
                                                                            
                                                                                                           
                          get ? block
                                                                            
                                              Fetch a block for reading or writing                          ?
                  put ? block                ? Return a block previously requested with get ? block ?
                                                                            
                                                                                                               
                                                                             
                          alloc ? zone          ? Allocate a new zone (to make a file longer)                   ?
                                                                                                                   
                          free ? zone                          Release a zone
                                                                             
                                                                              (when a  file is removed)             ?
                                                                            
                          rw ? block                 ? Transfer a block between disk and cache                        ?
                                                                                                                         
                          invalidate                    ? Purge all the cache blocks for some device
                                                                                                                           
                       flushall                          ? Flush all dirty blocks for one device                            ?
                                                                             
                                                                                                                               
                          rw ? scattered ? Read or write scattered data from or to a device
                                                                                                                                 
                        rm ? lru                            ? Remove a block from its LRU chain                                   ?
                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                     

Figure 5-40. Procedures used for block management.

lines set bp to point to the start of the list on which the requested block would be,
if it were in the cache, applying HASH ? MASK to the block number. The loop on
the next line searches this list to see if the block can be found. If it is found and is
not in use, it is removed from the LRU list. If it is already in use, it is not on the
LRU list anyway. The pointer to the found block is returned to the caller on line
22463.
      If the block is not on the hash list, it is not in the cache, so the least recently
used block from the LRU list is taken. The buffer chosen is removed from its
hash chain, since it is about to acquire a new block number and hence belongs on
a different hash chain. If it is dirty, it is rewritten to the disk on line 22495. Do-
ing this with a call to flushall rewrites any other dirty blocks for the same device.
This call is is the way most blocks get written. Blocks that are currently in use are
never chosen for eviction, since they are not on the LRU chain. Blocks will
hardly ever be found to be in use, however; normally a block is released by
put ? block immediately upon being used.
      As soon as the buffer is available, all of the fields, including b ? dev, are up-
dated with the new parameters (lines 22499 to 22504), and the block may be read
in from the disk. However, there are two occasions when it may not be necessary
to read the block from the disk. Get ? block is called with a parameter
only ? search. This may indicate that this is a prefetch. During a prefetch an
available buffer is found, writing the old contents to the disk if necessary, and a
new block number is assigned to the buffer, but the b ? dev field is set to NO ? DEV
to signal there are as yet no valid data in this block. We will see how this is used
when we discuss the rw ? scattered function. Only ? search can also be used to sig-
nal that the file system needs a block just to rewrite all of it. In this case it is
wasteful to first read the old version in. In either of these cases the parameters are
updated, but the actual disk read is omitted (lines 22507 to 22513). When the new
block has been read in, get ? block returns to its caller with a pointer to it.

     Suppose that the file system needs a directory block temporarily, to look up a
file name. It calls get ? block to acquire the directory block. When it has looked
up its file name, it calls put ? block (line 22520) to return the block to the cache,
thus making the buffer available in case it is needed later for a different block.
     Put ? block takes care of putting the newly returned block on the LRU list, and
in some cases, rewriting it to the disk. At line 22544 a decision is made to put it
on the front or rear of the LRU list. Blocks on a RAM disk are always put on the
front of the queue. The block cache does not really do very much for a RAM
disk, since its data are already in memory and accessible without actual I/O. The
ONE ? SHOT flag is tested to see if the block has been marked as one not likely to
be needed again soon, and such blocks are put on the front, where they will be
reused quickly. However, this is used rarely, if at all. Almost all blocks except
those from the RAM disk are put on the rear, in case they are needed again soon.
     After the block has been repositioned on the LRU list, another check is made
to see if the block should be rewritten to disk immediately. Like the previous test,
the test for WRITE ? IMMED is a vestige of an abandoned experiment; currently
no blocks are marked for immediate writing.
     As a file grows, from time to time a new zone must be allocated to hold the
new data. The procedure alloc ? zone (line 22580) takes care of allocating new
zones. It does this by finding a free zone in the zone bitmap. There is no need to
search through the bitmap if this is to be the first zone in a file; the s ? zsearch
field in the superblock, which always points to the first available zone on the
device, is consulted. Otherwise an attempt is made to find a zone close to the last
existing zone of the current file, in order to keep the zones of a file together. This
is done by starting the search of the bitmap at this last zone (line 22603). The
mapping between the bit number in the bitmap and the zone number is handled on
line 22615, with bit 1 corresponding to the first data zone.
     When a file is removed, its zones must be returned to the bitmap. Free ? zone
(line 22621) is responsible for returning these zones. All it does is call free ? bit,
passing the zone map and the bit number as parameters. Free ? bit is also used to
return free i-nodes, but then with the i-node map as the first parameter, of course.
     Managing the cache requires reading and writing blocks. To provide a simple
disk interface, the procedure rw ? block (line 22641) has been provided. It reads or
writes one block. Analogously, rw ? inode exists to read and write i-nodes.
     The next procedure in the file is invalidate (line 22680). It is called when a
disk is unmounted, for example, to remove from the cache all the blocks belong-
ing to the file system just unmounted. If this were not done, then when the device
were reused (with a different floppy disk), the file system might find the old
blocks instead of the new ones.
     We mentioned earlier that flushall (line 22694), called from get ? block when-
ever a dirty block is removed from the LRU list, is the function responsible for
writing most data. It is also called by the sync system call to flush to disk all dirty
buffers belonging to a specific device. Sync is activated periodically by the
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                         573
update daemon, and calls flushall once for each mounted device. Flushall treats
the buffer cache as a linear array, so all dirty buffers are found, even ones that are
currently in use and are not in the LRU list. All buffers in the cache are scanned,
and those that belong to the device to be flushed and that need to be written are
added to an array of pointers, dirty. This array is declared as static to keep it off
the stack. It is then passed to rw ? scattered.
     In MINIX 3 scheduling of disk writing has been removed from the disk device
drivers and made the sole responsibility of rw ? scattered (line 22711). This func-
tion receives a device identifier, a pointer to an array of pointers to buffers, the
size of the array, and a flag indicating whether to read or write. The first thing it
does is sort the array it receives on the block numbers, so the actual read or write
operation will be performed in an efficient order. It then constructs vectors of
contiguous blocks to send to the the device driver with a call to dev ? io. The
driver does not have to do any additional scheduling. It is likely with a modern
disk that the drive electronics will further optimize the order of requests, but this
is not visible to MINIX 3. Rw ? scattered is called with the WRITING flag only
from the flushall function described above. In this case the origin of these block
numbers is easy to understand. They are buffers which contain data from blocks
previously read but now modified. The only call to rw ? scattered for a read
operation is from rahead in read.c. At this point, we just need to know that before
calling rw ? scattered, get ? block has been called repeatedly in prefetch mode, thus
reserving a group of buffers. These buffers contain block numbers, but no valid
device parameter. This is not a problem, since rw ? scattered is called with a
device parameter as one of its arguments.
     There is an important difference in the way a device driver may respond to a
read (as opposed to a write) request, from rw ? scattered. A request to write a
number of blocks must be honored completely, but a request to read a number of
blocks may be handled differently by different drivers, depending upon what is
most efficient for the particular driver. Rahead often calls rw ? scattered with a
request for a list of blocks that may not actually be needed, so the best response is
to get as many blocks as can be gotten easily, but not to go wildly seeking all over
a device that may have a substantial seek time. For instance, the floppy driver
may stop at a track boundary, and many other drivers will read only consecutive
blocks. When the read is complete, rw ? scattered marks the blocks read by filling
in the device number field in their block buffers.
     The last function in Fig. 5-40 is rm ? lru (line 22809). This function is used to
remove a block from the LRU list. It is used only by get ? block in this file, so it is
declared PRIVATE instead of PUBLIC to hide it from procedures outside the file.
     Before we leave the block cache, let us say a few words about fine-tuning it.
NR ? BUF ? HASH must be a power of 2. If it is larger than NR ? BUFS, the aver-
age length of a hash chain will be less than one. If there is enough memory for a
large number of buffers, there is space for a large number of hash chains, so the
usual choice is to make NR ? BUF ? HASH the next power of 2 greater than

NR ? BUFS. The listing in the text shows settings of 128 blocks and 128 hash lists.
The optimal size depends upon how the system is used, since that determines how
much must be buffered. The full source code used to compile the standard MINIX
3 binaries that are installed from the CD-ROM that accommpanies this text has
settings of 1280 buffers and 2048 hash chains. Empirically it was found that
increasing the number of buffers beyond this did not improve performance when
recompiling the MINIX 3 system, so apparently this is large enough to hold the
binaries for all compiler passes. For some other kind of work a smaller size might
be adequate or a larger size might improve performance.
     The buffers for the standard MINIX 3 system on the CD-ROM occupy more
than 5 MB of RAM. An additional binary, designated image ? small is provided
that was compiled with just 128 buffers in the block cache, and the buffers for this
system need only a little more than 0.5 MB. This one can be installed on a system
with only 8 MB of RAM. The standard version requires 16 MB of RAM. With
some tweaking, it could no doubt be shoehorned into a memory of 4 MB or
smaller.

I-Node Management

    The block cache is not the only file system table that needs support pro-
cedures. The i-node table does, too. Many of the procedures are similar in func-
tion to the block management procedures. They are listed in Fig. 5-41.
                                                                        
               Procedure ?                                                         Function                     ?
                                                                          
                                                                                                                   
                         get ? inode
                                                                          
                                             Fetch an i-node into memory                                            ?
                put ? inode                 ? Return an i-node that is no longer needed                               ?
                                                                          
                                                                                                                         
                                                                          
                         alloc ? inode         ? Allocate a new i-node (for a new file)                                   ?
                                                                                                                             
                         wipe ? inode             ? Clear some fields in an i-node
                                                                                                                               
                                                                          
                         free ? inode              ? Release an i-node (when a file is removed)                                 ?
                                                                                                                                   
                         update ? times ? Update time fields in an i-node
                                                                                                                                     
                     rw ? inode                       ? Transfer an i-node between memory and disk                                    ?
                                                                           
                                                                                                                                         
                         old ? icopy
                                                                           
                                                           Convert i-node contents to write to V1 disk i-node ?
                      new ? icopy                         ? Convert data read from V1 file system disk i-node ?
                                                                           
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                     
                         dup ? inode                         ?? Indicate that someone else is using an i-node                               ??

Figure 5-41. Procedures used for i-node management.

     The procedure get ? inode (line 22933) is analogous to get ? block. When any
part of the file system needs an i-node, it calls get ? inode to acquire it. Get ? inode
first searches the inode table to see if the i-node is already present. If so, it incre-
ments the usage counter and returns a pointer to it. This search is contained on
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                            575
lines 22945 to 22955. If the i-node is not present in memory, the i-node is loaded
by calling rw ? inode.
     When the procedure that needed the i-node is finished with it, the i-node is
returned by calling the procedure put ? inode (line 22976), which decrements the
usage count i ? count. If the count is then zero, the file is no longer in use, and the
i-node can be removed from the table. If it is dirty, it is rewritten to disk.
     If the i ? link field is zero, no directory entry is pointing to the file, so all its
zones can be freed. Note that the usage count going to zero and the number of
links going to zero are different events, with different causes and different conse-
quences. If the i-node is for a pipe, all the zones must be released, even though
the number of links may not be zero. This happens when a process reading from a
pipe releases the pipe. There is no sense in having a pipe for one process.
     When a new file is created, an i-node must be allocated by alloc ? inode (line
23003). MINIX 3 allows mounting of devices in read-only mode, so the super-
block is checked to make sure the device is writable. Unlike zones, where an
attempt is made to keep the zones of a file close together, any i-node will do. In
order to save the time of searching the i-node bitmap, advantage is taken of the
field in the superblock where the first unused i-node is recorded.
     After the i-node has been acquired, get ? inode is called to fetch the i-node into
the table in memory. Then its fields are initialized, partly in-line (lines 23038 to
23044) and partly using the procedure wipe ? inode (line 23060). This particular
division of labor has been chosen because wipe ? inode is also needed elsewhere in
the file system to clear certain i-node fields (but not all of them).
     When a file is removed, its i-node is freed by calling free ? inode (line 23079).
All that happens here is that the corresponding bit in the i-node bitmap is set to 0
and the superblock’s record of the first unused i-node is updated.
     The next function, update ? times (line 23099), is called to get the time from
the system clock and change the time fields that require updating. Update ? times
is also called by the stat and fstat system calls, so it is declared PUBLIC.
     The procedure rw ? inode (line 23125) is analogous to rw ? block. Its job is to
fetch an i-node from the disk. It does its work by carrying out the following steps:
     1. Calculate which block contains the required i-node.
     2. Read in the block by calling get ? block.
     3. Extract the i-node and copy it to the inode table.
     4. Return the block by calling put ? block.

     Rw ? inode is a bit more complex than the basic outline given above, so some
additional functions are needed. First, because getting the current time requires a
kernel call, any need for a change to the time fields in the i-node is only marked
by setting bits in the i-node’s i ? update field while the i-node is in memory. If this
field is nonzero when an i-node must be written, update ? times is called.

     Second, the history of MINIX adds a complication: in the old V1 file system
the i-nodes on the disk have a different structure from V2. Two functions,
old ? icopy (line 23168) and new ? icopy (line 23214) are provided to take care of
the conversions. The first converts between i-node information in memory and
the format used by the V1 filesystem. The second does the same conversion for
V2 and V3 filesystem disks. Both of these functions are called only from within
this file, so they are declared PRIVATE. Each function handles conversions in
both directions (disk to memory or memory to disk).
     Older versions of MINIX were ported to systems which used a different byte
order from Intel processors and MINIX 3 is also likely to be ported to such archi-
tectures in the future. Every implementation uses the native byte order on its disk;
the sp−>native field in the superblock identifies which order is used. Both
old ? icopy and new ? icopy call functions conv2 and conv4 to swap byte orders, if
necessary. Of course, much of what we have just described is not used by MINIX
3, since it does not support the V1 filesystem to the extent that V1 disks can be
used. And as of this writing nobody has ported MINIX 3 to a platform that uses a
different byte order. But these bits and pieces remain in place for the day when
someone decides to make MINIX 3 more versatile.
     The procedure dup ? inode (line 23257) just increments the usage count of the
i-node. It is called when an open file is opened again. On the second open, the i-
node need not be fetched from disk again.

Superblock Management

   The file super.c contains procedures that manage the superblock and the bit-
maps. Six procedures are defined in this file, listed in Fig. 5-42.

                                                                               
       Procedure                  ?                                        Function                                  ?
                                                                                 
                                                                                                                        
               alloc ? bit
                                                                                 
                                        Allocate a bit from the zone or i-node map                                       ?
        free ? bit                     ? Free a bit in the zone or i-node map                                              ?
                                                                                 
                                                                                                                              
               get ? super                ? Search the superblock table for a device
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                  
               get ? block ? size            ?      Find block size to use
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                        
               mounted                         ? Report whether given i-node is on a mounted (or root) file system ?
                                                                                                                                      
               read ? super                       ? Read a superblock
                                                                                                                                        

Figure 5-42. Procedures used to manage the superblock and bitmaps.

    When an i-node or zone is needed, alloc ? inode or alloc ? zone is called, as we
have seen above. Both of these call alloc ? bit (line 23324) to actually search the
relevant bitmap. The search involves three nested loops, as follows:
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                          577
     1. The outer one loops on all the blocks of a bitmap.
     2. The middle one loops on all the words of a block.
     3. The inner one loops on all the bits of a word.

The middle loop works by seeing if the current word is equal to the one’s comple-
ment of zero, that is, a complete word full of 1s. If so, it has no free i-nodes or
zones, so the next word is tried. When a word with a different value is found, it
must have at least one 0 bit in it, so the inner loop is entered to find the free (i.e.,
0) bit. If all the blocks have been tried without success, there are no free i-nodes
or zones, so the code NO ? BIT (0) is returned. Searches like this can consume a
lot of processor time, but the use of the superblock fields that point to the first
unused i-node and zone, passed to alloc ? bit in origin, helps to keep these
searches short.
     Freeing a bit is simpler than allocating one, because no search is required.
Free ? bit (line 23400) calculates which bitmap block contains the bit to free and
sets the proper bit to 0 by calling get ? block, zeroing the bit in memory and then
calling put ? block.
     The next procedure, get ? super (line 23445), is used to search the superblock
table for a specific device. For example, when a file system is to be mounted, it is
necessary to check that it is not already mounted. This check can be performed
by asking get ? super to find the file system’s device. If it does not find the device,
then the file system is not mounted.
     In MINIX 3 the file system server is capable of handling file systems with dif-
ferent block sizes, although within a given disk partition only a single block size
can be used. The get ? block ? size function (line 23467) is meant to determine the
block size of a file system. It searches the superblock table for the given device
and returns the block size of the device if it is mounted. Otherwise the minimum
block size, MIN ? BLOCK ? SIZE is returned.
     The next function, mounted (line 23489), is called only when a block device is
closed. Normally, all cached data for a device are discarded when it is closed.
But, if the device happens to be mounted, this is not desirable. Mounted is called
with a pointer to the i-node for a device. It just returns TRUE if the device is the
root device, or if it is a mounted device.
     Finally, we have read ? super (line 23509). This is partially analogous to
rw ? block and rw ? inode, but it is called only to read. The superblock is not read
into the block cache at all, a request is made directly to the device for 1024 bytes
starting at an offset of the same amount from the beginning of the device. Writing
a superblock is not necessary in the normal operation of the system. Read ? super
checks the version of the file system from which it has just read and performs
conversions, if necessary, so the copy of the superblock in memory will have the
standard structure even when read from a disk with a different superblock struc-
ture or byte order.

    Even though it is not currently used in MINIX 3, the method of determining
whether a disk was written on a system with a different byte order is clever and
worth noting. The magic number of a superblock is written with the native byte
order of the system upon which the file system was created, and when a super-
block is read a test for reversed-byte-order superblocks is made.

File Descriptor Management

    MINIX 3 contains special procedures to manage file descriptors and the filp
table (see Fig. 5-39). They are contained in the file filedes.c. When a file is
created or opened, a free file descriptor and a free filp slot are needed. The pro-
cedure get ? fd (line 23716) is used to find them. They are not marked as in use,
however, because many checks must first be made before it is known for sure that
the creat or open will succeed.
    Get ? filp (line 23761) is used to see if a file descriptor is in range, and if so,
returns its filp pointer.
    The last procedure in this file is find ? filp (line 23774). It is needed to find out
when a process is writing on a broken pipe (i.e., a pipe not open for reading by
any other process). It locates potential readers by a brute force search of the filp
table. If it cannot find one, the pipe is broken and the write fails.

File Locking

     The POSIX record locking functions are shown in Fig. 5-43. A part of a file
can be locked for reading and writing, or for writing only, by an fcntl call specify-
ing a F ? SETLK or F ? SETLKW request. Whether a lock exists over a part of a
file can be determined using the F ? GETLK request.
                                                                    
                  Operation ?                               Meaning                ?
                  
                                                                     
                                                                                      
                    F     ? SETLK     ? Lock region for both reading and writing ?
                                                                          
                     F ? SETLKW ? Lock region for writing                              ?
                                                                         
                                                                                          
                        F ? GETLK        ?? Report if region is locked
                                                                                             

Figure 5-43. The POSIX advisory record locking operations. These operations
        are requested by using an FCNTL system call.

    The file lock.c contains only two functions. Lock ? op (line 23820) is called by
the fcntl system call with a code for one of the operations shown in Fig. 5-43. It
does some error checking to be sure the region specified is valid. When a lock is
being set, it must not conflict with an existing lock, and when a lock is being
cleared, an existing lock must not be split in two. When any lock is cleared, the
other function in this file, lock ? revive (line 23964), is called. It wakes up all the
processes that are blocked waiting for locks.
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                            579
    This strategy is a compromise; it would take extra code to figure out exactly
which processes were waiting for a particular lock to be released. Those
processes that are still waiting for a locked file will block again when they start.
This strategy is based on an assumption that locking will be used infrequently. If
a major multiuser data base were to be built upon a MINIX 3 system, it might be
desirable to reimplement this.
    Lock ? revive is also called when a locked file is closed, as might happen, for
instance, if a process is killed before it finishes using a locked file.

5.7.3 The Main Program

     The main loop of the file system is contained in file main.c, (line 24040).
After a call to fs ? init for initialization, the main loop is entered. Structurally, this
is very similar to the main loop of the process manager and the I/O device drivers.
The call to get ? work waits for the next request message to arrive (unless a pro-
cess previously suspended on a pipe or terminal can now be handled). It also sets
a global variable, who, to the caller’s process table slot number and another global
variable, call ? nr, to the number of the system call to be carried out.
     Once back in the main loop the variable fp is pointed to the caller’s process
table slot, and the super ? user flag tells whether the caller is the superuser or not.
Notification messages are high priority, and a SYS ? SIG message is checked for
first, to see if the system is shutting down. The second highest priority is a
SYN ? ALARM, which means that a timer set by the file system has expired. A
NOTIFY ? MESSAGE means a device driver is ready for attention, and is
dispatched to dev ? status. Then comes the main attraction—the call to the pro-
cedure that carries out the system call. The procedure to call is selected by using
call ? nr as an index into the array of procedure pointers, call ? vecs.
     When control comes back to the main loop, if dont ? reply has been set, the
reply is inhibited (e.g., a process has blocked trying to read from an empty pipe).
Otherwise a reply is sent by calling reply (line 24087). The final statement in the
main loop has been designed to detect that a file is being read sequentially and to
load the next block into the cache before it is actually requested, to improve per-
formance.
     Two other functions in this file are intimately involved with the file system’s
main loop. Get ? work (line 24099) checks to see if any previously blocked pro-
cedures have now been revived. If so, these have priority over new messages.
When there is no internal work to do the file system calls the kernel to get a mes-
sage, on line 24124. Skipping ahead a few lines, we find reply (line 24159) which
is called after a system call has been completed, successfully or otherwise. It
sends a reply back to the caller. The process may have been killed by a signal, so
the status code returned by the kernel is ignored. In this case there is nothing to
be done anyway.

Initialization of the File System

     The functions that remain to be discussed in main.c are used at system startup.
The major player is fs ? init, which is called by the file system before it enters its
main loop during startup of the entire system. In the context of discussing process
scheduling in Chapter 2 we showed in Fig. 2-43 the initial queueing of processes
as the MINIX 3 system starts up. The file system is scheduled on a queue with
lower priority than the process manager, so we can be sure that at startup time the
process manager will get a chance to run before the file system. In Chapter 4 we
examined the initialization of the process manager. As the PM builds its part of
the process table, adding entries for itself and all other processes in the boot
image, it sends a message to the file system for each one so the FS can initialize
the corresponding entry in the FS part of the file system. Now we can see the
other half of this interaction.
     When the file system starts it immediately enters a loop of its own in fs ? init,
on lines 24189 to 24202. The first statement in the loop is a call to receive, to get
a message sent at line 18235 in the PM’s pm ? init initialization function. Each
message contains a process number and a PID. The first is used as an index into
the file system’s process table and the second is saved in the fp ? pid field of each
selected slot. Following this the real and effective uid and gid for the superuser
and a ~0 (all bits set) umask is set up for each selected slot. When a message with
the symbolic value NONE in the process number field is received the loop ter-
minates and a message is sent back to the process manager to tell it all is OK.
     Next, the file system’s own initialization is completed. First important con-
stants are tested for valid values. Then several other functions are invoked to ini-
tialize the block cache and the device table, to load the RAM disk if necessary,
and to load the root device superblock. At this point the root device can be
accessed, and another loop is made through the FS part of the process table, so
each process loaded from the boot image will recognize the root directory and use
the root directory as its working directory (lines 24228 to 24235).
     The first function called by fs ? init after it finshes its interaction with the pro-
cess manager is buf ? pool, which begins on line 24132. It builds the linked lists
used by the block cache. Figure 5-37 shows the normal state of the block cache,
in which all blocks are linked on both the LRU chain and a hash chain. It may be
helpful to see how the situation of Fig. 5-37 comes about. Immediately after the
cache is initialized by buf ? pool, all the buffers will be on the LRU chain, and all
will be linked into the 0th hash chain, as in Fig. 5-44(a). When a buffer is
requested, and while it is in use, we have the situation of Fig. 5-44(b), in which
we see that a block has been removed from the LRU chain and is now on a dif-
ferent hash chain.
     Normally, blocks are released and returned to the LRU chain immediately.
Figure 5-44(c) shows the situation after the block has been returned to the LRU
chain. Although it is no longer in use, it can be accessed again to provide the
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                                 581
same data, if need be, and so it is retained on the hash chain. After the system has
been in operation for awhile, almost all of the blocks can be expected to have
been used and to be distributed among the different hash chains at random. Then
the LRU chain will look like Fig. 5-37.

                            Front                            Rear

                0                                                   NULL
                    … …

                k            NULL

                n            NULL
                                              (a)

                                           Front                Rear

                                    NULL                               NULL
                0
                    … …

                k

                n            NULL
                                              (b)

                            Rear           Front

                                    NULL                               NULL

                0
                    … …

                k

                n            NULL
                                              (c)

Figure 5-44. Block cache initialization. (a) Before any buffers have been used.
        (b) After one block has been requested. (c) After the block has been released.

     The next thing called after buf ? pool is build ? dmap, which we will describe
later, along with other functions dealing with device files. After that, load ? ram is
called, which uses the next function we will examine, igetenv (line 2641). This

function retrieves a numeric device identifier from the kernel, using the name of a
boot parameter as a key. If you have used the sysenv command to to look at the
boot parameters on a working MINIX 3 system, you have seen that sysenv reports
devices numerically, displaying strings like

    rootdev=912

The file system uses numbers like this to identify devices. The number is simply
256 x major + minor, where major and minor are the major and minor device
numbers. In this example, the major, minor pair is 3, 144, which corresponds to
/dev/c0d1p0s0, a typical place to install MINIX 3 on a system with two disk drives.
     Load ? ram (line 24260) allocates space for a RAM disk, and loads the root
file system on it, if required by the boot parameters. It uses igetenv to get the
rootdev, ramimagedev, and ramsize parameters set in the boot environment (lines
24278 to 24280). If the boot parameters specify

    rootdev = ram

the root file system is copied from the device named by ramimagedev to the RAM
disk block by block, starting with the boot block, with no interpretation of the
various file system data structures. If the ramsize boot parameter is smaller than
the size of ramimagedev, the RAM disk is made large enough to hold it. If ram-
size specifies a size larger than the boot device file system the requested size is
allocated and the RAM disk file system is adjusted to use the full size specified
(lines 24404 to 24420). This is the only time that the file system ever writes a
superblock, but, just as with reading a superblock, the block cache is not used and
the data is written directly to the device using dev ? io.
     Two items merit note at this point. The first is the code on lines 24291 to
24307 which deals with the case of booting from a CD-ROM. The cdprobe func-
tion, not discussed in this text, is used. Interested readers are referred to the code
in fs/cdprobe.c, which can be found on the CD-ROM or the Web site. Second,
regardless of the disk block size used by MINIX 3 for ordinary disk access, the
boot block is always a 1 KB block and the superblock is loaded from the second 1
KB of the disk device. Anything else would be complicated, since the block size
cannot be known until the superblock has been loaded.
     Load ? ram allocates space for an empty RAM disk if a nonzero ramsize is
specified without a request to use the RAM disk as the root file system. In this
case, since no file system structures are copied, the RAM device cannot be used
as a file system until it has been initialized by the mkfs command. Alternatively,
such a RAM disk can be used for a secondary cache if support for this is compiled
into the file system.
     The last function in main.c is load ? super (line 24426). It initializes the
superblock table and reads in the superblock of the root device.
SEC. 5.7       IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                         583

5.7.4 Operations on Individual Files

     In this section we will look at the system calls that operate on individual files
one at a time (as opposed to, say, operations on directories). We will start with
how files are created, opened, and closed. After that we will examine in some
detail the mechanism by which files are read and written. Then that we will look
at pipes and how operations on them differ from those on files.

Creating, Opening, and Closing Files

     The file open.c contains the code for six system calls: creat, open, mknod,
mkdir, close, and lseek. We will examine creat and open together, and then look
at each of the others.
     In older versions of UNIX, the creat and open calls had distinct purposes.
Trying to open a file that did not exist was an error, and a new file had to be
created with creat, which could also be used to truncate an existing file to zero
length. The need for two distinct calls is no longer present in a POSIX system,
however. Under POSIX, the open call now allows creating a new file or truncat-
ing an old file, so the creat call now represents a subset of the possible uses of the
open call and is really only necessary for compatibility with older programs. The
procedures that handle creat and open are do ? creat (line 24537) and do ? open
(line 24550). (As in the process manager, the convention is used in the file sys-
tem that system call XXX is performed by procedure do ? XXX.) Opening or creat-
ing a file involves three steps:
     1. Finding the i-node (allocating and initializing if the file is new).
     2. Finding or creating the directory entry.
     3. Setting up and returning a file descriptor for the file.
     Both the creat and the open calls do two things: they fetch the name of a file
and then they call common ? open which takes care of tasks common to both calls.
     Common ? open (line 24573) starts by making sure that free file descriptor and
filp table slots are available. If the calling function specified creation of a new
file (by calling with the O ? CREAT bit set), new ? node is called on line 24594.
New ? node returns a pointer to an existing i-node if the directory entry already ex-
ists; otherwise it will create both a new directory entry and i-node. If the i-node
cannot be created, new ? node sets the global variable err ? code. An error code
does not always mean an error. If new ? node finds an existing file, the error code
returned will indicate that the file exists, but in this case that error is acceptable
(line 24597). If the O ? CREAT bit is not set, a search is made for the i-node using
an alternative method, the eat ? path function in path.c, which we will discuss
further on. At this point, the important thing to understand is that if an i-node is

not found or successfully created, common ? open will terminate with an error
before line 24606 is reached. Otherwise, execution continues here with assign-
ment of a file descriptor and claiming of a slot in the filp table, Following this, if a
new file has just been created, lines 24612 to 24680 are skipped.
     If the file is not new, then the file system must test to see what kind of a file it
is, what its mode is, and so on, to determine whether it can be opened. The call to
forbidden on line 24614 first makes a general check of the rwx bits. If the file is a
regular file and common ? open was called with the O ? TRUNC bit set, it is trun-
cated to length zero and forbidden is called again (line 24620), this time to be sure
the file may be written. If the permissions allow, wipe ? inode and rw ? inode are
called to re-initialize the i-node and write it to the disk. Other file types (direc-
tories, special files, and named pipes) are subjected to appropriate tests. In the
case of a device, a call is made on line 24640 (using the dmap structure) to the
appropriate routine to open the device. In the case of a named pipe, a call is made
to pipe ? open (line 24646), and various tests relevant to pipes are made.
     The code of common ? open, as well as many other file system procedures,
contains a large amount of code that checks for various errors and illegal combi-
nations. While not glamorous, this code is essential to having an error-free, robust
file system. If something is wrong, the file descriptor and filp slot previously allo-
cated are deallocated and the i-node is released (lines 24683 to 24689). In this
case the value returned by common ? open will be a negative number, indicating an
error. If there are no problems the file descriptor, a positive value, is returned.
     This is a good place to discuss in more detail the operation of new ? node (line
24697), which does the allocation of the i-node and the entering of the path name
into the file system for creat and open calls. It is also used for the mknod and
mkdir calls, yet to be discussed. The statement on line 24711 parses the path
name (i.e., looks it up component by component) as far as the final directory; the
call to advance three lines later tries to see if the final component can be opened.
     For example, on the call
    fd = creat(′′/usr/ast/foobar′′, 0755);
last ? dir tries to load the i-node for /usr/ast/ into the tables and return a pointer to
it. If the file does not exist, we will need this i-node shortly in order to add foobar
to the directory. All the other system calls that add or delete files also use
last ? dir to first open the final directory in the path.
     If new ? node discovers that the file does not exist, it calls alloc ? inode on line
24717 to allocate and load a new i-node, returning a pointer to it. If no free i-
nodes are left, new ? node fails and returns NIL ? INODE.
     If an i-node can be allocated, the operation continues at line 24727, filling in
some of the fields, writing it back to the disk, and entering the file name in the
final directory (on line 24732). Again we see that the file system must constantly
check for errors, and upon encountering one, carefully release all the resources,
such as i-nodes and blocks that it is holding. If we were prepared to just let
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                          585
MINIX 3 panic when we ran out of, say, i-nodes, rather than undoing all the effects
of the current call and returning an error code to the caller, the file system would
be appreciably simpler.
      As mentioned above, pipes require special treatment. If there is not at least
one reader/writer pair for a pipe, pipe ? open (line 24758) suspends the caller.
Otherwise, it calls release, which looks through the process table for processes
that are blocked on the pipe. If it is successful, the processes are revived.
      The mknod call is handled by do ? mknod (line 24785). This procedure is
similar to do ? creat, except that it just creates the i-node and makes a directory
entry for it. In fact, most of the work is done by the call to new ? node on line
24797. If the i-node already exists, an error code will be returned. This is the
same error code that was an acceptable result from new ? node when it was called
by common ? open; in this case, however, the error code is passed back to the
caller, which presumably will act accordingly. The case-by-case analysis we saw
in common ? open is not needed here.
      The mkdir call is handled by the function do ? mkdir (line 24805). As with the
other system calls we have discussed here, new ? node plays an important part.
Directories, unlike files, always have links and are never completely empty be-
cause every directory must contain two entries from the time of its creation: the
‘‘.’’ and ‘‘..’’ entries that refer to the directory itself and to its parent directory.
The number of links a file may have is limited, it is LINK ? MAX (defined in
include/limits.h as SHRT ? MAX, 32767 for MINIX 3 on a standard 32-bit Intel sys-
tem). Since the reference to a parent directory in a child is a link to the parent, the
first thing do ? mkdir does is to see if it is possible to make another link in the
parent directory (lines 24819 and 24820). Once this test has been passed,
new ? node is called. If new ? node succeeds, then the directory entries for ‘‘.’’ and
‘‘..’’ are made (lines 24841 and 24842). All of this is straightforward, but there
could be failures (for instance, if the disk is full), so to avoid making a mess of
things provision is made for undoing the initial stages of the process if it can not
be completed.
      Closing a file is easier than opening one. The work is done by do ? close (line
24865). Pipes and special files need some attention, but for regular files, almost
all that needs to be done is to decrement the filp counter and check to see if it is
zero, in which case the i-node is returned with put ? inode. The final step is to
remove any locks and to revive any process that may have been suspended wait-
ing for a lock on the file to be released.
      Note that returning an i-node means that its counter in the inode table is dec-
remented, so it can be removed from the table eventually. This operation has
nothing to do with freeing the i-node (i.e., setting a bit in the bitmap saying that it
is available). The i-node is only freed when the file has been removed from all
directories.
      The final procedure in open.c is do ? lseek (line 24939). When a seek is done,
this procedure is called to set the file position to a new value. On line 24968

reading ahead is inhibited; an explicit attempt to seek to a position in a file is
incompatible with sequential access.

Reading a File

     Once a file has been opened, it can be read or written. Many functions are
used during both reading and writing. These are found in the file read.c. We will
discuss these first and then proceed to the following file, write.c, to look at code
specifically used for writing. Reading and writing differ in a number of ways, but
they have enough similarities that all that is required of do ? read (line 25030) is to
call the common procedure read ? write with a flag set to READING. We will see
in the next section that do ? write is equally simple.
     Read ? write begins on line 25038. Some special code on lines 25063 to 25066
is used by the process manager to have the file system load entire segments in
user space for it. Normal calls are processed starting on line 25068. Some vali-
dity checks follow (e.g., reading from a file opened only for writing) and some
variables are initialized. Reads from character special files do not go through the
block cache, so they are filtered out on line 25122.
     The tests on lines 25132 to 25145 apply only to writes and have to do with
files that may get bigger than the device can hold, or writes that will create a hole
in the file by writing beyond the end-of-file. As we discussed in the MINIX 3
overview, the presence of multiple blocks per zone causes problems that must be
dealt with explicitly. Pipes are also special and are checked for.
     The heart of the read mechanism, at least for ordinary files, is the loop starting
on line 25157. This loop breaks the request up into chunks, each of which fits in a
single disk block. A chunk begins at the current position and extends until one of
the following conditions is met:
      1. All the bytes have been read.
      2. A block boundary is encountered.
      3. The end-of-file is hit.
These rules mean that a chunk never requires two disk blocks to satisfy it. Figure
5-45 shows three examples of how the chunk size is determined, for chunk sizes
of 6, 2, and 1 bytes, respectively. The actual calculation is done on lines 25159 to
25169.
    The actual reading of the chunk is done by rw ? chunk. When control returns,
various counters and pointers are incremented, and the next iteration begins.
When the loop terminates, the file position and other variables may be updated
(e.g., pipe pointers).
    Finally, if read ahead is called for, the i-node to read from and the position to
read from are stored in global variables, so that after the reply message is sent to
the user, the file system can start getting the next block. In many cases the file
SEC. 5.7          IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                                       587

       Byte number
        0   1      2       3    4      5      6   7   8   9   10   11    12     13   14 15   16

                               Block                                    Block
                       Current position = 1

                                                                   Chunk = 6

                Current position = 6

                                 Current position = 9
                                                                   Chunk = 2

                                                                   Chunk = 1

Figure 5-45. Three examples of how the first chunk size is determined for a
        10-byte file. The block size is 8 bytes, and the number of bytes requested is 6.
        The chunk is shown shaded.

system will block, waiting for the next disk block, during which time the user pro-
cess will be able to work on the data it just received. This arrangement overlaps
processing and I/O and can improve performance substantially.
     The procedure rw ? chunk (line 25251) is concerned with taking an i-node and
a file position, converting them into a physical disk block number, and requesting
the transfer of that block (or a portion of it) to the user space. The mapping of the
relative file position to the physical disk address is done by read ? map, which
understands about i-nodes and indirect blocks. For an ordinary file, the variables
b and dev on line 25280 and line 25281 contain the physical block number and
device number, respectively. The call to get ? block on line 25303 is where the
cache handler is asked to find the block, reading it in if need be. Calling rahead
on line 25295 then ensures that the block is read into the cache.
     Once we have a pointer to the block, the sys ? vircopy kernel call on line
25317 takes care of transferring the required portion of it to the user space. The
block is then released by put ? block, so that it can be evicted from the cache later.
(After being acquired by get ? block, it will not be in the LRU queue and it will not
be returned there while the counter in the block’s header shows that it is in use, so
it will be exempt from eviction; put ? block decrements the counter and returns the
block to the LRU queue when the counter reaches zero.) The code on line 25327
indicates whether a write operation filled the block. However, the value passed to
put ? block in n does not affect how the block is placed on the queue; all blocks are
now placed on the rear of the LRU chain.
     Read ? map (line 25337) converts a logical file position to the physical block
number by inspecting the i-node. For blocks close enough to the beginning of the

file that they fall within one of the first seven zones (the ones right in the i-node),
a simple calculation is sufficient to determine which zone is needed, and then
which block. For blocks further into the file, one or more indirect blocks may
have to be read.
     Rd ? indir (line 25400) is called to read an indirect block. The comments for
this function are a bit out of date; code to support the 68000 processor has been
removed and the support for the MINIX V1 file system is not used and could also
be dropped. However, it is worth noting that if someone wanted to add support
for other file system versions or other platforms where data might have a different
format on the disk, problems of different data types and byte orders could be
relegated to this file. If messy conversions were necessary, doing them here
would let the rest of the file system see data in only one form.
     Read ? ahead (line 25432) converts the logical position to a physical block
number, calls get ? block to make sure the block is in the cache (or bring it in), and
then returns the block immediately. It cannot do anything with the block, after all.
It just wants to improve the chance that the block is around if it is needed soon,
     Note that read ? ahead is called only from the main loop in main. It is not
called as part of the processing of the read system call. It is important to realize
that the call to read ? ahead is performed after the reply is sent, so that the user
will be able to continue running even if the file system has to wait for a disk block
while reading ahead.
     Read ? ahead by itself is designed to ask for just one more block. It calls the
last function in read.c, rahead, to actually get the job done. Rahead (line 25451)
works according to the theory that if a little more is good, a lot more is better.
Since disks and other storage devices often take a relatively long time to locate
the first block requested but then can relatively quickly read in a number of adja-
cent blocks, it may be possible to get many more blocks read with little additional
effort. A prefetch request is made to get ? block, which prepares the block cache
to receive a number of blocks at once. Then rw ? scattered is called with a list of
blocks. We have previously discussed this; recall that when the device drivers are
actually called by rw ? scattered, each one is free to answer only as much of the
request as it can efficiently handle. This all sounds fairly complicated, but the
complications make possible a significant speedup of applications which read
large amounts of data from the disk.
     Figure 5-46 shows the relations between some of the major procedures in-
volved in reading a file–in particular, who calls whom.

Writing a File

    The code for writing to files is in write.c. Writing a file is similar to reading
one, and do ? write (line 25625) just calls read ? write with the WRITING flag. A
major difference between reading and writing is that writing requires allocating
new disk blocks. Write ? map (line 25635) is analogous to read ? map, only instead
SEC. 5.7         IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                                       589

                                           Entry points

                          do_read                do_write

                                    read_write     Main procedure for reading/writing

               dev_io            pipe_check                 rw_chunk   Read or write one block
               Special                Pipes
                files
                            read_map              rahead           sys_copy         put _block
                                                                 Transfer from    Return block
             Look up                                              FS to user       to cache
           disk address      rd_indir            get _block
                            Get indirect
                          block address
                          (if necessary)         rw_block
                                                                 Search the cache

                                                  dev_io

                                                  rw_dev        Listed in dmap table

                                                  sendrec       Send message to the kernel

Figure 5-46. Some of the procedures involved in reading a file.

of looking up physical block numbers in the i-node and its indirect blocks, it
enters new ones there (to be precise, it enters zone numbers, not block numbers).
    The code of write ? map is long and detailed because it must deal with several
cases. If the zone to be inserted is close to the beginning of the file, it is just
inserted into the i-node on (line 25658).
    The worst case is when a file exceeds the size that can be handled by a
single-indirect block, so a double-indirect block is now required. Next, a single-
indirect block must be allocated and its address put into the double-indirect block.
As with reading, a separate procedure, wr ? indir, is called. If the double-indirect
block is acquired correctly, but the disk is full so the single-indirect block cannot
be allocated, then the double one must be returned to avoid corrupting the bitmap.
    Again, if we could just toss in the sponge and panic at this point, the code
would be much simpler. However, from the user’s point of view it is much nicer
that running out of disk space just returns an error from write, rather than crashing
the computer with a corrupted file system.

     Wr ? indir (line 25726) calls the conversion routines, conv4 to do any neces-
sary data conversion and puts a new zone number into an indirect block. (Again,
there is leftover code here to handle the old V1 filesystem, but only the V2 code is
currently used.) Keep in mind that the name of this function, like the names of
many other functions that involve reading and writing, is not literally true. The
actual writing to the disk is handled by the functions that maintain the block
cache.
     The next procedure in write.c is clear ? zone (line 25747), which takes care of
the problem of erasing blocks that are suddenly in the middle of a file. This hap-
pens when a seek is done beyond the end of a file, followed by a write of some
data. Fortunately, this situation does not occur very often.
     New ? block (line 25787) is called by rw ? chunk whenever a new block is
needed. Figure 5-47 shows six successive stages of the growth of a sequential
file. The block size is 1-KB and the zone size is 2-KB in this example.

                      (a)    24                               …
                                        Free zones: 12 20 31 36

                      (b)    24 25

                      (c)    24 25 40

                      (d)    24 25 40 41

                      (e)    24 25 40 41 62
                                                        Block number
                       (f)   24 25 40 41 62 63

Figure 5-47. (a) – (f) The successive allocation of 1-KB blocks with a 2-KB
        zone.

    The first time new ? block is called, it allocates zone 12 (blocks 24 and 25).
The next time it uses block 25, which has already been allocated but is not yet in
use. On the third call, zone 20 (blocks 40 and 41) is allocated, and so on.
Zero ? block (line 25839) clears a block, erasing its previous contents. This
description is considerably longer than the actual code.

Pipes

     Pipes are similar to ordinary files in many respects. In this section we will
focus on the differences. The code we will discuss is all in pipe.c.
     First of all, pipes are created differently, by the pipe call, rather than the creat
call. The pipe call is handled by do ? pipe (line 25933). All do ? pipe really does is
allocate an i-node for the pipe and return two file descriptors for it. Pipes are
owned by the system, not by the user, and are located on the designated pipe de-
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                         591
vice (configured in include/minix/config.h), which could very well be a RAM
disk, since pipe data do not have to be preserved permanently.
     Reading and writing a pipe is slightly different from reading and writing a
file, because a pipe has a finite capacity. An attempt to write to a pipe that is
already full will cause the writer to be suspended. Similarly, reading from an
empty pipe will suspend the reader. In effect, a pipe has two pointers, the current
position (used by readers) and the size (used by writers), to determine where data
come from or go to.
     The various checks to see if an operation on a pipe is possible are carried out
by pipe ? check (line 25986). In addition to the above tests, which may lead to the
caller being suspended, pipe ? check calls release to see if a process previously
suspended due to no data or too much data can now be revived. These revivals
are done on line 26017 and line 26052, for sleeping writers and readers, respec-
tively. Writing on a broken pipe (no readers) is also detected here.
     The act of suspending a process is done by suspend (line 26073). All it does
is save the parameters of the call in the process table and set the flag dont ? reply
to TRUE, to inhibit the file system’s reply message.
     The procedure release (line 26099) is called to check if a process that was
suspended on a pipe can now be allowed to continue. If it finds one, it calls revive
to set a flag so that the main loop will notice it later. This function is not a system
call, but is listed in Fig. 5-33(c) because it uses the message-passing mechanism.
     The last procedure in pipe.c is do ? unpause (line 26189). When the process
manager is trying to signal a process, it must find out if that process is hanging on
a pipe or special file (in which case it must be awakened with an EINTR error).
Since the process manager knows nothing about pipes or special files, it sends a
message to the file system to ask. That message is processed by do ? unpause,
which revives the process, if it is blocked. Like revive, do ? unpause has some
similarity to a system call, although it is not one.
     The last two functions in pipe.c, select ? request ? pipe (line 26247) and
select ? match ? pipe (line 26278), support the select call, which is not discussed
here.

5.7.5 Directories and Paths

    We have now finished looking at how files are read and written. Our next
task is to see how path names and directories are handled.

Converting a Path to an I-Node

     Many system calls (e.g., open, unlink, and mount) have path names (i.e., file
names) as a parameter. Most of these calls must fetch the i-node for the named
file before they can start working on the call itself. How a path name is converted

to an i-node is a subject we will now look at in detail. We already saw the general
outline in Fig. 5-16.
     The parsing of path names is done in the file path.c. The first procedure,
eat ? path (line 26327), accepts a pointer to a path name, parses it, arranges for its
i-node to be loaded into memory, and returns a pointer to the i-node. It does its
work by calling last ? dir to get the i-node to the final directory and then calling
advance to get the final component of the path. If the search fails, for example,
because one of the directories along the path does not exist, or exists but is pro-
tected against being searched, NIL ? INODE is returned instead of a pointer to the
i-node.
     Path names may be absolute or relative and may have arbitrarily many com-
ponents, separated by slashes. These issues are dealt with by last ? dir, which
begins by examining the first character of the path name to see if it is an absolute
path or a relative one (line 26371). For absolute paths, rip is set to point to the
root i-node; for relative ones, it is set to point to the i-node for the current working
directory.
     At this point, last ? dir has the path name and a pointer to the i-node of the
directory to look up the first component in. It enters a loop on line 26382 now,
parsing the path name, component by component. When it gets to the end, it
returns a pointer to the final directory.
     Get ? name (line 26413) is a utility procedure that extracts components from
strings. More interesting is advance (line 26454), which takes as parameters a
directory pointer and a string, and looks up the string in the directory. If it finds
the string, advance returns a pointer to its i-node. The details of transferring
across mounted file systems are handled here.
     Although advance controls the string lookup, the actual comparison of the
string against the directory entries is done in search ? dir (line 26535), which is the
only place in the file system where directory files are actually examined. It con-
tains two nested loops, one to loop over the blocks in a directory, and one to loop
over the entries in a block. Search ? dir is also used to enter and delete names
from directories. Figure 5-48 shows the relationships between some of the major
procedures used in looking up path names.

Mounting File Systems

    Two system calls that affect the file system as a whole are mount and umount.
They allow independent file systems on different minor devices to be ‘‘glued’’
together to form a single, seamless naming tree. Mounting, as we saw in Fig. 5-
38, is effectively achieved by reading in the root i-node and superblock of the file
system to be mounted and setting two pointers in its superblock. One of them
points to the i-node mounted on, and the other points to the root i-node of the
mounted file system. These pointers hook the file systems together.
SEC. 5.7         IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                                   593

                                      eat_path     Convert path to i-node

                   last _dir   Get final                 advance     Process one component
                               directory

       Loop                                                                   Load
      on path      advance                       search_dir     get_inode     i-node
    components

                                read_map         get_block      put _block
                                 Look up         Find block    Return block
                               disk address       in cache      to cache

Figure 5-48. Some of the procedures used in looking up path names.

   The setting of these pointers is done in the file mount.c by do ? mount on lines
26819 and 26820. The two pages of code that precede setting the pointers are
almost entirely concerned with checking for all the errors that can occur while
mounting a file system, among them:
     1. The special file given is not a block device.
     2. The special file is a block device but is already mounted.
     3. The file system to be mounted has a rotten magic number.
     4. The file system to be mounted is invalid (e.g., no i-nodes).
     5. The file to be mounted on does not exist or is a special file.
     6. There is no room for the mounted file system’s bitmaps.
     7. There is no room for the mounted file system’s superblock.
     8. There is no room for the mounted file system’s root i-node.

Perhaps it seems inappropriate to keep harping on this point, but the reality of any
practical operating system is that a substantial fraction of the code is devoted to
doing minor chores that are not intellectually very exciting but are crucial to mak-
ing a system usable. If a user attempts to mount the wrong floppy disk by
accident, say, once a month, and this leads to a crash and a corrupted file system,
the user will perceive the system as being unreliable and blame the designer, not
himself.
    The famous inventor Thomas Edison once made a remark that is relevant
here. He said that ‘‘genius’’ is 1 percent inspiration and 99 percent perspiration.
The difference between a good system and a mediocre one is not the brilliance of
the former’s scheduling algorithm, but its attention to getting all the details right.

    Unmounting a file system is easier than mounting one—there are fewer things
that can go wrong. Do ? umount (line 26828) is called to start the job, which is
divided into two parts. Do ? umount itself checks that the call was made by the
superuser, converts the name into a device number, and then calls unmount (line
26846), which completes the operation. The only real issue is making sure that no
process has any open files or working directories on the file system to be
removed. This check is straightforward: just scan the whole i-node table to see if
any i-nodes in memory belong to the file system to be removed (other than the
root i-node). If so, the umount call fails.
    The last procedure in mount.c is name ? to ? dev (line 26893), which takes a
special file pathname, gets its i-node, and extracts its major and minor device
numbers. These are stored in the i-node itself, in the place where the first zone
would normally go. This slot is available because special files do not have zones.

Linking and Unlinking Files

     The next file to consider is link.c, which deals with linking and unlinking
files. The procedure do ? link (line 27034) is very much like do ? mount in that
nearly all of the code is concerned with error checking. Some of the possible
errors that can occur in the call
    link(file ? name, link ? name);
are listed below:
      1. File ? name does not exist or cannot be accessed.
      2. File ? name already has the maximum number of links.
      3. File ? name is a directory (only superuser can link to it).
      4. Link ? name already exists.
      5. File ? name and link ? name are on different devices.
If no errors are present, a new directory entry is made with the string link ? name
and the i-node number of file ? name. In the code, name1 corresponds to
file ? name and name2 corresponds to link ? name. The actual entry is made by
search ? dir, called from do ? link on line 27086.
      Files and directories are removed by unlinking them. The work of both the
unlink and rmdir system calls is done by do ? unlink (line 27104). Again, a variety
of checks must be made; testing that a file exists and that a directory is not a
mount point are done by the common code in do ? unlink, and then either
remove ? dir or unlink ? file is called, depending upon the system call being sup-
ported. We will discuss these shortly.
      The other system call supported in link.c is rename. UNIX users are familiar
with the mv shell command which ultimately uses this call; its name reflects
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                          595
another aspect of the call. Not only can it change the name of a file within a
directory, it can also effectively move the file from one directory to another, and it
can do this atomically, which prevents certain race conditions. The work is done
by do ? rename (line 27162). Many conditions must be tested before this com-
mand can be completed. Among these are:
     1. The original file must exist (line 27177).
     2. The old pathname must not be a directory above the new pathname
        in the directory tree (lines 27195 to 27212).
     3. Neither . nor .. is acceptable as an old or new name (lines 27217
        and 27218).
     4. Both parent directories must be on the same device (line 27221).
     5. Both parent directories must be writable, searchable, and on a writ-
        able device (lines 27224 and 27225).
     6. Neither the old nor the new name may be a directory with a file sys-
        tem mounted upon it.

Some other conditions must be checked if the new name already exists. Most
importantly it must be possible to remove an existing file with the new name.
     In the code for do ? rename there are a few examples of design decisions that
were taken to minimize the possibility of certain problems. Renaming a file to a
name that already exists could fail on a full disk, even though in the end no addi-
tional space is used, if the old file were not removed first, and this is what is done
at lines 27260 to 27266. The same logic is used at line 27280, removing the old
file name before creating a new name in the same directory, to avoid the possibil-
ity that the directory might need to acquire an additional block. However, if the
new file and the old file are to be in different directories, that concern is not
relevant, and at line 27285 a new file name is created (in a different directory)
before the old one is removed, because from a system integrity standpoint a crash
that left two filenames pointing to an i-node would be much less serious than a
crash that left an i-node not pointed to by any directory entry. The probability of
running out of space during a rename operation is low, and that of a system crash
even lower, but in these cases it costs nothing more to be prepared for the worst
case.
     The remaining functions in link.c support the ones that we have already dis-
cussed. In addition, the first of them, truncate (line 27316), is called from several
other places in the file system. It steps through an i-node one zone at a time, free-
ing all the zones it finds, as well as the indirect blocks. Remove ? dir (line 27375)
carries out a number of additional tests to be sure the directory can be removed,
and then it in turn calls unlink ? file (line 27415). If no errors are found, the direc-
tory entry is cleared and the link count in the i-node is reduced by one.

5.7.6 Other System Calls

     The last group of system calls is a mixed bag of things involving status, direc-
tories, protection, time, and other services.

Changing Directories and File Status

     The file stadir.c contains the code for six system calls: chdir, fchdir, chroot,
stat, fstat, and fstatfs. In studying last ? dir we saw how path searches start out by
looking at the first character of the path, to see if it is a slash or not. Depending
on the result, a pointer is then set to the working directory or the root directory.
     Changing from one working directory (or root directory) to another is just a
matter of changing these two pointers within the caller’s process table. These
changes are made by do ? chdir (line 27542) and do ? chroot (line 27580). Both of
them do the necessary checking and then call change (line 27594), which does
some more tests, then calls change ? into (line 27611) to open the new directory
and replace the old one.
     Do ? fchdir (line 27529) supports fchdir, which is an alternate way of effecting
the same operation as chdir, with the calling argument a file descriptor rather than
a path. It tests for a valid descriptor, and if the descriptor is valid it calls
change ? into to do the job.
     In do ? chdir the code on lines 27552 to 27570 is not executed on chdir calls
made by user processes. It is specifically for calls made by the process manager,
to change to a user’s directory for the purpose of handling exec calls. When a
user tries to execute a file, say, a.out in his working directory, it is easier for the
process manager to change to that directory than to try to figure out where it is.
     The two system calls stat and fstat are basically the same, except for how the
file is specified. The former gives a path name, whereas the latter provides the
file descriptor of an open file, similar to what we saw for chdir and fchdir. The
top-level procedures, do ? stat (line 27638) and do ? fstat (line 27658), both call
stat ? inode to do the work. Before calling stat ? inode, do ? stat opens the file to
get its i-node. In this way, both do ? stat and do ? fstat pass an i-node pointer to
stat ? inode.
     All stat ? inode (line 27673) does is to extract information from the i-node and
copy it into a buffer. The buffer must be explicitly copied to user space by a
sys ? datacopy kernel call on lines 27713 and 27714 because it is too large to fit in
a message.
     Finally, we come to do ? fstatfs (line 27721). Fstatfs is not a POSIX call,
although POSIX defines a similar fstatvfs call which returns a much bigger data
structure. The MINIX 3 fstatfs returns only one piece of information, the block
size of a file system. The prototype for the call is
     PROTOTYPE( int fstatfs, (int fd, struct statfs *st)        );
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                           597
The statfs structure it uses is simple, and can be displayed on a single line:
    struct statfs { off?t f?bsize;   /* file system block size */ };
These definitions are in include/sys/statfs.h, which is not listed in Appendix B.

Protection

     The MINIX 3 protection mechanism uses the rwx bits. Three sets of bits are
present for each file: for the owner, for his group, and for others. The bits are set
by the chmod system call, which is carried out by do ? chmod, in file protect.c
(line 27824). After making a series of validity checks, the mode is changed on
line 27850.
     The chown system call is similar to chmod in that both of them change an
internal i-node field in some file. The implementation is also similar although
do ? chown (line 27862) can be used to change the owner only by the superuser.
Ordinary users can use this call to change the group of their own files.
     The umask system call allows the user to set a mask (stored in the process
table), which then masks out bits in subsequent creat system calls. The complete
implementation would be only one statement, line 27907, except that the call must
return the old mask value as its result. This additional burden triples the number
of lines of code required (lines 27906 to 27908).
     The access system call makes it possible for a process to find out if it can
access a file in a specified way (e.g., for reading). It is implemented by
do ? access (line 27914), which fetches the file’s i-node and calls the internal pro-
cedure, forbidden (line 27938), to see if the access is forbidden. Forbidden
checks the uid and gid, as well as the information in the i-node. Depending on
what it finds, it selects one of the three rwx groups and checks to see if the access
is permitted or forbidden.
     Read ? only (line 27999) is a little internal procedure that tells whether the file
system on which its i-node parameter is located is mounted read only or read-
write. It is needed to prevent writes on file systems mounted read only.

5.7.7 The I/O Device Interface

    As we have mentioned more than once, a design goal was to make MINIX 3 a
more robust operating system by having all device drivers run as user-space
processes without direct access to kernel data structures or kernel code. The pri-
mary advantage of this approach is that a faulty device driver will not cause the
entire system to crash, but there are some other implications of this approach.
One is that device drivers not needed immediately upon startup can be started at
any time after startup is complete. This also implies that a device driver can be
stopped, restarted, or replaced by a different driver for the same device at any
time while the system is running. This flexibility is subject, of course to some

restrictions—you cannot start multiple drivers for the same device. However, if
the hard disk driver crashes, it can be restarted from a copy on the RAM disk.
     MINIX 3 device drivers are accessed from the file system. In response to user
requests for I/O the file system sends messages to the user-space device drivers.
The dmap table has an entry for every possible major device type. It provides the
mapping between the major device number and the corresponding device driver.
The next two files we will consider deal with the dmap table. The table itself is
declared in dmap.c. This file also supports initialization of the table and a new
system call, devctl, which is intended to support starting, stopping, and restarting
of device drivers. After that we will look at device.c which supports normal run-
time operations on devices, such as open, close, read, write, and ioctl.
     When a device is opened, closed, read, or written, dmap provides the name of
the procedure to call to handle the operation. All of these procedures are located
in the file system’s address space. Many of these procedures do nothing, but
some call a device driver to request actual I/O. The process number correspond-
ing to each major device is also provided by the table.
     Whenever a new major device is added to MINIX 3, a line must be added to
this table telling what action, if any, is to be taken when the device is opened,
closed, read, or written. As a simple example, if a tape drive is added to MINIX 3,
when its special file is opened, the procedure in the table could check to see if the
tape drive is already in use.
     Dmap.c begins with a macro definition, DT (lines 28115 to 28117), which is
used to initialize the dmap table. This macro makes it easier to add a new device
driver when reconfiguring MINIX 3. Elements of the dmap table are defined in
include/minix/dmap.h; each element consists of a pointer to a function to be called
on an open or close, another pointer to a function to be called on a read or write, a
process number (index into process table, not a PID), and a set of flags. The
actual table is an array of such elements, declared on line 28132. This table is
globally available within the file server. The size of the table is NR ? DEVICES,
which is 32 in the version of MINIX 3 described here, and almost twice as big as
needed for the number of devices currently supported. Fortunately, the C
language behavior of setting all uninitialized variables to zero will ensure that no
spurious information appears in unused slots.
     Following the declaration of dmap is a PRIVATE declaration of init ? dmap. It
is defined by an array of DT macros, one for each possible major device. Each of
these macros expands to initialize an entry in the global array at compile time. A
look at a few of the macros will help with understanding how they are used.
Init ? dmap[1] defines the entry for the memory driver, which is major device 1.
The macro looks like this:
    DT(1, gen ? opcl, gen ? io, MEM ? PROC ? NR, 0)

The memory driver is always present and is loaded with the system boot image.
The ‘‘1’’ as first parameter means that this driver must be present. In this case, a
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                         599
pointer to gen ? opcl will be entered as the function to call to open or close, and a
pointer to gen ? io will be entered to specify the function to call for reading or
writing, MEM ? PROC ? NR tells which slot in the process table the memory driver
uses, and ‘‘0’’ means no flags are set. Now look at the next entry, init ? dmap[2].
This is the entry for the floppy disk driver, and it looks like this:
    DT(0, no?dev, 0, 0, DMAP?MUTABLE)

The first ‘‘0’’ indicates this entry is for a driver not required to be in the boot
image. The default for the first pointer field specifies a call to no ? dev on an
attempt to open the device. This function returns an ENODEV ‘‘no such device’’
error to the caller. The next two zeros are also defaults: since the device cannot
be opened there is no need to specify a function to call to do I/O, and a zero in the
process table slot is interpreted as no process specified. The meaning of the flag
DMAP ? MUTABLE is that changes to this entry are permitted. (Note that the
absence of this flag for the memory driver entry means its entry cannot be
changed after initialization.) MINIX 3 can be configured with or without a floppy
disk driver in the boot image. If the floppy disk driver is in the boot image and it
is specified by a label=FLOPPY boot parameter to be the default disk device, this
entry will be changed when the file system starts. If the floppy driver is not in the
boot image, or if it is in the image but is not specified to be the default disk
device, this field will not be changed when FS starts. However, it is still possible
for the floppy driver to be activated later. Typically this is done by the /etc/rc
script run when init is run.
     Do ? devctl (line 28157) is the first function executed to service a devctl call.
The current version is very simple, it recognizes two requests, DEV ? MAP and
DEV ? UNMAP, and the latter returns a ENOSYS error, which means ‘‘function not
implemented.’’ Obviously, this is a stopgap. In the case of DEV ? MAP the next
function, map ? driver is called.
     It might be helpful to describe how the devctl call is used, and plans for its use
in the future. A server process, the reincarnation server (RS) is used in MINIX 3
to support starting user-space servers and drivers after the operating system is up
and running. The interface to the reincarnation server is the service utility, and
examples of its use can be seen in /etc/rc. An example is
    service up /sbin/floppy –dev /dev/fd0

This action results in the reincarnation server making a devctl call to start the
binary /sbin/floppy as the device driver for the device special file /dev/fd0. To do
this, RS execs the specified binary, but sets a flag that inhibits it from running
until it has been transformed into a system process. Once the process is in mem-
ory and its slot number in the process table is known, the major device number for
the specified device is determined. This information is then included in a mes-
sage to the file server that requested the devctl DEV ? MAP operation. This is the

most important part of the reincarnation server’s job from the point of view of ini-
tializing the I/O interface. For the sake of completeness we will also mention that
to complete initialization of the device driver, RS also makes a sys ? privctl call to
have the system task initialize the driver process’s priv table entry and allow it to
execute. Recall from Chapter 2 that a dedicated priv table slot is what makes an
otherwise ordinary user-space process into a system process.
     The reincarnation server is new, and in the release of MINIX 3 described here
it is still rudimentary. Plans for future releases of MINIX 3 include a more power-
ful reincarnation server that will be able to stop and restart drivers in addition to
starting them. It will also be able to monitor drivers and restart them automati-
cally if problems develop. Check the Web site (www.minix3.org) and the news-
group (comp.os.minix) for the current status.
     Continuing with dmap.c, the function map ? driver begins on line 28178. Its
operation is straightforward. If the DMAP ? MUTABLE flag is set for the entry in
the dmap table, appropriate values are written into each entry. Three different
variants of the function for handling opening and closing of the device are avail-
able; one is selected by a style parameter passed in the message from RS to the
file system (lines 28204 to 28206). Notice that dmap ? flags is not altered. If the
entry was marked DMAP ? MUTABLE originally it retains this status after the
devctl call .
     The third function in dmap.c is build ? map. This is called by fs ? init when the
file system is first started, before it enters its main loop. The first thing done is to
loop over all of the entries in the local init ? dmap table and copy the expanded
macros to the global dmap table for each entry that does not have no ? dev speci-
fied as the dmap ? opcl member. This correctly initializes these entries. Other-
wise the default values for an uninitialized driver are set in place in dmap. The
rest of build ? map is more interesting. A boot image can be built with multiple
disk device drivers. By default at?wini, bios?wini, and floppy drivers are added to
the boot image by the Makefile in the src/tools/. A label is added to each of these,
and a label= item in the boot parameters determines which one will actually be
loaded in the image and activated as the default disk driver. The env ? get ? param
calls on line 28248 and line 28250 use library routines that ultimately use the
sys ? getinfo kernel call to get the label and controller boot parameter strings.
Finally, build ? map is called on line 28267 to modify the entry in dmap that
corresponds to the boot device. The key thing here is setting the process number
to DRVR ? PROC ? NR, which happens to be slot 6 in the process table. This slot is
magic; the driver in this slot is the default driver.
     Now we come to the file device.c, which contains the procedures needed for
device I/O at run time.
     The first one is dev ? open (line 28334). It is called by other parts of the file
system, most often from common ? open in main.c when a open operation is deter-
mined to be accessing a device special file, but also from load ? ram and
do ? mount. Its operation is typical of several procedures we will see here. It de-
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                          601
termines the major device number, verifies that it is valid, and then uses it to set a
pointer to an entry in the dmap table, and then makes a call to the function pointed
to in that entry, at line 28349:
    r = (*dp->dmap ?opcl)(DEV ?OPEN, dev, proc, flags)
In the case of a disk drive, the function called will be gen ? opcl, in the case of a
terminal device it will be tty ? opcl. If a SUSPEND return code is received there is
a serious problem; an open call should not fail this way.
    The next call, dev ? close (line 28357) is simpler. It is not expected that a call
will be made to an invalid device, and no harm is done if a close operation fails,
so the code is shorter than this text describing it, just one line that will end up cal-
ling the same * ? opcl procedure as dev ? open called when the device was opened.
    When the file system receives a notification message from a device driver
dev ? status (line 28366) is called. A notification means an event has occurred,
and this function is responsible for finding out what kind of event and initiating
appropriate action. The origin of the notification is specified as a process number,
so the first step is to search through the dmap table to find an entry that cor-
responds to the notifying process (lines 18371 to 18373). It is possible the notifi-
cation could have been bogus, so it is not an error if no corresponding entry is
found and dev ? status returns without finding a match. If a match is found, the
loop on lines 28378 to 28398 is entered. On each iteration a message is sent to the
driver process requesting its status. Three possible reply types are expected. A
DEV ? REVIVE message may be received if the process that originally requested
I/O was previously suspended. In this case revive (in pipe.c, line 26146) is called.
A DEV ? IO ? READY message may be received if a select call has been made on
the device. Finally, a DEV ? NO ? STATUS message may be received, and is, in
fact expected, but possibly not until one or both of the first two message types are
received. For this reason, the get ? more variable is used to cause the loop to
repeat until the DEV ? NO ? STATUS message is received.
    When actual device I/O is needed, dev ? io (line 28406) is called from
read ? write (line 25124) to handle character special files, and from rw ? block (line
22661) to handle block special files. It builds a standard message (see Fig. 3-17)
and sends it to the specified device driver by calling either gen ? io or ctty ? io as
specified in the dp->dmap ? driver field of the dmaptable. While dev ? io is wait-
ing for a reply from the driver, the file system waits. It has no internal multipro-
gramming. Usually, these waits are quite short though (e.g., 50 msec). But it is
possible no data will be available—this is especially likely if the data was
requested from a terminal device. In that case the reply message may indicate
SUSPEND, to temporarily suspend the calling application but let the file system
continue.
    The procedure gen ? opcl (line 28455) is called for disk devices, whether
floppy disks, hard disks, or memory-based devices. A message is constructed,
and, as with reading and writing, the dmap table is used to determine whether

gen ? io or ctty ? io will be used to send the message to the driver process for the
device. Gen ? opcl is also used to close the same devices.
      To open a terminal device tty ? opcl (line 28482) is called. It calls gen ? opcl
after possibly modifying the flags, and if the call made the tty the controlling tty
for the active process this is recorded in the process table fp ? tty entry for that pro-
cess.
      The device /dev/tty is a fiction which does not correspond to any particular
device. This is a magic designation that an interactive user can use to refer to his
own terminal, no matter which physical terminal is actually in use. To open or
close /dev/tty, a call is made to ctty ? opcl (line 28518). It determines whether the
fp ? tty process table entry for the current process has indeed been modified by a
previous ctty ? opcl call to indicate a controlling tty.
      The setsid system call requires some work by the file system, and this is per-
formed by do ? setsid (line 28534). It modifies the process table entry for the
current process to record that the process is a session leader and has no controlling
process.
      One system call, ioctl, is handled primarily in device.c. This call has been put
here because it is closely tied to the device driver interface. When an ioctl is
done, do ? ioctl (line 28554) is called to build a message and send it to the proper
device driver.
      To control terminal devices one of the functions declared in include/termios.h
should be used in programs written to be POSIX compliant. The C library will
translate such functions into ioctl calls. For devices other than terminals ioctl is
used for many operations, many of which were described in Chap. 3.
      The next function, gen ? io (line 28575), is the real workhorse of this file.
Whether the operation on a device is an open or a close, a read or a write, or an
ioctl this function is called to complete the work. Since /dev/tty is not a physical
device, when a message that refers to it must be sent, the next function, ctty ? io
(line 28652), finds the correct major and minor device and substitutes them into
the message before passing the message on. The call is made using the dmap
entry for the physical device that is actually in use. As MINIX 3 is currently con-
figured a call to gen ? io will result.
      The function no ? dev (line 28677), is called from slots in the table for which a
device does not exist, for example when a network device is referenced on a
machine with no network support. It returns an ENODEV status. It prevents
crashes when nonexistent devices are accessed.
      The last function in device.c is clone ? opcl (line 28691). Some devices need
special processing upon open. Such a device is ‘‘cloned,’’ that is, on a successful
open it is replaced by a new device with a new unique minor device number. In
MINIX 3 as described here this capability is not used. However, it is used when
networking is enabled. A device that needs this will, of course, have an entry in
the dmap table that specifies clone ? opcl in the dmap ? opcl field. This is accom-
plished by a call from the reincarnation server that specifies STYLE ? CLONE.
SEC. 5.7       IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                        603
When clone ? opcl opens a device the operation starts in exactly the same way as
gen ? opcl, but on the return a new minor device number may be returned in the
REP ? STATUS field of the reply message. If so, a temporary file is created if it is
possible to allocate a new i-node. A visible directory entry is not created. That is
not necessary, since the file is already open.

Time

     Associated with each file are three 32-bit numbers relating to time. Two of
these record the times when the file was last accessed and last modified. The
third records when the status of the i-node itself was last changed. This time will
change for almost every access to a file except a read or exec. These times are
kept in the i-node. With the utime system call, the access and modification times
can be set by the owner of the file or the superuser. The procedure do ? utime (line
28818) in file time.c performs the system call by fetching the i-node and storing
the time in it. At line 28848 the flags that indicate a time update is required are
reset, so the system will not make an expensive and redundant call to clock ? time.
     As we saw in the previous chapter, the real time is determined by adding the
time since the system was started (maintained by the clock task) to the real time
when startup occurred. The stime system call returns the real time. Most of its
work is done by the process manager, but the file system also maintains a record
of the startup time in a global variable, boottime. The process manager sends a
message to the file system whenever a stime call is made. The file system’s
do ? stime (line 28859) updates boottime from this message.

5.7.8 Additional System Call Support

    There are a number of files that are not listed in Appendix B, but which are
required to compile a working system. In this section we will review some files
that support additional system calls. In the next section we will mention files and
functions that provide more general support for the file system.
    The file misc.c contains procedures for a few system and kernel calls that do
not fit in anywhere else.
    Do ? getsysinfo is an interface to the sys ? datacopy kernel call. It is meant to
support the information server (IS) for debugging purposes. It allows IS to
request a copy of file system data structures so it can display them to the user.
    The dup system call duplicates a file descriptor. In other words, it creates a
new file descriptor that points to the same file as its argument. The call has a
variant dup2. Both versions of the call are handled by do ? dup This function is
included in MINIX 3 to support old binary programs. Both of these calls are
obsolete. The current version of the MINIX 3 C library will invoke the fcntl sys-
tem call when either of these are encountered in a C source file.

                                                              
                        Operation ?                                          Meaning                ?
                                                               
                                                                                                       
                                         F ? DUPFD ? Duplicate a file descriptor ?
                                                                  
                            F ? GETFD ? Get the close-on-exec flag ?
                                                                    
                                                                                                         
                                                                     
                                         F ? SETFD        ? Set the close-on-exec flag ?
                                                                                                           
                                         F ? GETFL           ? Get file status flags
                                                                                                             
                                                                         
                                         F ? SETFL            ? Set file status flags                         ?
                                                                                                                 
                                         F ? GETLK               ? Get lock status of a file
                                                                                                                   
                                      F ? SETLK                   ? Set read/write lock on a file ?
                                                                              
                                                                                                                     
                                         F ? SETLKW ?? Set write lock on a file
                                                                                                                        

Figure 5-49. The POSIX request parameters for the FCNTL system call.

    Fcntl, handled by do ? fcntl is the preferred way to request operations on an
open file. Services are requested using POSIX-defined flags described in Fig. 5-
49. The call is invoked with a file descriptor, a request code, and additional argu-
ments as necessary for the particular request. For instance, the equivalent of the
old call
    dup2(fd, fd2);
would be
    fcntl(fd, F ? DUPFD, fd2);
Several of these requests set or read a flag; the code consists of just a few lines.
For instance, the F ? SETFD request sets a bit that forces closing of a file when its
owner process does an exec. The F ? GETFD request is used to determine
whether a file must be closed when an exec call is made. The F ? SETFL and
F ? GETFL requests permit setting flags to indicate a particular file is available in
nonblocking mode or for append operations.
     Do ? fcntl handles file locking, also. A call with the F ? GETLK, F ? SETLK, or
F ? SETLKW command specified is translated into a call to lock ? op, discussed in
an earlier section.
     The next system call is sync, which copies all blocks and i-nodes that have
been modified since being loaded back to the disk. The call is processed by
do ? sync. It simply searches through all the tables looking for dirty entries. The
i-nodes must be processed first, since rw ? inode leaves its results in the block
cache. After all dirty i-nodes are written to the block cache, then all dirty blocks
are written to the disk.
     The system calls fork, exec, exit, and set are really process manager calls, but
the results have to be posted here as well. When a process forks, it is essential
that the kernel, process manager, and file system all know about it. These ‘‘sys-
tem calls’’ do not come from user processes, but from the process manager.
SEC. 5.7        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MINIX 3 FILE SYSTEM                          605
Do ? fork, do ? exit, and do ? set record the relevant information in the file system’s
part of the process table. Do ? exec searches for and closes (using do ? close) any
files marked to be closed-on-exec.
     The last function in misc.c is not really a system call but is handled like one.
Do ? revive is called when a device driver that was previously unable to complete
work that the file system had requested, such as providing input data for a user
process, has now completed the work. The file system then revives the process
and sends it the reply message.
     One system call merits a header file as well as a C source file to support it.
Select.h and select.c provide support for the select system call. Select is used
when a single process has to do deal with multiple I/O streams, as, for instance, a
communications or network program. Describing it in detail is beyond the scope
of this book.

5.7.9 File System Utilities

     The file system contains a few general purpose utility procedures that are used
in various places. They are collected together in the file utility.c.
     Clock ? time sends messages to the system task to find out what the current
real time is.
     Fetch ? name is needed because many system calls have a file name as param-
eter. If the file name is short, it is included in the message from the user to the
file system. If it is long, a pointer to the name in user space is put in the message.
Fetch ? name checks for both cases, and either way, gets the name.
     Two functions here handle general classes of errors. No ? sys is the error
handler that is called when the file system receives a system call that is not one of
its calls. Panic prints a message and tells the kernel to throw in the towel when
something catastrophic happens. Similar functions can be found in pm/utility.c in
the process manager’s source directory.
     The last two functions, conv2 and conv4, exist to help MINIX 3 deal with the
problem of differences in byte order between different CPU families. These rou-
tines are called when reading from or writing to a disk data structure, such as an
i-node or bitmap. The byte order in the system that created the disk is recorded in
the superblock. If it is different from the order used by the local processor the
order will be swapped. The rest of the file system does not need to know anything
about the byte order on the disk.
     Finally, there are two other files that provide specialized utility services to the
file manager. The file system can ask the system task to set an alarm for it, but if
it needs more than one timer it can maintain its own linked list of timers, similar
to what we saw for the process manager in the previous chapter. The file timers.c
provides this support for the file system. Finally, MINIX 3 implements a unique
way of using a CD-ROM that hides a simulated MINIX 3 disk with several parti-
tions on a CD-ROM, and allows booting a live MINIX 3 system from the CD-

ROM. The MINIX 3 files are not visible to operating systems that support only
standard CD-ROM file formats. The file cdprobe.c is used at boot time to locate
a CD-ROM device and the files on it needed to start MINIX 3.

5.7.10 Other MINIX 3 Components

     The process manager discussed in the previous chapter and the file system
discussed in this chapter are user-space servers which provide support that would
be integrated into a monolithic kernel in an operating system of conventional
design. These are not the only server processes in a MINIX 3 system, however.
There are other user-space processes that have system privileges and should be
considered part of the operating system. We do not have enough space in this
book to discuss their internals, but we should at least mention them here.
     One we have already mentioned in this chapter. This is the reincarnation
server, RS, which can start an ordinary process and turn it into a system process.
It is used in the current version of MINIX 3 to launch device drivers that are not
part of the system boot image. In future releases it will also be able to stop and
restart drivers, and, indeed, to monitor drivers and stop and restart them automati-
cally if they seem to be malfunctioning. The source code for the reincarnation
server is in the src/servers/rs/ directory.
     Another server that has been mentioned in passing is the information server,
IS. It is used to generate the debugging dumps that can be triggered by pressing
the function keys on a PC-style keyboard. The source code for the information
server is in the src/servers/is/ directory.
     The information server and the reincarnation servers are relatively small pro-
grams. There is a third, optional, server, the network server, or INET. It is quite
large. The INET program image on disk is comparable in size to the MINIX 3
boot image. It is started by the reincarnation server in much the same way that
device drivers are started. The inet source code is in the src/servers/inet/ direc-
tory.
     Finally, we will mention one other system component which is considered a
device driver, not a server. This is the log driver. With so many different com-
ponents of the operating system running as independent processes, it is desirable
to provide a standardized way of handling diagnostic, warning, and error mes-
sages. The MINIX 3 solution is to have a device driver for a pseudo-device known
as /dev/klog which can receive messages and handle writing them to a file. The
source code for the log driver is in the src/drivers/log/ directory.

5.8 SUMMARY
     When seen from the outside, a file system is a collection of files and direc-
tories, plus operations on them. Files can be read and written, directories can be
created and destroyed, and files can be moved from directory to directory. Most
SEC. 5.8                                 SUMMARY                                            607
modern file systems support a hierarchical directory system, in which directories
may have subdirectories ad infinitum.
     When seen from the inside, a file system looks quite different. The file sys-
tem designers have to be concerned with how storage is allocated, and how the
system keeps track of which block goes with which file. We have also seen how
different systems have different directory structures. File system reliability and
performance are also important issues.
     Security and protection are of vital concern to both the system users and sys-
tem designers. We discussed some security flaws in older systems, and generic
problems that many systems have. We also looked at authentication, with and
without passwords, access control lists, and capabilities, as well as a matrix model
for thinking about protection.
     Finally, we studied the MINIX 3 file system in detail. It is large but not very
complicated. It accepts requests for work from user processes, indexes into a
table of procedure pointers, and calls that procedure to carry out the requested
system call. Due to its modular structure and position outside the kernel, it can be
removed from MINIX 3 and used as a free-standing network file server with only
minor modifications.
     Internally, MINIX 3 buffers data in a block cache and attempts to read ahead
when making sequential access to file. If the cache is made large enough, most
program text will be found to be already in memory during operations that repeat-
edly access a particular set of programs, such as a compilation.

                                        PROBLEMS

 1. NTFS uses Unicode for naming files. Unicode supports 16-bit characters. Give an
    advantage of Unicode file naming over ASCII file naming.
 2. Some files begin with a magic number. Of what use is this?
 3. Fig. 5-4 lists some file attributes. Not listed in this table is parity. Would that be a use-
    ful file attribute? If so, how might it be used?
 4. Give 5 different path names for the file /etc/passwd. (Hint: think about the directory
    entries ‘‘.’’ and ‘‘..’’.)
 5. Systems that support sequential files always have an operation to rewind files. Do
    systems that support random access files need this too?
 6. Some operating systems provide a system call rename to give a file a new name. Is
    there any difference at all between using this call to rename a file, and just copying the
    file to a new file with the new name, followed by deleting the old one?
 7. Consider the directory tree of Fig. 5-7. If /usr/jim/ is the working directory, what is
    the absolute path name for the file whose relative path name is ../ast/x?

 8. Consider the following proposal. Instead of having a single root for the file system,
    give each user a personal root. Does that make the system more flexible? Why or why
    not?
 9. The UNIX file system has a call chroot that changes the root to a given directory.
    Does this have any security implications? If so, what are they?
10. The UNIX system has a call to read a directory entry. Since directories are just files,
    why is it necessary to have a special call? Can users not just read the raw directories
    themselves?
11. A standard PC can hold only four operating systems at once. Is there any way to
    increase this limit? What consequences would your proposal have?
12. Contiguous allocation of files leads to disk fragmentation, as mentioned in the text. Is
    this internal fragmentation or external fragmentation? Make an analogy with some-
    thing discussed in the previous chapter.
13. Figure 5-10 shows the structure of the original FAT file system used on MS-DOS. Ori-
    ginally this file system had only 4096 blocks, so a table with 4096 (12-bit) entries was
    enough. If that scheme were to be directly extended to file systems with 232 blocks,
    how much space would the FAT occupy?
14. An operating system only supports a single directory but allows that directory to have
    arbitrarily many files with arbitrarily long file names. Can something approximating a
    hierarchical file system be simulated? How?
15. Free disk space can be kept track of using a free list or a bitmap. Disk addresses
    require D bits. For a disk with B blocks, F of which are free, state the condition under
    which the free list uses less space than the bitmap. For D having the value 16 bits,
    express your answer as a percentage of the disk space that must be free.
16. It has been suggested that the first part of each UNIX file be kept in the same disk
    block as its i-node. What good would this do?
17. The performance of a file system depends upon the cache hit rate (fraction of blocks
    found in the cache). If it takes 1 msec to satisfy a request from the cache, but 40 msec
    to satisfy a request if a disk read is needed, give a formula for the mean time required
    to satisfy a request if the hit rate is h. Plot this function for values of h from 0 to 1.0.
18. What is the difference between a hard link and a symbolic link? Give an advantage of
    each one.
19. Name three pitfalls to watch out for when backing up a file system.
20. A disk has 4000 cylinders, each with 8 tracks of 512 blocks. A seek takes 1 msec per
    cylinder moved. If no attempt is made to put the blocks of a file close to each other,
    two blocks that are logically consecutive (i.e., follow one another in the file) will
    require an average seek, which takes 5 msec. If, however, the operating system makes
    an attempt to cluster related blocks, the mean interblock distance can be reduced to 2
    cylinders and the seek time reduced to 100 microsec. How long does it take to read a
    100 block file in both cases, if the rotational latency is 10 msec and the transfer time is
    20 microsec per block?
CHAP. 5                                 PROBLEMS                                         609
21. Would compacting disk storage periodically be of any conceivable value? Explain.
22. What is the difference between a virus and a worm? How do they each reproduce?
23. After getting your degree, you apply for a job as director of a large university com-
    puter center that has just put its ancient operating system out to pasture and switched
    over to UNIX . You get the job. Fifteen minutes after starting work, your assistant
    bursts into your office screaming: ‘‘Some students discovered the algorithm we use for
    encrypting passwords and posted it on the Internet.’’ What should you do?
24. Two computer science students, Carolyn and Elinor, are having a discussion about i-
    nodes. Carolyn maintains that memories have gotten so large and so cheap that when
    a file is opened, it is simpler and faster just to fetch a new copy of the i-node into the
    i-node table, rather than search the entire table to see if it is already there. Elinor
    disagrees. Who is right?
25. The Morris-Thompson protection scheme with the n-bit random numbers was
    designed to make it difficult for an intruder to discover a large number of passwords
    by encrypting common strings in advance. Does the scheme also offer protection
    against a student user who is trying to guess the superuser password on his machine?
26. A computer science department has a large collection of UNIX machines on its local
    network. Users on any machine can issue a command of the form
         machine4 who
    and have it executed on machine4, without having the user log in on the remote
    machine. This feature is implemented by having the user’s kernel send the command
    and his uid to the remote machine. Is this scheme secure if the kernels are all
    trustworthy (e.g., large timeshared minicomputers with protection hardware)? What if
    some of the machines are students’ personal computers, with no protection hardware?
27. When a file is removed, its blocks are generally put back on the free list, but they are
    not erased. Do you think it would be a good idea to have the operating system erase
    each block before releasing it? Consider both security and performance factors in
    your answer, and explain the effect of each.
28. Three different protection mechanisms that we have discussed are capabilities, access
    control lists, and the UNIX rwx bits. For each of the following protection problems,
    tell which of these mechanisms can be used.
    (a) Ken wants his files readable by everyone except his office mate.
    (b) Mitch and Steve want to share some secret files.
    (c) Linda wants some of her files to be public.
    For UNIX , assume that groups are categories such as faculty, students, secretaries, etc.
29. Can the Trojan horse attack work in a system protected by capabilities?
30. The size of the filp table is currently defined as a constant, NR ? FILPS, in fs/const.h.
    In order to accommodate more users on a networked system you want to increase
    NR ? PROCS in include/minix/config.h. How should NR ? FILPS be defined as a func-
    tion of NR ? PROCS?
31. Suppose that a technological breakthrough occurs, and that nonvolatile RAM, which

    retains its contents reliably following a power failure, becomes available with no price
    or performance disadvantage over conventional RAM. What aspects of file system
    design would be affected by this development?
32. Symbolic links are files that point to other files or directories indirectly. Unlike ordi-
    nary links such as those currently implemented in MINIX 3, a symbolic link has its
    own i-node, which points to a data block. The data block contains the path to the file
    being linked to, and the i-node makes it possible for the link to have different owner-
    ship and permissions from the file linked to. A symbolic link and the file or directory
    to which it points can be located on different devices. Symbolic links are not part of
    MINIX 3. Implement symbolic links for MINIX 3.
33. Although the current limit to a MINIX 3 file size is determined by the 32-file pointer,
    in the future, with 64-bit file pointers, files larger than 232 − 1 bytes may be allowed,
    in which case triple indirect blocks may be needed. Modify FS to add triple indirect
    blocks.
34. Show if setting the (now-unused) ROBUST flag might make the file system more or
    less robust in the face of a crash. Whether this is the case in the current version of
    MINIX 3 has not been researched, so it may be either way. Take a good look at what
    happens when a modified block is evicted from the cache. Take into account that a
    modified data block may be accompanied by a modified i-node and bitmap.
35. Design a mechanism to add support for a ‘‘foreign’’ file system, so that one could, for
    instance, mount an MS-DOS file system on a directory in the MINIX 3 file system.
36. Write a pair of programs, in C or as shell scripts, to send and receive a message by a
    covert channel on a MINIX 3 system. Hint: A permission bit can be seen even when a
    file is otherwise inaccessible, and the sleep command or system call is guaranteed to
    delay for a fixed time, set by its argument. Measure the data rate on an idle system.
    Then create an artificially heavy load by starting up numerous different background
    processes and measure the data rate again.
37. Implement immediate files in MINIX 3, that is small files actually stored in the i-node
    itself, thus saving a disk access to retrieve them.
