Foreword
Programmers sometimes say that they “cook a patch” rather than “implement a patch”. I’ve been
fascinated with programming since my school years. To produce good code the programmer
needs to pick the best “ingredients”. While different programming languages offer various
building blocks, “ingredients”, when it comes to Linux kernel programming, there is nothing but
the kernel itself.

In 2012 I had to add a set of kernel features, but the “ingredients” I needed did not then exist. I
could have started writing building blocks inside the kernel. They would be ready to use years
later. Instead, I decided to create a “universal ingredient” that when in the hands of a skilled
programmer could be both a layer 2 networking bridge and a layer 3 networking router inside the
kernel.

I had some important requirements: The “universal ingredient” had to be safe to consume, no
matter the programming skills. A malicious or inexperienced developer should not be able to
prepare a virus out of it. The “universal ingredient” shouldn’t allow it.

There was something already in the Linux kernel which had similar properties called BPF
(Berkeley Packet Filter): A minimal instruction set that can be used to filter packets before they are
seen by an application such as tcpdump. I borrowed that name for my “ingredient” and called it
eBPF, where ‘e’ stands for ‘extended’.

Several years later the distinction between eBPF and classic BPF has vanished. My “universal
ingredient” has taken over under the name BPF. Well-known corporations have built large systems
out of it to provide services to billions of people like you and me. Its foundational principle of
safety by design allows many “cooks” to become world-renowned “chefs”.

The first BPF chef was Brendan Gregg. He saw that in addition to its uses in networking and
security BPF could be used for performance analysis, introspection, and observability. Making
such tools and interpreting their measurements requires practice and knowledge though.

I hope this book will become your favorite “cookbook” where you can learn from master chef how
to use BPF in your Linux kitchen.

                                                                               —Alexei Starovoitov
                                                                               Seattle, Washington
                                                                                      August, 2019
