                                                 If you would only recognize that life is hard, things
                                                 would be so much easier for you.
                                                                                          Louis D. Brandeis

Chapter 1

How To Use This Book

The purpose of this book is to help you program shared-memory parallel systems
without risking your sanity.1 Nevertheless, you should think of the information in this
book as a foundation on which to build, rather than as a completed cathedral. Your
mission, if you choose to accept, is to help make further progress in the exciting field of
parallel programming—progress that will in time render this book obsolete.
    Parallel programming in the 21st century is no longer focused solely on science,
research, and grand-challenge projects. And this is all to the good, because it means
that parallel programming is becoming an engineering discipline. Therefore, as befits
an engineering discipline, this book examines specific parallel-programming tasks and
describes how to approach them. In some surprisingly common cases, these tasks can
be automated.
    This book is written in the hope that presenting the engineering discipline underlying
successful parallel-programming projects will free a new generation of parallel hackers
from the need to slowly and painstakingly reinvent old wheels, enabling them to instead
focus their energy and creativity on new frontiers. However, what you get from this
book will be determined by what you put into it. It is hoped that simply reading this
book will be helpful, and that working the Quick Quizzes will be even more helpful.
However, the best results come from applying the techniques taught in this book to
real-life problems. As always, practice makes perfect.
    But no matter how you approach it, we sincerely hope that parallel programming
brings you at least as much fun, excitement, and challenge that it has brought to us!

    1 Or, perhaps more accurately, without much greater risk to your sanity than that incurred

by non-parallel programming. Which, come to think of it, might not be saying all that much.

                                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
2                                           CHAPTER 1. HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

1.1     Roadmap

                                         Cat: Where are you going?
                                         Alice: Which way should I go?
                                         Cat: That depends on where you are going.
                                         Alice: I don’t know.
                                         Cat: Then it doesn’t matter which way you go.
                                                         Lewis Carroll, Alice in Wonderland

This book is a handbook of widely applicable and heavily used design techniques, rather
than a collection of optimal algorithms with tiny areas of applicability. You are currently
reading Chapter 1, but you knew that already. Chapter 2 gives a high-level overview of
parallel programming.
     Chapter 3 introduces shared-memory parallel hardware. After all, it is difficult
to write good parallel code unless you understand the underlying hardware. Because
hardware constantly evolves, this chapter will always be out of date. We will nevertheless
do our best to keep up. Chapter 4 then provides a very brief overview of common
shared-memory parallel-programming primitives.
     Chapter 5 takes an in-depth look at parallelizing one of the simplest problems
imaginable, namely counting. Because almost everyone has an excellent grasp of
counting, this chapter is able to delve into many important parallel-programming issues
without the distractions of more-typical computer-science problems. My impression is
that this chapter has seen the greatest use in parallel-programming coursework.
     Chapter 6 introduces a number of design-level methods of addressing the issues
identified in Chapter 5. It turns out that it is important to address parallelism at the
design level when feasible: To paraphrase Dĳkstra [Dĳ68], “retrofitted parallelism
considered grossly suboptimal” [McK12c].
     The next three chapters examine three important approaches to synchronization.
Chapter 7 covers locking, which is still not only the workhorse of production-quality
parallel programming, but is also widely considered to be parallel programming’s worst
villain. Chapter 8 gives a brief overview of data ownership, an often overlooked but
remarkably pervasive and powerful approach. Finally, Chapter 9 introduces a number
of deferred-processing mechanisms, including reference counting, hazard pointers,
sequence locking, and RCU.
     Chapter 10 applies the lessons of previous chapters to hash tables, which are heavily
used due to their excellent partitionability, which (usually) leads to excellent performance
and scalability.
     As many have learned to their sorrow, parallel programming without validation is a
sure path to abject failure. Chapter 11 covers various forms of testing. It is of course
impossible to test reliability into your program after the fact, so Chapter 12 follows up
with a brief overview of a couple of practical approaches to formal verification.
     Chapter 13 contains a series of moderate-sized parallel programming problems.
The difficulty of these problems vary, but should be appropriate for someone who has
mastered the material in the previous chapters.
     Chapter 14 looks at advanced synchronization methods, including non-blocking
synchronization and parallel real-time computing, while Chapter 15 covers the advanced
topic of memory ordering. Chapter 16 follows up with some ease-of-use advice. Chap-
ter 17 looks at a few possible future directions, including shared-memory parallel system

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
1.2. QUICK QUIZZES                                                                                  3

design, software and hardware transactional memory, and functional programming for
parallelism. Finally, Chapter 18 reviews the material in this book and its origins.
    This chapter is followed by a number of appendices. The most popular of these
appears to be Appendix C, which delves even further into memory ordering. Appendix E
contains the answers to the infamous Quick Quizzes, which are discussed in the next
section.

1.2       Quick Quizzes
                                                Undertake something difficult, otherwise you will
                                                never grow.
                                                                    Abbreviated from Ronald E. Osburn

“Quick quizzes” appear throughout this book, and the answers may be found in
Appendix E starting on page 735. Some of them are based on material in which that
quick quiz appears, but others require you to think beyond that section, and, in some
cases, beyond the realm of current knowledge. As with most endeavors, what you get
out of this book is largely determined by what you are willing to put into it. Therefore,
readers who make a genuine effort to solve a quiz before looking at the answer find their
effort repaid handsomely with increased understanding of parallel programming.
 Quick Quiz 1.1: Where are the answers to the Quick Quizzes found?

 Quick Quiz 1.2: Some of the Quick Quiz questions seem to be from the viewpoint of the
 reader rather than the author. Is that really the intent?

 Quick Quiz 1.3: These Quick Quizzes are just not my cup of tea. What can I do about it?

    In short, if you need a deep understanding of the material, then you should invest
some time into answering the Quick Quizzes. Don’t get me wrong, passively reading
the material can be quite valuable, but gaining full problem-solving capability really
does require that you practice solving problems. Similarly, gaining full code-production
capability really does require that you practice producing code.
 Quick Quiz 1.4: If passively reading this book doesn’t get me full problem-solving and
 code-production capabilities, what on earth is the point???

    I learned this the hard way during coursework for my late-in-life Ph.D. I was
studying a familiar topic, and was surprised at how few of the chapter’s exercises I
could answer off the top of my head.2 Forcing myself to answer the questions greatly
increased my retention of the material. So with these Quick Quizzes I am not asking
you to do anything that I have not been doing myself.
    Finally, the most common learning disability is thinking that you already understand
the material at hand. The quick quizzes can be an extremely effective cure.

    2 So I suppose that it was just as well that my professors refused to let me waive that

class!

                                                                                                        v2025.12.18a
4                                              CHAPTER 1. HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

1.3      Alternatives to This Book
                                            Between two evils I always pick the one I never tried
                                            before.
                                                                                       Mae West

As Knuth learned the hard way, if you want your book to be finite, it must be focused.
This book focuses on shared-memory parallel programming, with an emphasis on
software that lives near the bottom of the software stack, such as operating-system
kernels, parallel data-management systems, low-level libraries, and the like. The
programming language used by this book is C.
    If you are interested in other aspects of parallelism, you might well be better served
by some other book. Fortunately, there are many alternatives available to you:

    1. If you prefer a more academic and rigorous treatment of parallel programming,
       you might like Herlihy’s and Shavit’s textbook [HS08, HSLS20]. This book
       starts with an interesting combination of low-level primitives at high levels of
       abstraction from the hardware, and works its way through locking and simple data
       structures including lists, queues, hash tables, and counters, culminating with
       transactional memory, all in Java. Michael Scott’s textbook [Sco13] approaches
       similar material with more of a software-engineering focus, and, as far as I know,
       is the first formally published academic textbook with section devoted to RCU.
       Herlihy, Shavit, Luchangco, and Spear did catch up in their second edition [HSLS20]
       by adding short sections on hazard pointers and on RCU, with the latter in the guise
       of EBR.3 They also include a brief history of both, albeit with an abbreviated
       history of RCU that picks up almost a year after it was accepted into the Linux
       kernel and more than 20 years after Kung’s and Lehman’s landmark paper [KL80].
       Those wishing a deeper view of the history may find it in this book’s Section 9.5.5.
       However, readers who might otherwise suspect a hostile attitude towards RCU
       on the part of this textbook’s first author should refer to the last full sentence on
       the first page of one of his papers [BGHZ16]. This sentence reads “QSBR [a
       particular class of RCU implementations] is fast and can be applied to virtually
       any data structure.” These are clearly not the words of someone who is hostile
       towards RCU.
    2. If you would like an academic treatment of parallel programming from a program-
       ming-language-pragmatics viewpoint, you might be interested in the concurrency
       chapter from Scott’s textbook [Sco06, Sco15] on programming-language prag-
       matics.
    3. If you are interested in an object-oriented patternist treatment of parallel pro-
       gramming focussing on C++, you might try Volumes 2 and 4 of Schmidt’s POSA
       series [SSRB00, BHS07]. Volume 4 in particular has some interesting chapters
       applying this work to a warehouse application. The realism of this example is
       attested to by the section entitled “Partitioning the Big Ball of Mud”, in which
       the problems inherent in parallelism often take a back seat to getting one’s head
       around a real-world application.
   3 Albeit an implementation that contains a reader-preemption bug noted by Richard

Bornat.

                                                                                                    v2025.12.18a
1.3. ALTERNATIVES TO THIS BOOK                                                          5

   4. If you want to work with Linux-kernel device drivers, then Corbet’s, Rubini’s,
      and Kroah-Hartman’s “Linux Device Drivers” [CRKH05] is indispensable, as is
      the Linux Weekly News web site (https://lwn.net/). There is a large number
      of books and resources on the more general topic of Linux kernel internals.

   5. If your primary focus is scientific and technical computing, and you prefer a
      patternist approach, you might try Mattson et al.’s textbook [MSM05]. It covers
      Java, C/C++, OpenMP, and MPI. Its patterns are admirably focused first on
      design, then on implementation.

   6. If your primary focus is scientific and technical computing, and you are interested
      in GPUs, CUDA, and MPI, you might check out Norm Matloff’s “Programming
      on Parallel Machines” [Mat17]. Of course, the GPU vendors have quite a bit of
      additional information [AMD20, Zel11, NVi17a, NVi17b].

   7. If you are interested in POSIX Threads, you might take a look at David R. Buten-
      hof’s book [But97]. In addition, W. Richard Stevens’s book [Ste92, Ste13] covers
      UNIX and POSIX, and Stewart Weiss’s lecture notes [Wei13] provide an thorough
      and accessible introduction with a good set of examples.

   8. If you are interested in C++11, you might like Anthony Williams’s “C++ Concur-
      rency in Action: Practical Multithreading” [Wil12, Wil19] or Rainer Grimm’s
      “Concurrency with Modern C++” [Gri17].

   9. If you are interested in C++, but in a Windows environment, you might try Herb
      Sutter’s “Effective Concurrency” series in Dr. Dobbs Journal [Sut08]. This series
      does a reasonable job of presenting a commonsense approach to parallelism.

 10. If you want to try out Intel Threading Building Blocks, then perhaps James
     Reinders’s book [Rei07] is what you are looking for.

 11. Those interested in learning how various types of multi-processor hardware cache
     organizations affect the implementation of kernel internals should take a look at
     Curt Schimmel’s classic treatment of this subject [Sch94].

 12. If you are looking for a hardware view, Hennessy’s and Patterson’s classic
     textbook [HP17] is well worth a read. A “Readers Digest” version of this tome
     geared for scientific and technical workloads (bashing big arrays) may be found in
     Andrew Chien’s textbook [Chi22]. If you are looking for an academic textbook
     on memory ordering from a more hardware-centric viewpoint, that of Daniel
     Sorin et al. [SHW11, NSHW20] is highly recommended. For a memory-ordering
     tutorial from a Linux-kernel viewpoint, Paolo Bonzini’s LWN series is a good
     place to start [Bon21a, Bon21e, Bon21c, Bon21b, Bon21d, Bon21f].

 13. Those wishing to learn about the Rust language’s support for low-level concurrency
     should refer to Mara Bos’s book [Bos23].

 14. Finally, those using Java might be well-served by Doug Lea’s textbooks [Lea97,
     GPB+ 07].

   However, if you are interested in principles of parallel design for low-level software,
especially software written in C, read on!

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
6                                               CHAPTER 1. HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

1.4       Sample Source Code

                                           Use the source, Luke!
                                                                         Unknown Star Wars fan

This book discusses its fair share of source code, and in many cases this source code
may be found in the CodeSamples directory of this book’s git tree. For example, on
UNIX systems, you should be able to type the following:

    find CodeSamples -name rcu_rcpls.c -print

   This command will locate the file rcu_rcpls.c, which is called out in Appendix B.
Non-UNIX systems have their own well-known ways of locating files by filename.

1.5       Video Resources

                                           I hear and I forget; I see and I remember, I do and I
                                           understand.
                                                                                        Unknown

This section calls attention to some talks covering a few sections of this book.
    Chapter 2 (“Introduction”) is covered by a 2025 talk entitled “Breaking Up is
Hard to Do”. Video is available here: https://kernel-recipes.org/en/2025/
schedule/breaking-up-is-hard-to-do/, but you will need to supply your own
2x4 Duplo and Lego bricks, two of the former and sixteen of the latter. The presentation
also touches on Chapter 6 (“Partitioning and Synchronization Design”).
    Chapter 3 (“Hardware and its Habits”) is covered by a 2023 talk entitled “Hardware
and its Concurrency Habits”. Slides and video are available here: https://kernel-
recipes.org/en/2023/schedule/hardware-and-its-concurrency-habits/.
    Chapter 5 (“Counting”) is covered by the 2024 talk entitled “Case Study: Concurrent
Counting”. Slides and video are available here: https://kernel-recipes.org/
en/2024/schedule/case-study-concurrent-counting/.
    Section 9.3 (“Hazard Pointers”) is covered by the 2024 talk entitled “Hazard Pointers
in the Linux Kernel”, though it is to be hoped that Maged Michael some day gives a
talk whose video is archived. In the meantime, slides and video are available here:
https://lpc.events/event/18/contributions/1731/.
    Section 9.5.1 (“Introduction to RCU”) and Section 9.5.2 (“RCU Fundamentals”)
is covered by the 2021 talk entitled “Unraveling RCU-Usage Mysteries (Fundamen-
tals)”. Slides and video are available here: http://www.rdrop.com/~paulmck/RCU/
RCUusageFundamental.2021.12.07a.LF.pdf and https://www.linuxfoundation.
org/webinars/unraveling-rcu-usage-mysteries, respectively.
    Section 9.5.4 (“RCU Usage”) is covered by the 2022 talk entitled “Unraveling RCU-
Usage Mysteries (Additional Use Cases)”. Slides and video are available here: https:
//events.linuxfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/RCUusageAdditional.
2022.02.22b.LF-1.pdf and https://www.linuxfoundation.org/webinars/
unraveling-rcu-usage-mysteries-additional-use-cases, respectively.

                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
1.6. WHOSE BOOK IS THIS?                                                                      7

Listing 1.1: Creating an Up-To-Date PDF
git clone git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/paulmck/perfbook.git
cd perfbook
# You may need to install a font. See item 1 in FAQ.txt.
make                     # -jN for parallel build
evince perfbook.pdf &    # Two-column version
make perfbook-1c.pdf
evince perfbook-1c.pdf & # One-column version for e-readers
make help                # Display other build options

Listing 1.2: Generating an Updated PDF
git remote update
git checkout origin/master
make                     # -jN for parallel build
evince perfbook.pdf &    # Two-column version
make perfbook-1c.pdf
evince perfbook-1c.pdf & # One-column version for e-readers

   Section 11.6.4 (“Hunting Heisenbugs”) is covered by the 2023 talk also entitled
“Hunting Heisenbugs”. Slides and video are available here: https://lpc.events/
event/17/contributions/1504/.

1.6     Whose Book Is This?

                                          If you become a teacher, by your pupils you’ll be
                                          taught.
                                                                         Oscar Hammerstein II

As the cover says, the editor is one Paul E. McKenney. However, the editor does accept
contributions via the perfbook@vger.kernel.org email list. These contributions
can be in pretty much any form, with popular approaches including text emails, patches
against the book’s LATEX source, and even git pull requests. Use whatever form
works best for you.
    To create patches or git pull requests, you will need the LATEX source to the book,
which is at git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/paulmck/perfbook.
git, or, alternatively, https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/
paulmck/perfbook.git. You will of course also need git and LATEX, which are
available as part of most mainstream Linux distributions. Other packages may be
required, depending on the distribution you use. The required list of packages for a
few popular distributions is listed in the file FAQ-BUILD.txt in the LATEX source to the
book.
    To create and display a current LATEX source tree of this book, use the list of Linux
commands shown in Listing 1.1. In some environments, the evince command that
displays perfbook.pdf may need to be replaced, for example, with acroread. The
git clone command need only be used the first time you create a PDF, subsequently,
you can run the commands shown in Listing 1.2 to pull in any updates and generate an
updated PDF. The commands in Listing 1.2 must be run within the perfbook directory
created by the commands shown in Listing 1.1.
    PDFs of this book are sporadically posted at https://kernel.org/pub/linux/
kernel/people/paulmck/perfbook/perfbook.html and at http://www.rdrop.
com/users/paulmck/perfbook/.

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
8                                             CHAPTER 1. HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

    The actual process of contributing patches and sending git pull requests is similar
to that of the Linux kernel, which is documented here: https://www.kernel.org/
doc/html/latest/process/submitting-patches.html. One important require-
ment is that each patch (or commit, in the case of a git pull request) must contain a
valid Signed-off-by: line, which has the following format:

    Signed-off-by: My Name <myname@example.org>

    Please see https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/20070116022324.GA28513@linux.
vnet.ibm.com/ for an example patch with a Signed-off-by: line. Note well that
the Signed-off-by: line has a very specific meaning, namely that you are certifying
that:

    (a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have the right to
        submit it under the open source license indicated in the file; or
    (b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my knowledge,
        is covered under an appropriate open source license and I have the right under
        that license to submit that work with modifications, whether created in whole
        or in part by me, under the same open source license (unless I am permitted to
        submit under a different license), as indicated in the file; or
    (c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person who certified
        (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

    (d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are public and that
        a record of the contribution (including all personal information I submit with
        it, including my sign-off) is maintained indefinitely and may be redistributed
        consistent with this project or the open source license(s) involved.

    This is quite similar to the Developer’s Certificate of Origin (DCO) 1.1 used
by the Linux kernel. You must use your real name: I unfortunately cannot accept
pseudonymous or anonymous contributions.
    The language of this book is American English, however, the open-source nature
of this book permits translations, and I personally encourage them. The open-source
licenses covering this book additionally allow you to sell your translation, if you wish. I
do request that you send me a copy of the translation (hardcopy if available), but this
is a request made as a professional courtesy, and is not in any way a prerequisite to
the permission that you already have under the Creative Commons and GPL licenses.
Please see the FAQ.txt file in the source tree for a list of translations currently in
progress. I consider a translation effort to be “in progress” once at least one chapter has
been fully translated.
    I have no plans to produce hardcopies of this book, but you should feel free to do so,
for example, by using any of a number of print services available on the Internet. Cover
art is available in the cartoons directory of this book’s git archive, but feel free to
design your own.
    There are many styles under the “American English” rubric. The style for this
particular book is documented in Appendix D.
    As noted at the beginning of this section, I am this book’s editor. However, if you
choose to contribute, it will be your book as well. In that spirit, I offer you Chapter 2,
our introduction.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
