                                        If parallel programming is so hard, why are there so
                                        many parallel programs?
                                                                                    Unknown

Chapter 2

Introduction

Parallel programming has earned a reputation as one of the most difficult areas a
hacker can tackle. Papers and textbooks warn of the perils of deadlock, livelock, race
conditions, non-determinism, Amdahl’s-Law limits to scaling, and excessive realtime
latencies. And these perils are quite real; we authors have accumulated uncounted years
of experience along with the resulting emotional scars, grey hairs, and hair loss.
     However, new technologies that are difficult to use at introduction invariably become
easier over time. For example, the once-rare ability to drive a car is now commonplace
in many countries. This dramatic change came about for two basic reasons: (1) Cars
became cheaper and more readily available, so that more people had the opportunity to
learn to drive, and (2) Cars became easier to operate due to automatic transmissions,
automatic chokes, automatic starters, greatly improved reliability, and a host of other
technological improvements.
     The same is true for many other technologies, including computers. It is no
longer necessary to operate a keypunch in order to program. Spreadsheets allow
most non-programmers to get results from their computers that would have required
a team of specialists a few decades ago. Perhaps the most compelling example is
web-surfing and content creation, which since the early 2000s has been easily done
by untrained, uneducated people using various now-commonplace social-networking
tools. As recently as 1968, such content creation was a far-out research project [Eng68],
described at the time as “like a UFO landing on the White House lawn” [Gri00].
     Therefore, if you wish to argue that parallel programming will remain as difficult as
it is currently perceived by many to be, it is you who bears the burden of proof, keeping
in mind the many centuries of counter-examples in many fields of endeavor.

2.1     Historic Parallel Programming Difficulties

                                        Not the power to remember, but its very opposite,
                                        the power to forget, is a necessary condition for our
                                        existence.
                                                                                 Sholem Asch

As indicated by its title, this book takes a different approach. Rather than complain
about the difficulty of parallel programming, it instead examines the reasons why

parallel programming is difficult, and then works to help the reader to overcome these
difficulties. As will be seen, these difficulties have historically fallen into several
categories, including:

     1. The historic high cost and relative rarity of parallel systems.

     2. The typical researcher’s and practitioner’s lack of experience with parallel systems.

     3. The paucity of publicly accessible parallel code.

     4. The lack of a widely understood engineering discipline of parallel programming.

     5. The high overhead of communication relative to that of processing, even in tightly
        coupled shared-memory computers.

    Many of these historic difficulties are well on the way to being overcome. First, over
the past few decades, the cost of parallel systems has decreased from many multiples of
that of a house to that of a modest meal, courtesy of Moore’s Law [Moo65]. Papers
calling out the advantages of multicore CPUs were published as early as 1996 [ONH+ 96].
IBM introduced simultaneous multi-threading into its high-end POWER family in 2000,
and multicore in 2001. Intel introduced hyperthreading into its commodity Pentium
line in November 2000, and both AMD and Intel introduced dual-core CPUs in 2005.
Sun followed with the multicore/multi-threaded Niagara in late 2005. In fact, by 2008,
it was becoming difficult to find a single-CPU desktop system, with single-core CPUs
being relegated to netbooks and embedded devices. By 2012, even smartphones were
starting to sport multiple CPUs. By 2020, safety-critical software standards started
addressing concurrency.
    Second, the advent of low-cost and readily available multicore systems means
that the once-rare experience of parallel programming is now available to almost all
researchers and practitioners. In fact, parallel systems have long been within the budget
of students and hobbyists. We can therefore expect greatly increased levels of invention
and innovation surrounding parallel systems, and that increased familiarity will over
time make the once prohibitively expensive field of parallel programming much more
friendly and commonplace.
    Third, in the 20th century, large systems of highly parallel software were almost
always closely guarded proprietary secrets. In happy contrast, the 21st century has
seen numerous open-source (and thus publicly available) parallel software projects,
including the Linux kernel [Tor03], database systems [Pos08, MS08], and message-
passing systems [The08, Uni08a]. This book will draw primarily from the Linux kernel,
but will provide much material suitable for user-level applications.
    Fourth, even though the large-scale parallel-programming projects of the 1980s and
1990s were almost all proprietary projects, these projects have seeded other communities
with cadres of developers who understand the engineering discipline required to develop
production-quality parallel code. A major purpose of this book is to present this
engineering discipline.
    Unfortunately, the fifth difficulty, the high cost of communication relative to that
of processing, remains largely in force. This difficulty has been receiving increasing
attention during the new millennium. However, according to Stephen Hawking,
the finite speed of light and the atomic nature of matter will limit progress in this
area [Gar07, Moo03]. Fortunately, this difficulty has been in force since the late 1980s,
so that the aforementioned engineering discipline has evolved practical and effective

2.2. PARALLEL PROGRAMMING GOALS                                                              11

strategies for handling it. In addition, hardware designers are increasingly aware of
these issues, so perhaps future hardware will be more friendly to parallel software, as
discussed in Section 3.3.
Quick Quiz 2.1: Come on now!!! Parallel programming has been known to be exceedingly
hard for many decades. You seem to be hinting that it is not so hard. What sort of game are you
playing?

   However, even though parallel programming might not be as hard as is commonly
advertised, it is often more work than is sequential programming.
Quick Quiz 2.2: How could parallel programming ever be as easy as sequential programming?

     It therefore makes sense to consider alternatives to parallel programming. However,
it is not possible to reasonably consider parallel-programming alternatives without
understanding parallel-programming goals. This topic is addressed in the next section.

2.2     Parallel Programming Goals
                                             If you don’t know where you are going, you will end
                                             up somewhere else.
                                                                                      Yogi Berra

The three major goals of parallel programming (over and above those of sequential
programming) are as follows:

   1. Performance.

   2. Productivity.
   3. Generality.

    Unfortunately, given the current state of the art, it is possible to achieve at best two
of these three goals for any given parallel program. These three goals therefore form the
iron triangle of parallel programming, a triangle upon which overly optimistic hopes all
too often come to grief.1
Quick Quiz 2.3: Oh, really??? What about correctness, maintainability, robustness, and so
on?

Quick Quiz 2.4: And if correctness, maintainability, and robustness don’t make the list, why
do productivity and generality?

Quick Quiz 2.5: Given that parallel programs are much harder to prove correct than are
sequential programs, again, shouldn’t correctness really be on the list?

Quick Quiz 2.6: What about just having fun?

    Each of these goals is elaborated upon in the following sections.

   1 Kudos to Michael Wong for naming the iron triangle.

                                                 10000

                    CPU Clock Frequency / MIPS
                                                 1000

                                                  100

                                                   10

                                                    1

                                                   0.1

                                                     1975
                                                            1980
                                                                   1985
                                                                          1990
                                                                                 1995
                                                                                        2000
                                                                                               2005
                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                             2015
                                                                                                                    2020
                                                                                  Year

                 Figure 2.1: MIPS/Clock-Frequency Trend for Intel CPUs

2.2.1      Performance
Performance is the primary goal behind most parallel-programming effort. After all, if
performance is not a concern, why not do yourself a favor: Just write sequential code,
and be happy? It will very likely be easier and you will probably get done much more
quickly.
 Quick Quiz 2.7: Are there no cases where parallel programming is about something other
 than performance?

    Note that “performance” is interpreted broadly here, including for example scalability
(performance per CPU) and efficiency (performance per watt).
    That said, the focus of performance has shifted from hardware to parallel software.
This change in focus is due to the fact that, although Moore’s Law continues to deliver
increases in transistor density, it has ceased to provide the traditional single-threaded
performance increases. This can be seen in Figure 2.1,2 which shows that writing
single-threaded code and simply waiting a year or two for the CPUs to catch up may
no longer be an option. Given the recent trends on the part of all major manufacturers
towards multicore/multithreaded systems, parallelism is the way to go for those wanting
to avail themselves of the full performance of their systems.
 Quick Quiz 2.8: Why not instead rewrite programs from inefficient scripting languages to C
 or C++?

    Even so, the first goal is performance rather than scalability, especially given that the
easiest way to attain linear scalability is to reduce the performance of each CPU [Tor01].
    2 This plot shows clock frequencies for newer CPUs theoretically capable of retiring one

or more instructions per clock, and MIPS (millions of instructions per second, usually from
the old Dhrystone benchmark) for older CPUs requiring multiple clocks to execute even the
simplest instruction. The reason for shifting between these two measures is that the newer
CPUs’ ability to retire multiple instructions per clock is typically limited by memory-system
performance. Furthermore, the benchmarks commonly used on the older CPUs are obsolete,
and it is difficult to run the newer benchmarks on systems containing the old CPUs, in part
because it is hard to find working instances of the old CPUs.

2.2. PARALLEL PROGRAMMING GOALS                                                                13

Given a four-CPU system, which would you prefer? A program that provides 100
transactions per second on a single CPU, but does not scale at all? Or a program that
provides 10 transactions per second on a single CPU, but scales perfectly? The first
program seems like a better bet, though the answer might change if you happened to
have a 32-CPU system.
    That said, just because you have multiple CPUs is not necessarily in and of itself
a reason to use them all, especially given the recent decreases in price of multi-CPU
systems. The key point to understand is that parallel programming is primarily a
performance optimization, and, as such, it is one potential optimization of many. If your
program is fast enough as currently written, there is no reason to optimize, either by
parallelizing it or by applying any of a number of potential sequential optimizations.3
By the same token, if you are looking to apply parallelism as an optimization to a
sequential program, then you will need to compare parallel algorithms to the best
sequential algorithms. This may require some care, as far too many publications ignore
the sequential case when analyzing the performance of parallel algorithms.

2.2.2      Productivity
 Quick Quiz 2.9: Why all this prattling on about non-technical issues??? And not just any
 non-technical issue, but productivity of all things? Who cares?

    Productivity has been becoming increasingly important in recent decades. To see
this, consider that the price of early computers was tens of millions of dollars at a time
when engineering salaries were but a few thousand dollars a year. If dedicating a team
of ten engineers to such a machine would improve its performance, even by only 10 %,
then their salaries would be repaid many times over.
    One such machine was the CSIRAC, the oldest still-intact fully electronic stored-
program computer, which was put into operation in 1949 [Mus20, Dep17]. Because
this machine was built before the transistor era, it was constructed of 2,000 vacuum
tubes, ran with a clock frequency of 1 kHz, consumed 30 kW of power, and weighed
more than three metric tons. Given that this machine had but 768 words of RAM, it is
safe to say that it did not suffer from the productivity issues that often plague today’s
large-scale software projects.
    Today, it would be quite difficult to purchase a machine with so little computing
power. Perhaps the closest equivalents are 8-bit embedded microprocessors exemplified
by the venerable Z80 [Wik08], but even the old Z80 had a CPU clock frequency more
than 1,000 times faster than the CSIRAC. The Z80 CPU had 8,500 transistors, and
could be purchased in 2008 for less than $2 US per unit in 1,000-unit quantities. In
stark contrast to the CSIRAC, software-development costs are anything but insignificant
for the Z80.
    The CSIRAC and the Z80 are two points in a long-term trend, as can be seen in
Figure 2.2. This figure plots an approximation to computational power per die over the
past four decades, showing an impressive six-order-of-magnitude increase over a period
of forty years. Note that the advent of multicore CPUs has permitted this increase to
continue apace despite the clock-frequency wall encountered in 2003, albeit courtesy of
dies supporting more than 50 hardware threads each.

     3 Of course, if you are a hobbyist whose primary interest is writing parallel software,

that is more than enough reason to parallelize whatever software you are interested in.

                                    1x106

                                   100000

                                   10000

                    MIPS per Die
                                    1000

                                      100

                                       10

                                        1

                                      0.1

                                         1975
                                                1980
                                                       1985
                                                              1990
                                                                     1995
                                                                            2000
                                                                                   2005
                                                                                          2010
                                                                                                 2015
                                                                                                        2020
                                                                      Year

                                   Figure 2.2: MIPS per Die for Intel CPUs

     One of the inescapable consequences of the rapid decrease in the cost of hardware
is that software productivity becomes increasingly important. It is no longer sufficient
merely to make efficient use of the hardware: It is now necessary to make extremely
efficient use of software developers as well. This has long been the case for sequential
hardware, but parallel hardware has become a low-cost commodity only recently.
Therefore, only recently has high productivity become critically important when
creating parallel software.
Quick Quiz 2.10: Given how cheap parallel systems have become, how can anyone afford to
pay people to program them?

   Perhaps at one time, the sole purpose of parallel software was performance. Now,
however, productivity is gaining the spotlight.

2.2.3      Generality
One way to justify the high cost of developing parallel software is to strive for maximal
generality. All else being equal, the cost of a more-general software artifact can be
spread over more users than that of a less-general one. In fact, this economic force
explains much of the maniacal focus on portability, which can be seen as an important
special case of generality.4
    Unfortunately, generality often comes at the cost of performance, productivity, or
both. For example, portability is often achieved via adaptation layers, which inevitably
exact a performance penalty. To see this more generally, consider the following popular
parallel programming environments:

C/C++ “Locking Plus Threads”: This category, which includes POSIX Threads
    (pthreads) [Ope97], Windows Threads, and numerous operating-system kernel
    environments, offers excellent performance (at least within the confines of a
    single SMP system) and also offers good generality. Pity about the relatively low
    productivity.
     4 Kudos to Michael Wong for pointing this out.

2.2. PARALLEL PROGRAMMING GOALS                                                            15

                                               Productivity

                                                   Application

                                         Middleware (e.g., DBMS)

                         Performance

                                                                              Generality
                                              System Libraries
                                       Container

                                         Operating System Kernel
                                                                 Hypervisor

                                                   Firmware

                                                   Hardware

     Figure 2.3: Software Layers and Performance, Productivity, and Generality

Java: This general purpose and inherently multithreaded programming environment
     is widely believed to offer much higher productivity than C or C++, courtesy of
     the automatic garbage collector and the rich set of class libraries. However, its
     performance, though greatly improved in the early 2000s, lags that of C and C++.

MPI: This Message Passing Interface [MPI08] powers the largest scientific and technical
     computing clusters in the world and offers unparalleled performance and scalability.
     In theory, it is general purpose, but it is mainly used for scientific and technical
     computing. Its productivity is believed by many to be even lower than that of
     C/C++ “locking plus threads” environments.
OpenMP: This set of compiler directives can be used to parallelize loops. It is thus
    quite specific to this task, and this specificity often limits its performance. It is,
    however, much easier to use than MPI or C/C++ “locking plus threads.”
SQL: Structured Query Language [Int92] is specific to relational database queries.
    However, its performance is quite good as measured by the Transaction Processing
    Performance Council (TPC) benchmark results [Tra01]. Productivity is excellent;
    in fact, this parallel programming environment enables people to make good
    use of a large parallel system despite having little or no knowledge of parallel
    programming concepts.

Quick Quiz 2.11: SQL??? That is ancient history. Here in the 2020s, if you really want to
make good use of a large parallel system, why not use machine learning?

    The nirvana of parallel programming environments, one that offers world-class
performance, productivity, and generality, simply does not yet exist. Until such a
nirvana appears, it will be necessary to make engineering tradeoffs among performance,
productivity, and generality. One such tradeoff is depicted by the green “iron triangle”5
shown in Figure 2.3, which shows how productivity becomes increasingly important
   5 Kudos to Michael Wong for coining “iron triangle.”

                                     Special−Purpose
                       User 1         Env Productive          User 2
                                        for User 1

                                         HW /            Special−Purpose
                                         Abs               Environment
                                                       Productive for User 2

                    User 3
                                    General−Purpose        User 4
                                      Environment

                  Special−Purpose Environment
                                                    Special−Purpose
                      Productive for User 3
                                                      Environment
                                                  Productive for User 4

              Figure 2.4: Tradeoff Between Productivity and Generality

at the upper layers of the system stack, while performance and generality become
increasingly important at the lower layers of the system stack. The huge development
costs incurred at the lower layers must be spread over equally huge numbers of users
(hence the importance of generality), and performance lost in lower layers cannot easily
be recovered further up the stack. In the upper layers of the stack, there might be very
few users for a given specific application, in which case productivity concerns are
paramount. This explains the tendency towards “bloatware” further up the stack: Extra
hardware is often cheaper than extra developers. This book is intended for developers
working near the bottom of the stack, where performance and generality are of greatest
concern.
    It is important to note that a tradeoff between productivity and generality has existed
for centuries in many fields. For but one example, a nailgun is more productive than
a hammer for driving nails, but in contrast to the nailgun, a hammer can be used for
many things besides driving nails. It should therefore be no surprise to see similar
tradeoffs appear in the field of parallel computing. This tradeoff is shown schematically
in Figure 2.4. Here, users 1, 2, 3, and 4 have specific jobs that they need the computer to
help them with. The most productive possible language or environment for a given user is
one that simply does that user’s job, without requiring any programming, configuration,
or other setup.
Quick Quiz 2.12: This is a ridiculously unachievable ideal! Why not focus on something that
is achievable in practice?

    Unfortunately, a system that performs optimally on the user 1’s job is unlikely to
perform very well on user 2’s job. In other words, the most productive languages and
environments are domain-specific, and thus by definition lacking generality.
    Another option is to tailor a given programming language or environment to the
hardware system (for example, low-level languages such as assembly, C, C++, or Java)
or to some abstraction (for example, Haskell, Prolog, or Snobol), as is shown by the
circular region near the center of Figure 2.4. These languages can be considered to be
general in the sense that they are equally ill-suited to the jobs required by users 1, 2, 3,
and 4. In other words, their generality comes at the expense of decreased productivity
when compared to domain-specific languages and environments. Worse yet, a language

2.3. ALTERNATIVES TO PARALLEL PROGRAMMING                                                17

that is tailored to a given abstraction is likely to suffer from performance and scalability
problems unless and until it can be efficiently mapped to real hardware.
    Is there no escape from iron triangle’s three conflicting goals of performance,
productivity, and generality?
    It turns out that there often is an escape, for example, using the alternatives to
parallel programming discussed in the next section. After all, parallel programming can
be a great deal of fun, but it is not always the best tool for the job.

2.3     Alternatives to Parallel Programming

                                         Experiment is folly when experience shows the way.
                                                                            Roger M. Babson

In order to properly consider alternatives to parallel programming, you must first decide
on what exactly you expect the parallelism to do for you. As seen in Section 2.2, the
primary goals of parallel programming are performance, productivity, and generality.
Because this book is intended for developers working on performance-critical code near
the bottom of the software stack, the remainder of this section focuses primarily on
performance improvement.
     It is important to keep in mind that parallelism is but one way to improve performance.
Other well-known approaches include the following, in roughly increasing order of
difficulty:

   1. Run multiple instances of a sequential application.

   2. Make the application use existing parallel software.

   3. Optimize the sequential application.

    These approaches are covered in the following sections.

2.3.1    Multiple Instances of a Sequential Application
Running multiple instances of a sequential application can allow you to do parallel
programming without actually doing parallel programming. There are a large number
of ways to approach this, depending on the structure of the application.
    If your program is analyzing a large number of different scenarios, or is analyzing a
large number of independent data sets, one easy and effective approach is to create a
single sequential program that carries out a single analysis, then use any of a number of
scripting environments (for example the bash shell) to run a number of instances of
that sequential program in parallel. In some cases, this approach can be easily extended
to a cluster of machines.
    This approach may seem like cheating, and in fact some denigrate such programs
as “embarrassingly parallel”. And in fact, this approach does have some potential
disadvantages, including increased memory consumption, waste of CPU cycles recom-
puting common intermediate results, and increased copying of data. However, it is
often extremely productive, garnering extreme performance gains with little or no added
effort.

2.3.2    Use Existing Parallel Software
There is no longer any shortage of parallel software environments that can present
a single-threaded programming environment, including relational databases [Dat82],
web-application servers, and map-reduce environments. For example, a common design
provides a separate process for each user, each of which generates SQL from user queries.
This per-user SQL is run against a common relational database, which automatically
runs the users’ queries concurrently. The per-user programs are responsible only for
the user interface, with the relational database taking full responsibility for the difficult
issues surrounding parallelism and persistence.
    In addition, there are a growing number of parallel library functions, particularly for
numeric computation. Even better, some libraries take advantage of special-purpose
hardware such as vector units and general-purpose graphical processing units (GPGPUs).
    Taking this approach often sacrifices some performance, at least when compared to
carefully hand-coding a fully parallel application. However, such sacrifice is often well
repaid by a huge reduction in development effort.
Quick Quiz 2.13: Wait a minute! Doesn’t this approach simply shift the development effort
from you to whoever wrote the existing parallel software you are using?

2.3.3    Performance Optimization
Up through the early 2000s, CPU clock frequencies doubled every 18 months. It was
therefore usually more important to create new functionality than to carefully optimize
performance. Now that Moore’s Law is “only” increasing transistor density instead of
increasing both transistor density and per-transistor performance, it might be a good
time to rethink the importance of performance optimization. After all, new hardware
generations no longer bring significant single-threaded performance improvements.
Furthermore, many performance optimizations can also conserve energy.
    From this viewpoint, parallel programming is but another performance optimization,
albeit one that is becoming much more attractive as parallel systems become cheaper and
more readily available. However, it is wise to keep in mind that the speedup available
from parallelism is limited to roughly the number of CPUs (but see Section 6.5 for an
interesting exception). In contrast, the speedup available from traditional single-threaded
software optimizations can be much larger. For example, replacing a long linked list with
a hash table or a search tree can improve performance by many orders of magnitude. This
highly optimized single-threaded program might run much faster than its unoptimized
parallel counterpart, making parallelization unnecessary. Of course, a highly optimized
parallel program would be even better, aside from the added development effort required.
    Furthermore, different programs might have different performance bottlenecks. For
example, if your program spends most of its time waiting on data from your disk drive,
using multiple CPUs will probably just increase the time wasted waiting for the disks.
In fact, if the program was reading from a single large file laid out sequentially on a
rotating disk, parallelizing your program might well make it a lot slower due to the
added seek overhead. You should instead optimize the data layout so that the file can be
smaller (thus faster to read), split the file into chunks which can be accessed in parallel
from different drives, cache frequently accessed data in main memory, or, if possible,
reduce the amount of data that must be read.
Quick Quiz 2.14: What other bottlenecks might prevent additional CPUs from providing
additional performance?

2.4. WHAT MAKES PARALLEL PROGRAMMING HARD?                                                   19

                   Performance                               Productivity
                                          Work
                                        Partitioning

                                                         Resource
                         Parallel
                                                       Partitioning and
                      Access Control                     Replication

                                        Interacting
                                       With Hardware

                                        Generality

          Figure 2.5: Categories of Tasks Required of Parallel Programmers

    Parallelism can be a powerful optimization technique, but it is not the only such
technique, nor is it appropriate for all situations. Of course, the easier it is to
parallelize your program, the more attractive parallelization becomes as an optimization.
Parallelization has a reputation of being quite difficult, which leads to the question
“exactly what makes parallel programming so difficult?”

2.4     What Makes Parallel Programming Hard?

                                         Real difficulties can be overcome; it is only the
                                         imaginary ones that are unconquerable.
                                                                               Theodore N. Vail

It is important to note that the difficulty of parallel programming is as much a human-
factors issue as it is a set of technical properties of the parallel programming problem.
We do need human beings to be able to tell parallel systems what to do, otherwise known
as programming. But parallel programming involves two-way communication, with
a program’s performance and scalability being the communication from the machine
to the human. In short, the human writes a program telling the computer what to do,
and the computer critiques this program via the resulting performance and scalability.
Therefore, appeals to abstractions or to mathematical analyses will often be of severely
limited utility.
     In the Industrial Revolution, the interface between human and machine was evaluated
by human-factor studies, then called time-and-motion studies. Although there have
been a few human-factor studies examining parallel programming [ENS05, ES05,
HCS+ 05, SS94], these studies have been extremely narrowly focused, and hence unable
to demonstrate any general results. Furthermore, given that the normal range of
programmer productivity spans more than an order of magnitude, it is unrealistic
to expect an affordable study to be capable of detecting (say) a 10 % difference in
productivity. Although the multiple-order-of-magnitude differences that such studies
can reliably detect are extremely valuable, the most impressive improvements tend to
be based on a long series of 10 % improvements.
     We must therefore take a different approach.

    One such approach is to carefully consider the tasks that parallel programmers must
undertake that are not required of sequential programmers. We can then evaluate how
well a given programming language or environment assists the developer with these
tasks. These tasks fall into the four categories shown in Figure 2.5, each of which is
covered in the following sections.

2.4.1    Work Partitioning
Work partitioning is absolutely required for parallel execution: If there is but one
unpartionable work item, then it can be executed by at most one CPU at a time, which
is by definition sequential execution. However, partitioning the work requires great
care. For example, uneven partitioning can result in sequential execution once the small
partitions have completed [Amd67]. In less extreme cases, load balancing can be used
to fully utilize available hardware and restore performance and scalability.
    Although partitioning can greatly improve performance and scalability, it can also
increase complexity. For example, partitioning can complicate handling of global errors
and events: A parallel program may need to carry out non-trivial synchronization in
order to safely process such global events. More generally, each partition requires
some sort of communication: After all, if a given thread did not communicate at all,
it would have no effect and would thus not need to be executed. However, because
communication incurs overhead, careless partitioning choices can result in severe
performance degradation.
    Furthermore, the number of concurrent threads must often be controlled, as each
such thread occupies common resources, for example, space in CPU caches. If too many
threads are permitted to execute concurrently, the CPU caches will overflow, resulting in
high cache miss rate, which in turn degrades performance. Conversely, large numbers
of threads are often required to overlap computation and I/O so as to fully utilize I/O
devices.
Quick Quiz 2.15: Other than CPU cache capacity, what might require limiting the number of
concurrent threads?

    Finally, permitting threads to execute concurrently greatly increases the program’s
state space, which can make the program difficult to understand and debug, degrading
productivity. All else being equal, smaller state spaces having more regular structure
are more easily understood, but this is a human-factors statement as much as it is a
technical or mathematical statement. Good parallel designs might have extremely large
state spaces, but nevertheless be easy to understand due to their regular structure, while
poor designs can be impenetrable despite having a comparatively small state space. The
best designs exploit embarrassing parallelism, or transform the problem to one having
an embarrassingly parallel solution. In either case, “embarrassingly parallel” is in fact
an embarrassment of riches. The current state of the art enumerates good designs; more
work is required to make more general judgments on state-space size and structure.

2.4.2    Parallel Access Control
Given a single-threaded sequential program, that single thread has full access to all of
the program’s resources. These resources are most often in-memory data structures,
but can be CPUs, memory (including caches), I/O devices, computational accelerators,
files, and much else besides.

2.4. WHAT MAKES PARALLEL PROGRAMMING HARD?                                           21

         Figure 2.6: Coarse Partitioning Reduces Synchronization Overhead

    The first parallel-access-control issue is whether the form of access to a given
resource depends on that resource’s location. For example, in many message-passing
environments, local-variable access is via expressions and assignments, while remote-
variable access uses an entirely different syntax, usually involving messaging. The
POSIX Threads environment [Ope97], Structured Query Language (SQL) [Int92],
and partitioned global address-space (PGAS) environments such as Universal Parallel
C (UPC) [EGCD03, CBF13] offer implicit access, while Message Passing Interface
(MPI) [MPI08] offers explicit access because access to remote data requires explicit
messaging.
    The other parallel-access-control issue is how threads coordinate access to the
resources. This coordination is carried out by the very large number of synchronization
mechanisms provided by various parallel languages and environments, including
message passing, locking, transactions, reference counting, explicit timing, shared
atomic variables, and data ownership. Many traditional parallel-programming concerns
such as deadlock, livelock, and transaction rollback stem from this coordination.
This framework can be elaborated to include comparisons of these synchronization
mechanisms, for example locking vs. transactional memory [MMW07], but such
elaboration is beyond the scope of this section. (See Sections 17.2 and 17.3 for more
information on transactional memory.)
Quick Quiz 2.16: Just what is “explicit timing”???

2.4.3    Resource Partitioning and Replication
The most effective parallel algorithms and systems exploit resource parallelism, so much
so that it is usually wise to begin parallelization by partitioning your write-intensive
resources and replicating frequently accessed read-mostly resources. The resource in
question is most frequently data, which might be partitioned over computer systems,
mass-storage devices, NUMA nodes, CPU cores (or dies or hardware threads), pages,
cache lines, instances of synchronization primitives, or critical sections of code. For
example, partitioning over locking primitives is termed “data locking” [BK85].
    Resource partitioning is frequently application dependent. For example, numerical
applications frequently partition matrices by row, column, or sub-matrix, while com-
mercial applications frequently partition write-intensive data structures and replicate
read-mostly data structures. Thus, a commercial application might assign the data for a
given customer to a given few computers out of a large cluster. An application might
statically partition data, or dynamically change the partitioning over time.

                   Performance                                Productivity
                                           Work
                                         Partitioning

                                                          Resource
                          Parallel
                                                        Partitioning and
                       Access Control                     Replication

                                         Interacting
                                        With Hardware

                                         Generality

                 Figure 2.7: Ordering of Parallel-Programming Tasks

    Resource partitioning is extremely effective, but it can be quite challenging for
complex multilinked data structures. As a rough rule of thumb, you want to keep the
smallest number of partitions needed to meet your scalability goals, with each partition
thus being as large as possible.
    The goal of this approach is to reduce the fraction of time consumed by synchro-
nization overhead, as illustrated by Figure 2.6, where the green regions represent useful
work and the red regions represent synchronization overhead. Of course, the coarser
synchronization on the right has only 16 partitions compared to the 64 partitions on
the left, however, it is quite possible that the added synchronization overhead will
overwhelm any performance benefit that might have resulted from the use of 64 CPUs
instead of 16.
Quick Quiz 2.17: That sounds like a difficult tradeoff. Just how are developers supposed to
resolve it???

2.4.4    Interacting With Hardware
Hardware interaction is normally the domain of the operating system, the compiler,
libraries, or other software-environment infrastructure. However, developers working
with novel hardware features and components will often need to work directly with such
hardware. In addition, direct access to the hardware can be required when squeezing
the last drop of performance out of a given system. In this case, the developer may
need to tailor or configure the application to the cache geometry, system topology, or
interconnect protocol of the target hardware.
    In some cases, hardware may be considered to be a resource which is subject to
partitioning or access control, as described in the previous sections.

2.4.5    Composite Capabilities
Although these four capabilities are fundamental, good engineering practice uses
composites of these capabilities. For example, the data-parallel approach first partitions
the data so as to minimize the need for inter-partition communication, partitions the code
accordingly, and finally maps data partitions and threads so as to maximize throughput
while minimizing inter-thread communication, as shown in Figure 2.7. The developer
can then consider each partition separately, greatly reducing the size of the relevant state

2.4. WHAT MAKES PARALLEL PROGRAMMING HARD?                                              23

space, in turn increasing productivity. Even though some problems are non-partitionable,
clever transformations into forms permitting partitioning can sometimes greatly enhance
both performance and scalability [Met99].

2.4.6    Existing Sequential Designs
Existing designs of sequential programs can be a limiting factor, especially given the
many pressures to make minimal changes when adapting systems to run on multi-core
systems. For example, consider the following hash-table API that might be used in
sequential code:

  int hash_add(struct htab *htp);
  int hash_del(int key);
  struct htab *hash_lookup(int key);

    Here, hash_add() and hash_del() both return the exact number of elements in
the hash table after the operation completes, or -1 if the operation fails due to duplicate
key or non-existent key, respectively. The hash_lookup() function takes a key and
returns a pointer to the corresponding element, or NULL if there is no such element.
    The problem with this API is the exact counts returned by hash_add() and hash_
del(). Although maintaining and returning these counts is almost free in sequential
code, doing so on a multi-core system can be extremely expensive and can limit
scalability, as discussed in Chapter 5. One way to fix this parallel-programming issue
is to have these functions instead return approximate counts (again as discussed in
Chapter 5) or to have them remain silent about the number of elements, as discussed in
Section 10.2.
    There are of course any number of other design patterns that work well in sequential
code but not in concurrent code. However, this example should give you a good idea
what to look for.

2.4.7    How Do Languages and Environments Assist With These
         Tasks?
Although many environments require the developer to deal manually with these tasks,
there are long-standing environments that bring significant automation to bear. The poster
child for these environments is SQL, many implementations of which automatically
parallelize single large queries and also automate concurrent execution of independent
queries and updates.
    These four categories of tasks must be carried out in all parallel programs, but that
of course does not necessarily mean that the developer must manually carry out these
tasks. We can expect to see ever-increasing automation of these four tasks as parallel
systems continue to become cheaper and more readily available.

Quick Quiz 2.18: Are there any other obstacles to parallel programming?

2.5     Discussion
                                        Until you try, you don’t know what you can’t do.
                                                                                Henry James

This section has given an overview of the difficulties with, goals of, and alternatives to
parallel programming. This overview was followed by a discussion of what can make
parallel programming hard, along with a high-level approach for dealing with parallel
programming’s difficulties. Those who still insist that parallel programming is impossibly
difficult should review some of the older guides to parallel programmming [Seq88,
Bir89, BK85, Inm85]. The following quote from Andrew Birrell’s monograph [Bir89]
is especially telling:

      Writing concurrent programs has a reputation for being exotic and difficult.
      I believe it is neither. You need a system that provides you with good
      primitives and suitable libraries, you need a basic caution and carefulness,
      you need an armory of useful techniques, and you need to know of the
      common pitfalls. I hope that this paper has helped you towards sharing my
      belief.

    The authors of these older guides were well up to the parallel programming challenge
back in the 1980s. As such, there are simply no excuses for refusing to step up to the
parallel-programming challenge here in the 21st century!
    We are now ready to proceed to the next chapter, which dives into the relevant
properties of the parallel hardware underlying our parallel software.

