                                          Premature abstraction is the root of all evil.
                                                                             A cast of thousands

Chapter 3

Hardware and its Habits

Most people intuitively understand that passing messages between systems is more
expensive than performing simple calculations within the confines of a single system.
But it is also the case that communicating among threads within the confines of a single
shared-memory system can be quite expensive. This chapter therefore looks at the cost
of synchronization and communication within a shared-memory system. These few
pages can do no more than scratch the surface of shared-memory parallel hardware
design; readers desiring more detail would do well to start with a recent edition of
Hennessy’s and Patterson’s classic text [HP17].
Quick Quiz 3.1: Why should parallel programmers bother learning low-level properties of
the hardware? Wouldn’t it be easier, better, more elegant, and more productive to remain at a
higher level of abstraction?

3.1     Overview

                                          Mechanical Sympathy: Hardware and software
                                          working together in harmony.
                                                                               Martin Thompson

Careless reading of computer-system specification sheets might lead one to believe that
CPU performance is a footrace on a clear track, as illustrated in Figure 3.1, where the
race always goes to the swiftest.
    Although there are a few CPU-bound benchmarks that approach the ideal case
shown in Figure 3.1, the typical program more closely resembles an obstacle course than
a race track. This is because the internal architecture of CPUs has changed dramatically
over the past few decades, courtesy of a collision of Moore’s Law with certain laws
of physics. A number of these architectural changes are described in the following
sections.

3.1.1    Pipelined CPUs
In the 1980s, the typical microprocessor fetched an instruction, decoded it, and executed
it, typically taking at least three clock cycles to complete one instruction before even

                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
26                CHAPTER 3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS

           CPU Benchmark Trackmeet

     Figure 3.1: CPU Performance at its Best

           4.0 GHz clock, 20 MB L3
           cache, 20 stage pipeline...

                The only pipeline I need
               is to cool off that hot-
                     headed brat.

         Figure 3.2: CPUs Old and New

                                                       v2025.12.18a
3.1. OVERVIEW                                                                                   27

                                                                                           ON
                                                                                         TI
                                                                                     DIC
                                                                                  RE
                                                                               SP
                                          PI                                 MI
                                             PE                          H
                                                LI
                                                   NE              A  NC
                                                        ER       BR
                                                          RO
                                                             R

                       Figure 3.3: CPU Meets a Pipeline Flush

starting the next. In contrast, the CPU of the late 1990s and of the 2000s execute
many instructions simultaneously, using pipelines; superscalar techniques; out-of-order
instruction and data handling; speculative execution, and more [HP17] in order to
optimize the flow of instructions and data through the CPU. Some cores have more
than one hardware thread, which is variously called simultaneous multithreading (SMT)
or hyperthreading (HT) [Fen73], each of which appears as an independent CPU to
software, at least from a functional viewpoint. These modern hardware features can
greatly improve performance, as illustrated by Figure 3.2.
    Achieving full performance with a CPU having a long pipeline requires highly
predictable control flow through the program. Suitable control flow is provided by
programs that run in tight loops, for example, those doing arithmetic on large matrices
or vectors. Such loops allow the CPU to correctly predict that the end-of-loop branch
will be taken in almost all cases, allowing the pipeline to be kept full and the CPU to
execute at full speed.
    However, branch prediction is not always so easy. For example, consider a program
with many loops, each of which iterates a small but random number of times. For
another example, consider a museum-piece object-oriented program with many virtual
objects that can reference many different real objects, all with different implementations
for frequently invoked member functions, resulting in many calls through pointers. In
these cases, it is difficult or even impossible for the CPU to predict where the next
branch might lead. Then either the CPU must stall waiting for execution to proceed
far enough to be certain where that branch leads, or it must guess and then proceed
using speculative execution. Although guessing works extremely well for programs
with predictable control flow, for unpredictable branches (such as those in binary search)
the guesses will frequently be wrong. A wrong guess can be expensive because the
CPU must discard any speculatively executed instructions following the corresponding
branch, resulting in a pipeline flush. If pipeline flushes appear too frequently, they
drastically reduce overall performance, as fancifully depicted in Figure 3.3.
    This gets even worse for hyperthreading (or SMT, if you prefer), especially on
pipelined superscalar out-of-order CPU featuring speculative execution. In this in-
creasingly common case, all the hardware threads sharing a core also share that core’s

                                                                                                     v2025.12.18a
28                                              CHAPTER 3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS

                         Thread 0                                               Thread 1
                         Instructions                                        Instructions
                                                   Decode and
                                                    Translate

                                                    Micro-Op
                                                    Scheduler

                                                                     Registers
                                 Execution                            (100s!)
                                   Units

                   Figure 3.4: Rough View of Modern Micro-Architecture

resources, including registers, cache, execution units, and so on. The instructions are
often decoded into micro-operations, and use of the shared execution units and the
hundreds of hardware registers is often coordinated by a micro-operation scheduler. A
rough diagram of such a two-threaded core is shown in Figure 3.4, and more accurate
(and thus more complex) diagrams are available in textbooks and scholarly papers.1
Therefore, the execution of one hardware thread can and often is perturbed by the actions
of other hardware threads sharing that core.
    Even if only one hardware thread is active (for example, in old-school CPU designs
where there is only one thread), counterintuitive results are quite common. Execution
units often have overlapping capabilities, so that a CPU’s choice of execution unit can
result in pipeline stalls due to contention for that execution unit from later instructions.
In theory, this contention is avoidable, but in practice CPUs must choose very quickly
and without the benefit of clairvoyance. In particular, adding an instruction to a tight
loop can sometimes actually cause execution to speed up.
    Unfortunately, pipeline flushes and shared-resource contention are not the only
hazards in the obstacle course that modern CPUs must run. The next section covers the
hazards of referencing memory.

3.1.2       Memory References
In the 1980s, it often took less time for a microprocessor to load a value from memory
than it did to execute an instruction. More recently, microprocessors might execute
hundreds or even thousands of instructions in the time required to access memory. This
disparity is due to the fact that Moore’s Law has increased CPU performance at a much
greater rate than it has decreased memory latency, in part due to the rate at which
memory sizes have grown. For example, a typical 1970s minicomputer might have 4 KB
(yes, kilobytes, not megabytes, let alone gigabytes or terabytes) of main memory, with
single-cycle access.2 Present-day CPU designers still can construct a 4 KB memory
with single-cycle access, even on systems with multi-GHz clock frequencies. And

   1 Here is one example for a late-2010s Intel core: https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/

intel/microarchitectures/skylake_(server).
   2 It is only fair to add that each of these single cycles lasted no less than 1.6 microseconds.

                                                                                                     v2025.12.18a
3.1. OVERVIEW                                                                           29

                     Figure 3.5: CPU Meets a Memory Reference

in fact they frequently do construct such memories, but they now call them “level-0
caches”, plus they can be a bit larger than 4 KB.
     Although the large caches found on modern microprocessors can do quite a bit to help
combat memory-access latencies, these caches require highly predictable data-access
patterns to successfully hide those latencies. Unfortunately, common operations such as
traversing a linked list have extremely unpredictable memory-access patterns—after
all, if the pattern was predictable, us software types would not bother with the pointers,
right? Therefore, as shown in Figure 3.5, memory references often pose severe obstacles
to modern CPUs.
     Thus far, we have only been considering obstacles that can arise during a given
CPU’s execution of single-threaded code. Multi-threading presents additional obstacles
to the CPU, as described in the following sections.

3.1.3    Atomic Operations
One such obstacle is atomic operations. The problem here is that the whole idea of an
atomic operation conflicts with the piece-at-a-time assembly-line operation of a CPU
pipeline. To hardware designers’ credit, modern CPUs use a number of extremely clever
tricks to make such operations look atomic even though they are in fact being executed
piece-at-a-time, with one common trick being to identify all the cachelines containing
the data to be atomically operated on, ensure that these cachelines are owned by the
CPU executing the atomic operation, and only then proceed with the atomic operation
while ensuring that these cachelines remained owned by this CPU. Because all the data
is private to this CPU, other CPUs are unable to interfere with the atomic operation
despite the piece-at-a-time nature of the CPU’s pipeline. Needless to say, this sort of
trick can require that the pipeline must be delayed or even flushed in order to perform the
cacheline-setup operations that permit a given atomic operation to complete correctly.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
30                                     CHAPTER 3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS

                        Figure 3.6: CPU Meets an Atomic Operation

     In contrast, when executing a non-atomic operation, the CPU can load values from
cachelines as they appear and place the results in the store buffer, without the need to
wait for cacheline ownership. Although there are a number of hardware optimizations
that can sometimes hide cache latencies, an atomic operation’s effect on performance is
all too often as depicted in Figure 3.6.
     Unfortunately, atomic operations usually apply only to single elements of data.
Because many parallel algorithms require that ordering constraints be maintained
between updates of multiple data elements, most CPUs provide memory barriers. These
memory barriers also serve as performance-sapping obstacles, as described in the next
section.
    Quick Quiz 3.2: What types of machines would allow atomic operations on multiple data
    elements?

3.1.4       Memory Barriers
Memory barriers will be considered in more detail in Chapter 15 and Appendix C. In
the meantime, consider the following simple lock-based critical section:

1    spin_lock(&mylock);
2    a = a + 1;
3    spin_unlock(&mylock);

    If the CPU were not constrained to execute these statements in the order shown, the
effect would be that the variable “a” would be incremented without the protection of
“mylock”, which would defeat the purpose of acquiring it. To prevent such destructive
reordering, locking primitives contain either explicit or implicit memory barriers.
Because the whole purpose of these memory barriers is to prevent reorderings that the
CPU (to say nothing of the compiler) would otherwise undertake in order to increase
performance, memory barriers almost always reduce performance, as depicted in
Figure 3.7.
    As with atomic operations, CPU designers have been working hard to reduce
memory-barrier overhead, and have made substantial progress.

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
3.1. OVERVIEW                                                                           31

                                   Memory
                                  Barrier

                      Figure 3.7: CPU Meets a Memory Barrier

3.1.5    Functional Unit Failings
Modern superscalar CPUs have numerous functional units with varying purposes and
capabilities. Each CPU is likely to have several arithmetic-logic units (ALUs) for integer
and boolean arithmetic, a few vector units, a couple of floating-point units (FPUs),
and at least one each branch unit, load unit, and store unit. Different CPUs will of
course have different combinations of functional units. However, not only will different
applications need different combinations of functional units, a given application is likely
to need different combinations at different phases of its execution.
    This means that it does not make much sense to think in terms of a given CPU
having a perfect combination of functional units. Sometimes a CPU instead must “hop
along on one leg” using only a very few out of its impressive array of functional units,
as fancifully depicted by the unfortunate CPU losing the race in Figure 3.8.
Quick Quiz 3.3: But what does this have to do with scaling workloads across a multi-core
CPU???

    Unfortunately, a workload could make perfectly efficient use of each and every one
of a given CPU’s functional units and still lose, for example, as described in the next
section.

3.1.6    Thermal Throttling
One increasingly common frustrating experience is to carefully micro-optimize a critical
code path, greatly reducing the number of clock cycles consumed by that code path,
only to find that the wall-clock time consumed by that code has actually increased.
    Welcome to modern thermal throttling.
    If you reduced the number of clock cycles by making more effective use of the
CPU’s functional units, you will have increased the power consumed by that CPU. This
will in turn increase the amount of heat dissipated by that CPU. If this heat dissipation

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
32                                  CHAPTER 3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS

                    Figure 3.8: CPU Functional-Unit Mismatch

                  Figure 3.9: CPU Encounters Thermal Throttling

exceeds the cooling system’s capacity, the system will thermally throttle that CPU, for
example, by reducing its clock frequency, as fancifully depicted by the snow penguin in
Figure 3.9.
    If performance is of the essence, the proper fix is improved cooling, an approach
loved by serious gamers, by overclockers (some of whom make good use of liquid
nitrogen), and by performance-first systems vendors (one of which used per-CPU
aluminum heat sinks, each of which weighed one pound, that is, 0.454 kilograms).
But if you cannot modify your computer’s cooling system, perhaps because you are
renting it from a cloud provider, then you will need to take some other optimization
approach. For example, you might need to apply algorithmic optimizations instead of
hardware-centric micro-optimizations. Alternatively, perhaps you can parallelize your
code, spreading the work (and thus the heat) over multiple CPU cores.
    Some recommend normalizing the results of a given test based on the various CPU
core clock frequencies, which can help. However, the latency of cache misses and
memory accesses do not depend on CPU core clock frequency. In addition, if the code
under test features tight interaction among multiple CPUs, then the performance that
code running on one of the CPUs will depend on the core clock frequencies of those
other CPUs.

                                                                                          v2025.12.18a
3.1. OVERVIEW                                                                           33

                     CACHE-
                      MISS
                     TOLL
                     BOOTH

                        Figure 3.10: CPU Meets a Cache Miss

    Finally, if the goal is instead to obtain repeatable benchmark measurements, one
approach is to extend traditional cache warmup to include thermal warmup, with the
required warm-up duration depending on the size and thus the thermal inertia of the
system under test.
    Another approach for repeatable benchmarks applies to event-based applications
that run in short but widely spaced bursts of latency-critical execution. In this case, the
previous approach’s thermal warmup interval should be replaced by a cooldown interval
during which the system remains idle.
    Even given careful thermal warmup or cooldown, results can vary with changes in
ambient temperature, which can depend strongly on time of day, to say nothing of time
of year in certain parts of the world.

Quick Quiz 3.4: Given a long thermal warmup or cooldown period and a fixed workload, why
would ambient temperature matter?

3.1.7    Cache Misses
An additional multi-threading obstacle to CPU performance is the “cache miss”. As
noted earlier, modern CPUs sport large caches in order to reduce the performance
penalty that would otherwise be incurred due to high memory latencies. However, these
caches are actually counter-productive for variables that are frequently shared among
CPUs. This is because when a given CPU wishes to modify the variable, it is most
likely the case that some other CPU has modified it recently. In this case, the variable
will be in that other CPU’s cache, but not in this CPU’s cache, which will therefore
incur an expensive cache miss (see Appendix C.1 for more detail). Such cache misses
form a major obstacle to CPU performance, as shown in Figure 3.10.

Quick Quiz 3.5: So have CPU designers also greatly reduced the overhead of cache misses?

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
34                                    CHAPTER 3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS

                      TELE              Please stay on the
                                        line. Your call is very
                                        important to us...

                     Figure 3.11: CPU Waits for I/O Completion

3.1.8    I/O Operations
A cache miss can be thought of as a CPU-to-CPU I/O operation, and as such is one
of the cheapest I/O operations available. I/O operations involving networking, mass
storage, or (worse yet) human beings pose much greater obstacles than the internal
obstacles called out in the prior sections, as illustrated by Figure 3.11.
    This is one of the differences between shared-memory and distributed-system
parallelism: Shared-memory parallel programs must normally deal with no obstacle
worse than a cache miss, while a distributed parallel program will typically incur the
larger network communication latencies. In both cases, the relevant latencies can be
thought of as a cost of communication—a cost that would be absent in a sequential
program. Therefore, the ratio between the overhead of the communication to that of
the actual work being performed is a key design parameter. A major goal of parallel
hardware design is to reduce this ratio as needed to achieve the relevant performance
and scalability goals. In turn, as will be seen in Chapter 6, a major goal of parallel
software design is to reduce the frequency of expensive operations like communications
cache misses.
    Of course, it is one thing to say that a given operation is an obstacle, and quite
another to show that the operation is a significant obstacle. This distinction is discussed
in the following sections.

3.2     Overheads
                                         Don’t design bridges in ignorance of materials, and
                                         don’t design low-level software in ignorance of the
                                         underlying hardware.
                                                                                    Unknown

This section presents actual overheads of the obstacles to performance listed out in the
previous section. However, it is first necessary to get a rough view of hardware system
architecture, which is the subject of the next section.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
3.2. OVERHEADS                                                                        35

                   CPU 0         CPU 1           CPU 2         CPU 3
                   Cache         Cache           Cache         Cache
                       Interconnect                  Interconnect

                  Memory          System Interconnect         Memory

                       Interconnect                  Interconnect
                   Cache         Cache           Cache         Cache
                   CPU 4         CPU 5           CPU 6         CPU 7

                     Speed−of−Light Round−Trip Distance in Vacuum
                            for 1.8 GHz Clock Period (8 cm)

                     Figure 3.12: System Hardware Architecture

3.2.1    Hardware System Architecture
Figure 3.12 shows a rough schematic of an eight-core computer system. Each die has a
pair of CPU cores, each with its cache, as well as an interconnect allowing the pair of
CPUs to communicate with each other. The system interconnect allows the four dies to
communicate with each other and with main memory.
    Data moves through this system in units of “cache lines”, which are power-of-two
fixed-size aligned blocks of memory, usually ranging from 32 to 256 bytes in size.
When a CPU loads a variable from memory to one of its registers, it must first load the
cacheline containing that variable into its cache, which may be thought of as a hardware
hash table. Similarly, when a CPU stores a value from one of its registers into memory,
it must also load the cacheline containing that variable into its cache, but must also
ensure that no other CPU has a copy of that cacheline.
    For example, suppose that CPU 1 wrote to a variable x whose cacheline was in
CPU 6’s cache. An over-simplified view of this process is illustrated by the following
sequence of steps in conjunction with Figure 3.13, each row of which condenses
Figure 3.12 to show only CPUs 1 and 6, their store buffers and local caches, along with
the system interconnect denoted by the grey rectangle connecting the pair of CPUs.

   1. CPU 1 checks its local cache, and does not find the cacheline. It therefore records
      the write in its store buffer as shown in row A of Figure 3.13.
   2. A request for this cacheline is forwarded to CPU 0’s and 1’s interconnect, which
      checks CPU 1’s local cache, and does not find the cacheline. Because nothing
      has changed, the system state is still as shown in row A of Figure 3.13.
   3. This request is forwarded to the system interconnect, as shown in row B of
      Figure 3.13, which checks with the other three dies, learning that the cacheline is
      held by the die containing CPU 6 and 7.
   4. This request is forwarded to CPU 6’s and 7’s interconnect, which checks both
      CPUs’ caches, finding the value in CPU 6’s cache, as shown in row C of
      Figure 3.13.

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
36                          CHAPTER 3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS

          CPU 1   Store    Cache           Cache   Store    CPU 6
                  Buffer                           Buffer
                                           x=3

          CPU 1   Store    Cache           Cache   Store    CPU 6
     A.           Buffer                           Buffer
                   x=5                     x=3

          CPU 1   Store    Cache           Cache   Store    CPU 6
     B.           Buffer                           Buffer
                                    x=?
                   x=5                     x=3

          CPU 1   Store    Cache   x=?     Cache   Store    CPU 6
     C.           Buffer                           Buffer
                   x=5                     x=3

          CPU 1   Store    Cache           Cache   Store    CPU 6
     D.           Buffer                           Buffer
                                   x=3
                   x=5

          CPU 1   Store    Cache           Cache   Store    CPU 6
                                     x=3
     E.           Buffer                           Buffer
                   x=5

          CPU 1   Store    Cache           Cache   Store    CPU 6
     F.           Buffer           x=3             Buffer
                   x=5

          CPU 1   Store    Cache           Cache   Store    CPU 6
     G.           Buffer                           Buffer
                   x=5     x=3

          CPU 1   Store    Cache           Cache   Store    CPU 6
     H.           Buffer                           Buffer
                           x=5

          Figure 3.13: Lifetime of a “Simple” Store

                                                                    v2025.12.18a
3.2. OVERHEADS                                                                          37

   5. CPU 6 forwards the cacheline to its interconnect, and also flushes the cacheline
      from its cache, and then CPU 6’s and 7’s interconnect forwards the cacheline to
      the system interconnect, as shown in row D of Figure 3.13.

   6. The system interconnect forwards the cacheline to CPU 0’s and 1’s interconnect,
      as shown in row E of Figure 3.13.

   7. CPU 0’s and 1’s interconnect forwards the cacheline to CPU 1, as shown in row F
      of Figure 3.13.

   8. The cache line is deposited into CPU 1’s cache, as shown in row G of Figure 3.13.

   9. CPU 1 can now complete the write, updating the relevant portions of the newly
      arrived cacheline from the value previously recorded in the store buffer, as shown
      in row H of Figure 3.13.

Quick Quiz 3.6: This is a simplified sequence of events? How could it possibly be any more
complex?

Quick Quiz 3.7: Why is it necessary to flush the cacheline from CPU 6’s cache?

    This simplified sequence is just the beginning of a discipline called cache-coherency
protocols [HP95, CSG99, MHS12, SHW11], which is discussed in more detail in
Appendix C. As can be seen in the sequence of events triggered by a simple memory
write operation, a single instruction can cause considerable protocol traffic, which can
significantly degrade your parallel program’s performance.
    Fortunately, if a given variable is being frequently read during a time interval during
which it is never updated, that variable can be replicated across all CPUs’ caches.
This replication permits all CPUs to enjoy extremely fast access to this read-mostly
variable. Chapter 9 presents synchronization mechanisms that take full advantage of
this important hardware read-mostly optimization.

3.2.2    Costs of Operations
The overheads of some common operations important to parallel programs are displayed
in Table 3.1. This system’s clock period rounds to 0.5 ns. Although it is not unusual
for modern microprocessors to be able to retire multiple instructions per clock period,
the operations’ costs are nevertheless normalized to a clock period in the third column,
labeled “Ratio”. The first thing to note about this table is the large values of many of
the ratios.
    The same-CPU compare-and-swap (CAS) operation consumes about seven nanosec-
onds, a duration more than ten times that of the clock period. CAS is an atomic operation
in which the hardware compares the contents of the specified memory location to a
specified “old” value, and if they compare equal, stores a specified “new” value, in
which case the CAS operation succeeds. If they compare unequal, the memory location
keeps its (unexpected) value, and the CAS operation fails. The operation is atomic in
that the hardware guarantees that the memory location will not be changed between the
compare and the store. CAS functionality is provided by the lock;cmpxchg instruction
on x86.
    The “same-CPU” prefix means that the CPU now performing the CAS operation on
a given variable was also the last CPU to access this variable, so that the corresponding

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
38                                    CHAPTER 3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS

Table 3.1: CPU 0 View of Synchronization Mechanisms on 8-Socket System With
    Intel Xeon Platinum 8176 CPUs @ 2.10 GHz
                                                            Ratio
             Operation                 Cost (ns)     (cost/clock)     CPUs
             Clock period                   0.5              1.0
             Same-CPU                                                     0
               CAS                          7.0             14.6
               lock                        15.4             32.3
             On-Core                                                    224
               Blind CAS                    7.2             15.2
               CAS                         18.0             37.7
             Off-Core                                                  1–27
                Blind CAS                  47.5             99.8    225–251
                CAS                       101.9            214.0
             Off-Socket                                              28–111
                Blind CAS                 148.8            312.5    252–335
                CAS                       442.9            930.1
             Cross-Interconnect                                     112–223
                Blind CAS                 336.6            706.8    336–447
                CAS                       944.8          1,984.2
             Off-System
                Comms Fabric            5,000           10,500
                Global Comms      195,000,000      409,500,000

cacheline is already held in that CPU’s cache. Similarly, the same-CPU lock operation
(a “round trip” pair consisting of a lock acquisition and release) consumes more than
fifteen nanoseconds, or more than thirty clock cycles. The lock operation is more
expensive than CAS because it requires two atomic operations on the lock data structure,
one for acquisition and the other for release.
     On-core operations involving interactions between the hardware threads sharing a
single core are about the same cost as same-CPU operations. This should not be too
surprising, given that these two hardware threads also share the full cache hierarchy.
     In the case of the blind CAS, the software specifies the old value without looking at
the memory location. This approach is appropriate when attempting to acquire a lock.
If the unlocked state is represented by zero and the locked state is represented by the
value one, then a CAS operation on the lock that specifies zero for the old value and one
for the new value will acquire the lock if it is not already held. The key point is that
there is only one access to the memory location, namely the CAS operation itself.
     In contrast, a normal CAS operation’s old value is derived from some earlier load.
For example, to implement an atomic increment, the current value in a shared variable
is loaded into one machine register and then incremented to produce the new value in
another machine register. Then in the CAS operation, the first register is specified as
the old value and the second register as the new value. If the shared variable’s value
did not change in the meantime, the CAS operation would store the new value, thus
incrementing that shared variable. However, if the shared variable’s value did change,

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
3.2. OVERHEADS                                                                           39

Table 3.2: Cache Geometry for 8-Socket System With Intel Xeon Platinum 8176 CPUs
    @ 2.10 GHz

                Level    Scope     Line Size      Sets   Ways         Size
                L0        Core           64        64        8       32K
                L1        Core           64        64        8       32K
                L2        Core           64      1024       16    1024K
                L3       Socket          64    57,344       11   39,424K

then the old value would not match, causing a miscompare that would result in the CAS
operation failing and thus making no further change to that shared variable. The key
point is that there are now two accesses to the memory location, the load and the CAS.
    Thus, it is not surprising that on-core blind CAS consumes only about seven
nanoseconds, while on-core CAS consumes about 18 nanoseconds. The non-blind
case’s extra load does not come for free. That said, the overhead of these operations are
similar to same-CPU CAS and lock, respectively.
Quick Quiz 3.8: Table 3.1 shows CPU 0 sharing a core with CPU 224. However, isn’t it more
logical for CPU 0 to share a core with CPU 1 instead of CPU 224???

    A blind CAS involving CPUs in different cores but on the same socket consumes
almost fifty nanoseconds, or almost one hundred clock cycles. The code used for this
cache-miss measurement passes the cache line back and forth between a pair of CPUs,
so this cache miss is satisfied not from memory, but rather from the other CPU’s cache.
A non-blind CAS operation, which as noted earlier must look at the old value of the
variable as well as store a new value, consumes over one hundred nanoseconds, or
more than two hundred clock cycles. Think about this a bit. In the time required to
do one CAS operation, the CPU could have executed more than two hundred normal
instructions. This should demonstrate the limitations not only of fine-grained locking,
but of any other synchronization mechanism relying on fine-grained global agreement.
    If the pair of CPUs are on different sockets, the operations are considerably more
expensive. A blind CAS operation consumes almost 150 nanoseconds, or more than three
hundred clock cycles. A normal CAS operation consumes more than 400 nanoseconds,
or almost one thousand clock cycles.
    Worse yet, not all pairs of sockets are created equal. This particular system appears
to be constructed as a pair of four-socket components, with additional latency penalties
when the CPUs reside in different components. In this case, a blind CAS operation
consumes more than three hundred nanoseconds, or more than seven hundred clock
cycles. A CAS operation consumes almost a full microsecond, or almost two thousand
clock cycles.
Quick Quiz 3.9: Surely the hardware designers could be persuaded to improve this situation!
Why have they been content with such abysmal performance for these single-instruction
operations?

Quick Quiz 3.10: Table E.1 in the answer to Quick Quiz 3.9 on page 747 says that on-core
CAS is faster than both of same-CPU CAS and on-core blind CAS. What is happening there?

    Unfortunately, the high speed of within-core and within-socket communication does
not come for free. First, there are only two CPUs within a given core and only 56 within

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
40                                            CHAPTER 3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS

a given socket, compared to 448 across the system. Second, as shown in Table 3.2, the
on-core caches are quite small compared to the on-socket caches, which are in turn
quite small compared to the 1.4 TB of memory configured on this system. Third, again
referring to the figure, the caches are organized as a hardware hash table with a limited
number of items per bucket. For example, the raw size of the L3 cache (“Size”) is
almost 40 MB, but each bucket (“Line”) can only hold 11 blocks of memory (“Ways”),
each of which can be at most 64 bytes (“Line Size”). This means that only 12 bytes of
memory (admittedly at carefully chosen addresses) are required to overflow this 40 MB
cache. On the other hand, equally careful choice of addresses might make good use of
the entire 40 MB.
    Spatial locality of reference is clearly extremely important, as is spreading the data
across memory.
    I/O operations are even more expensive. As shown in the “Comms Fabric” row,
high performance (and expensive!) communications fabric, such as InfiniBand or any
number of proprietary interconnects, has a latency of roughly five microseconds for an
end-to-end round trip, during which time more than ten thousand instructions might
have been executed. Standards-based communications networks often require some
sort of protocol processing, which further increases the latency. Of course, geographic
distance also increases latency, with the speed-of-light through optical fiber latency
around the world coming to roughly 195 milliseconds, or more than 400 million clock
cycles, as shown in the “Global Comms” row of Table E.2.
Quick Quiz 3.11: These numbers are insanely large! How can I possibly get my head around
them?

3.2.3       Hardware Optimizations
It is only natural to ask how the hardware is helping, and the answer is “Quite a bit!”
     One hardware optimization is large cachelines. This can provide a big performance
boost, especially when software is accessing memory sequentially. For example, given
a 64-byte cacheline and software accessing 64-bit variables, the first access will still be
slow due to speed-of-light delays (if nothing else), but the remaining seven can be quite
fast. However, this optimization has a dark side, namely false sharing, which happens
when different variables in the same cacheline are being updated by different CPUs,
resulting in a high cache-miss rate.3 Software can use the alignment directives available
in many compilers to avoid false sharing, and adding such directives is a common step
in tuning parallel software.
     A second related hardware optimization is cache prefetching, in which the hardware
reacts to consecutive accesses by prefetching subsequent cachelines, thereby evading
speed-of-light delays for these subsequent cachelines. Of course, the hardware must use
simple heuristics to determine when to prefetch, and these heuristics can be fooled by
the complex data-access patterns in many applications. Fortunately, some CPU families
allow for this by providing special prefetch instructions. Unfortunately, the effectiveness
of these instructions in the general case is the subject of some dispute.
     A third hardware optimization is the store buffer, which allows a string of store
instructions to execute quickly even when the stores are to non-consecutive addresses
and when none of the needed cachelines are present in the CPU’s cache. The dark side
of this optimization is memory misordering, for which see Chapter 15.

     3 This situation is sometimes referred to as “cache thrashing” or “cacheline bouncing”.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
3.2. OVERHEADS                                                                          41

                 Figure 3.14: Hardware and Software: On Same Side

     A fourth hardware optimization is speculative execution, which can allow the
hardware to make good use of the store buffers without resulting in memory misordering.
The dark side of this optimization can be energy inefficiency and lowered performance
if the speculative execution goes awry and must be rolled back and retried. Worse yet,
the advent of Spectre and Meltdown [Hor18] made it apparent that hardware speculation
can also enable side-channel attacks that defeat memory-protection hardware so as to
allow unprivileged processes to read memory that they should not have access to. It is
clear that the combination of speculative execution and cloud computing needs more
than a bit of rework!

    One could argue that if people would act reasonably, mitigations for side-channel
attacks would not be necessary. However, remotely accessible computer systems really
are often under attack by organized crime and by nation states, to say nothing of by
bored teenagers. There is an old saying “It only takes a few to spoil things for everyone”,
but the reality is that remotely accessible computer systems must be actively defended
from attack.

    A fifth hardware optimization is large caches, allowing individual CPUs to operate
on larger datasets without incurring expensive cache misses. Although large caches can
degrade both energy efficiency and cache-miss latency, the ever-growing cache sizes on
production microprocessors attests to the power of this optimization.

    A final hardware optimization is read-mostly replication, in which data that is
frequently read but rarely updated is present in all CPUs’ caches. This optimization
allows the read-mostly data to be accessed exceedingly efficiently, and is the subject of
Chapter 9.

    In short, hardware and software engineers are really on the same side, with both
trying to make computers go fast despite the best efforts of the laws of physics, as
fancifully depicted in Figure 3.14 where our data stream is trying its best to exceed
the speed of light, further hindered by the non-zero sizes of atoms. The next section
discusses some additional things that the hardware engineers might (or might not) be
able to do, depending on how well recent research translates to practice. Software’s
contribution to this noble goal is outlined in the remaining chapters of this book.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
42                                       CHAPTER 3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS

3.3       Hardware Free Lunch?
                                              The great trouble today is that there are too many
                                              people looking for someone else to do something for
                                              them. The solution to most of our troubles is to be
                                              found in everyone doing something for themselves.
                                                                             Henry Ford, updated

The major reason that concurrency has been receiving so much focus over the past few
years is the end of Moore’s-Law induced single-threaded performance increases (or
“free lunch” [Sut08]), as shown in Figure 2.1 on page 12. This section briefly surveys a
few ways that hardware designers might bring back the “free lunch”.
    However, the preceding section presented some substantial hardware obstacles to
exploiting concurrency. One severe physical limitation that hardware designers face is
the finite speed of light. As noted in Figure 3.12 on page 35, light can manage only
about an 8-centimeters round trip in a vacuum during the duration of a 1.8 GHz clock
period. This distance drops to about 3 centimeters for a 5 GHz clock. Both of these
distances are relatively small compared to the size of modern computer systems.
    To make matters even worse, electric waves in silicon move from three to thirty
times more slowly than does light in a vacuum, and common clocked logic constructs
run still more slowly, for example, a memory reference may need to wait for a local
cache lookup to complete before the request may be passed on to the rest of the system.
Furthermore, relatively low speed and high power drivers are required to move electrical
signals from one silicon die to another, for example, to communicate between a CPU
and main memory.
 Quick Quiz 3.12: But individual electrons don’t move anywhere near that fast, even in
 conductors!!! The electron drift velocity in a conductor under semiconductor voltage levels is
 on the order of only one millimeter per second. What gives???

    In fact, Stephen Hawking is said to have claimed that semiconductor manufacturers
have but two fundamental problems: (1) The finite speed of light and (2) The atomic
nature of matter [Gar07]. That is right, light is too slow and atoms are too big!!!
    There are nevertheless some technologies (both hardware and software) that might
help improve matters:

     1. Novel materials and processes,
     2. Substituting light for electricity,
     3. 3D integration,
     4. Special-purpose accelerators, and
     5. Existing parallel software.

     Each of these is described in one of the following sections.

3.3.1      Novel Materials and Processes
It is possible that Stephen Hawking is right, and that semiconductor manufacturers
are approaching the limits implied by the finite speed of light and the non-zero sizes

                                                                                                    v2025.12.18a
3.3. HARDWARE FREE LUNCH?                                                                43

of atoms. However, there are a few avenues of research and development focused on
working around these fundamental laws of physics.
    One workaround for the atomic nature of matter are so-called “high-K dielectric”
materials, which allow larger devices to mimic the electrical properties of infeasibly
small devices. These materials pose some severe fabrication challenges, but nevertheless
may help push the frontiers out a bit farther. Another more-exotic workaround stores
multiple bits in a single electron, relying on the fact that a given electron can exist at a
number of energy levels. It remains to be seen if this particular approach can be made
to work reliably in production semiconductor devices.
    Another proposed workaround is the “quantum dot” approach that allows much
smaller device sizes, but which is still in the research stage. Yet another proposed
workaround is to replace the atoms making up the base of a traditional transistor with a
vacuum, resulting in the vacuum-gap transistor.
    One challenge is that many recent hardware-device-level breakthroughs require very
tight control of which atoms are placed where [Kel17]. It therefore seems likely that
whoever finds a good way to hand-place atoms on each of the billions of devices on a
chip will have most excellent bragging rights, if nothing else!

3.3.2    Light, Not Electrons
Although the speed of light would be a hard limit, the fact is that semiconductor devices
are limited by the speed of electricity rather than that of light, given that electric waves
in semiconductor materials move at between 3 % and 30 % of the speed of light in a
vacuum. The use of copper connections on silicon devices is one way to increase the
speed of electricity, and it is quite possible that additional advances will push closer
still to the actual speed of light. In addition, there have been some experiments with
tiny optical fibers as interconnects within and between chips, based on the fact that the
speed of light in glass is more than 60 % of the speed of light in a vacuum. One obstacle
to such optical fibers is the inefficiency conversion between electricity and light and
vice versa, resulting in both power-consumption and heat-dissipation problems.
     That said, absent some fundamental advances in the field of physics, any exponential
increases in the speed of data flow will be sharply limited by the actual speed of light in
a vacuum.

3.3.3    3D Integration
3-dimensional integration (3DI) is the practice of bonding very thin silicon dies to
each other in a vertical stack. This practice provides potential benefits, but also poses
significant fabrication challenges [Kni08].
    Perhaps the most important benefit of 3DI is decreased path length through the
system, as shown in Figure 3.15. A 3-centimeter silicon die is replaced with a stack of
four 1.5-centimeter dies, in theory decreasing the maximum path through the system by
a factor of two, keeping in mind that each layer is quite thin. In addition, given proper
attention to design and placement, long horizontal electrical connections (which are
both slow and power hungry) can be replaced by short vertical electrical connections,
which are both faster and more power efficient.
    If you cannot make light go faster, make your devices smaller!
    However, delays due to levels of clocked logic will not be decreased by 3D integration,
and significant manufacturing, testing, power-supply, and heat-dissipation problems
must be solved for 3D integration to reach production while still delivering on its

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
44                                    CHAPTER 3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS

                                                    70 um

                       3 cm                                  1.5 cm

                    Figure 3.15: Latency Benefit of 3D Integration

                         Figure 3.16: Example 3D Integration

promise. The heat-dissipation problems might be solved using semiconductors based
on diamond, which is a good conductor for heat, but an electrical insulator. That said, it
remains difficult to grow large single diamond crystals, to say nothing of slicing them
into wafers. In addition, it seems unlikely that any of these technologies will be able to
deliver the exponential increases to which some people have become accustomed. That
said, they may be necessary steps on the path to the late Jim Gray’s “smoking hairy golf
balls” [Gra02].
    In the meantime, ca. 2020 advances in chiplet4 technology have made serious
progress in this direction, as depicted in Figure 3.16. Some researchers are taking this
further, stacking transistors within a single chip [Moo20, RK22].

3.3.4     Special-Purpose Accelerators
A general-purpose CPU working on a specialized problem is often spending significant
time and energy doing work that is only tangentially related to the problem at hand. For
example, when taking the dot product of a pair of vectors, a general-purpose CPU will
normally use a loop (possibly unrolled) with a loop counter. Decoding the instructions,
incrementing the loop counter, testing this counter, and branching back to the top of the
loop are in some sense wasted effort: The real goal is instead to multiply corresponding
elements of the two vectors. Therefore, a specialized piece of hardware designed
specifically to multiply vectors could get the job done more quickly and with less energy
consumed.
    This is in fact the motivation for the vector instructions present in many commodity
microprocessors. Because these instructions operate on multiple data items simultane-
     4 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chiplet

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
3.3. HARDWARE FREE LUNCH?                                                               45

ously, they would permit a dot product to be computed with less instruction-decode and
loop overhead.

    Similarly, specialized hardware can more efficiently encrypt and decrypt, compress
and decompress, encode and decode, and many other tasks besides. Unfortunately, this
efficiency does not come for free. A computer system incorporating this specialized
hardware will contain more transistors, which will consume some power even when
not in use. Software must be modified to take advantage of this specialized hardware,
and this specialized hardware must be sufficiently generally useful that the high up-
front hardware-design costs can be spread over enough users to make the specialized
hardware affordable. In part due to these sorts of economic considerations, specialized
hardware has thus far appeared only for a few application areas, including graphics
processing (GPUs), vector processors (MMX, SSE, and VMX instructions), and,
to a lesser extent, encryption and compression. And even in these areas, it is not
always easy to realize the expected performance gains, for example, due to thermal
throttling [Kra17, Lem18, Dow20].

    Unlike the server and PC arena, smartphones have long used a wide variety of
hardware accelerators. These hardware accelerators are often used for media decoding,
so much so that a high-end MP3 player might be able to play audio for several minutes—
with its CPU fully powered off the entire time. The purpose of these accelerators is
to improve energy efficiency and thus extend battery life: Special purpose hardware
can often compute more efficiently than can a general-purpose CPU. This is another
example of the principle called out in Section 2.2.3: Generality is almost never free.

    Nevertheless, given the end of Moore’s-Law-induced single-threaded performance
increases, it seems safe to assume that increasing varieties of special-purpose hardware
will appear. For example, in the mid-2020s, many are betting on special-purpose
accelerators for artificial-intelligence and machine-learning workloads.

3.3.5    Existing Parallel Software

Although multicore CPUs seem to have taken the computing industry by surprise,
the fact remains that shared-memory parallel computer systems have been readily (if
expensively) available since at least the 1980s. This is more than enough time for
significant parallel software to make its appearance, and it indeed has. Parallel operating
systems are quite commonplace, as are parallel threading libraries, parallel relational
database management systems, and parallel numerical software. Use of existing parallel
software can go a long ways towards solving any parallel-software crisis we might
encounter.

    Perhaps the most common example is the parallel relational database management
system. It is not unusual for single-threaded programs, often written in high-level
scripting languages, to access a central relational database concurrently. In the resulting
highly parallel system, only the database need actually deal directly with parallelism. A
very nice trick when it works!

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
46                                    CHAPTER 3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS

3.4      Software Design Implications

                                         One ship drives east and another west
                                         While the self-same breezes blow;
                                         ’Tis the set of the sail and not the gail
                                         That bids them where to go.
                                                                           Ella Wheeler Wilcox

The values of the ratios in Table 3.1 are critically important, as they limit the efficiency
of a given parallel application. To see this, suppose that the parallel application uses
CAS operations to communicate among threads. These CAS operations will typically
involve a cache miss, that is, assuming that the threads are communicating primarily
with each other rather than with themselves. Suppose further that the unit of work
corresponding to each CAS communication operation takes 300 ns, which is sufficient
time to compute several floating-point transcendental functions. Then about half of the
execution time will be consumed by the CAS communication operations! This in turn
means that a two-CPU system running such a parallel program would run no faster than
a sequential implementation running on a single CPU.
    The situation is even worse in the distributed-system case, where the latency of
a single communications operation might take as long as thousands or even millions
of floating-point operations. This illustrates how important it is for communications
operations to be extremely infrequent and to enable very large quantities of processing.
Quick Quiz 3.13: Given that distributed-systems communication is so horribly expensive,
why does anyone bother with such systems?

     The lesson should be quite clear: Parallel algorithms must be explicitly designed with
these hardware properties firmly in mind. One approach is to run nearly independent
threads. The less frequently the threads communicate, whether by atomic operations,
locks, or explicit messages, the better the application’s performance and scalability will
be. This approach will be touched on in Chapter 5, explored in Chapter 6, and taken to
its logical extreme in Chapter 8.
     Another approach is to make sure that any sharing be read-mostly, which allows the
CPUs’ caches to replicate the read-mostly data, in turn allowing all CPUs fast access.
This approach is touched on in Section 5.2.4, and explored more deeply in Chapter 9.
     In short, achieving excellent parallel performance and scalability means striving for
embarrassingly parallel algorithms and implementations, whether by careful choice of
data structures and algorithms, use of existing parallel applications and environments,
or transforming the problem into an embarrassingly parallel form.
Quick Quiz 3.14: OK, if we are going to have to apply distributed-programming techniques to
shared-memory parallel programs, why not just always use these distributed techniques and
dispense with shared memory?

     So, to sum up:

     1. The good news is that multicore systems are inexpensive and readily available.

     2. More good news: The overhead of many synchronization operations is much
        lower than it was on parallel systems from the early 2000s.

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
3.4. SOFTWARE DESIGN IMPLICATIONS                                                      47

   3. The bad news is that the overhead of cache misses is still high, especially on large
      systems.

   The remainder of this book describes ways of handling this bad news.
   In particular, Chapter 4 will cover some of the low-level tools used for parallel
programming, Chapter 5 will investigate problems and solutions to parallel counting,
and Chapter 6 will discuss design disciplines that promote performance and scalability.

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
48   CHAPTER 3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS

                                          v2025.12.18a
