                                            It is mine, I tell you. My own. My precious. Yes, my
                                            precious.
                                              Gollum in The Fellowship of the Ring, J.R.R. Tolkien

Chapter 8

Data Ownership

One of the simplest ways to avoid the synchronization overhead that comes with locking
is to parcel the data out among the threads (or, in the case of kernels, CPUs) so that a
given piece of data is accessed and modified by only one of the threads. Interestingly
enough, data ownership covers each of the “big three” parallel design techniques: It
partitions over threads (or CPUs, as the case may be), it batches all local operations, and
its elimination of synchronization operations is weakening carried to its logical extreme.
It should therefore be no surprise that data ownership is heavily used: Even novices use
it almost instinctively. In fact, it is so heavily used that this chapter will not introduce
any new examples, but will instead refer back to those of previous chapters.
    Quick Quiz 8.1: What form of data ownership is extremely difficult to avoid when creating
    shared-memory parallel programs (for example, using pthreads) in C or C++?

     There are a number of approaches to data ownership. Section 8.1 presents the
logical extreme in data ownership, where each thread has its own private address space.
Section 8.2 looks at the opposite extreme, where the data is shared, but different threads
own different access rights to the data. Section 8.3 describes function shipping, which
is a way of allowing other threads to have indirect access to data owned by a particular
thread. Section 8.4 describes how designated threads can be assigned ownership of a
specified function and the related data. Section 8.5 discusses improving performance
by transforming algorithms with shared data to instead use data ownership. Finally,
Section 8.6 lists a few software environments that feature data ownership as a first-class
citizen.

8.1        Multiple Processes
                                            A man’s home is his castle
                                                                         Ancient Laws of England

Section 4.1 introduced the following example:
1    compute_it 1 > compute_it.1.out &
2    compute_it 2 > compute_it.2.out &
3    wait
4    cat compute_it.1.out
5    cat compute_it.2.out

                                                                                                     v2025.12.18a
202                                                   CHAPTER 8. DATA OWNERSHIP

    This example runs two instances of the compute_it program in parallel, as separate
processes that do not share memory. Therefore, all data in a given process is owned by that
process, so that almost the entirety of data in the above example is owned. This approach
almost entirely eliminates synchronization overhead. The resulting combination of
extreme simplicity and optimal performance is obviously quite attractive.
 Quick Quiz 8.2: What synchronization remains in the example shown in Section 8.1?

 Quick Quiz 8.3: Is there any shared data in the example shown in Section 8.1?

    This same pattern can be written in C as well as in sh, as illustrated by Listings 4.1
and 4.2.
    It bears repeating that these trivial forms of parallelism are not in any way cheating
or ducking responsibility, but are rather simple and elegant ways to make your code
run faster. It is fast, scales well, is easy to program, easy to maintain, and gets the job
done. In addition, taking this approach (where applicable) allows the developer more
time to focus on other things whether these things might involve applying sophisticated
single-threaded optimizations to compute_it on the one hand, or applying sophisticated
parallel-programming patterns to portions of the code where this approach is inapplicable.
What is not to like?
    The next section discusses the use of data ownership in shared-memory parallel
programs.

8.2      Partial Data Ownership and pthreads

                                           Give thy mind more to what thou hast than to what
                                           thou hast not.
                                                                    Marcus Aurelius Antoninus

Concurrent counting (see Chapter 5) uses data ownership heavily, but adds a twist.
Threads are not allowed to modify data owned by other threads, but they are permitted to
read it. In short, the use of shared memory allows more nuanced notions of ownership
and access rights.
    For example, consider the per-thread statistical counter implementation shown in
Listing 5.4 on page 87. Here, inc_count() updates only the corresponding thread’s
instance of counter, while read_count() accesses, but does not modify, all threads’
instances of counter.
 Quick Quiz 8.4: Does it ever make sense to have partial data ownership where each thread
 reads only its own instance of a per-thread variable, but writes to other threads’ instances?

     Partial data ownership is also common within the Linux kernel. For example, a
given CPU might be permitted to read a given set of its own per-CPU variables only
with interrupts disabled, another CPU might be permitted to read that same set of the
first CPU’s per-CPU variables only when holding the corresponding per-CPU lock.
Then that given CPU would be permitted to update this set of its own per-CPU variables
if it both has interrupts disabled and holds its per-CPU lock. This arrangement can be
thought of as a reader-writer lock that allows each CPU very low-overhead access to its
own set of per-CPU variables. There are a great many variations on this theme.

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
8.3. FUNCTION SHIPPING                                                                     203

    For its own part, pure data ownership is also both common and useful, for example,
the per-thread memory-allocator caches discussed in Section 6.4.3 starting on page 145.
In this algorithm, each thread’s cache is completely private to that thread.

8.3     Function Shipping

                                         If the mountain will not come to Muhammad, then
                                         Muhammad must go to the mountain.
                                                                        Essays, Francis Bacon

The previous section described a weak form of data ownership where threads reached
out to other threads’ data. This can be thought of as bringing the data to the functions
that need it. An alternative approach is to send the functions to the data.
    Such an approach is illustrated in Section 5.4.3 beginning on page 105, in par-
ticular the flush_local_count_sig() and flush_local_count() functions in
Listing 5.18 on page 108.
    The flush_local_count_sig() function is a signal handler that acts as the
shipped function. The pthread_kill() function in flush_local_count() sends
the signal—shipping the function—and then waits until the shipped function executes.
This shipped function has the not-unusual added complication of needing to interact with
any concurrently executing add_count() or sub_count() functions (see Listing 5.19
on page 109 and Listing 5.20 on page 109).
Quick Quiz 8.5:     What mechanisms other than POSIX signals may be used for function
shipping?

8.4     Designated Thread

                                         Let a man practice the profession which he best
                                         knows.
                                                                                      Cicero

The earlier sections describe ways of allowing each thread to keep its own copy or its
own portion of the data. In contrast, this section describes a functional-decomposition
approach, where a special designated thread owns the rights to the data that is required to
do its job. The eventually consistent counter implementation described in Section 5.2.4
provides an example. This implementation has a designated thread that runs the
eventual() function shown on lines 17–32 of Listing 5.5. This eventual() thread
periodically pulls the per-thread counts into the global counter, so that accesses to the
global counter will, as the name says, eventually converge on the actual value.
Quick Quiz 8.6: But none of the data in the eventual() function shown on lines 17–32
of Listing 5.5 is actually owned by the eventual() thread! In just what way is this data
ownership???

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
204                                                    CHAPTER 8. DATA OWNERSHIP

8.5     Privatization

                                           There is, of course, a difference between what a man
                                           seizes and what he really possesses.
                                                                                    Pearl S. Buck

One way of improving the performance and scalability of a shared-memory parallel
program is to transform it so as to convert shared data to private data that is owned by a
particular thread.
    An excellent example of this is shown in the answer to one of the Quick Quizzes in
Section 6.1.1, which uses privatization to produce a solution to the Dining Philosophers
problem with much better performance and scalability than that of the standard textbook
solution. The original problem has five philosophers sitting around the table with one
fork between each adjacent pair of philosophers, which permits at most two philosophers
to eat concurrently.
    We can trivially privatize this problem by providing an additional five forks, so
that each philosopher has his or her own private pair of forks. This allows all five
philosophers to eat concurrently, and also offers a considerable reduction in the spread
of certain types of disease.
    In other cases, privatization imposes costs. For example, consider the simple
limit counter shown in Listing 5.7 on page 94. This is an example of an algorithm
where threads can read each others’ data, but are only permitted to update their own
data. A quick review of the algorithm shows that the only cross-thread accesses are
in the summation loop in read_count(). If this loop is eliminated, we move to
the more-efficient pure data ownership, but at the cost of a less-accurate result from
read_count().
Quick Quiz 8.7: Is it possible to obtain greater accuracy while still maintaining full privacy of
the per-thread data?

    Partial privatization is also possible, with some synchronization requirements, but
less than in the fully shared case. Some partial-privatization possibilities were explored
in Section 4.3.4.4. Chapter 9 will introduce a temporal component to data ownership by
providing ways of safely taking public data structures private.
    In short, privatization is a powerful tool in the parallel programmer’s toolbox, but it
must nevertheless be used with care. Just like every other synchronization primitive, it
has the potential to increase complexity while decreasing performance and scalability.

8.6     Other Uses of Data Ownership

                                           Everything comes to us that belongs to us if we
                                           create the capacity to receive it.
                                                                            Rabindranath Tagore

Data ownership works best when the data can be partitioned so that there is little or no
need for cross thread access or update. Fortunately, this situation is reasonably common,
and in a wide variety of parallel-programming environments.
   Examples of data ownership include:

                                                                                                    v2025.12.18a
8.6. OTHER USES OF DATA OWNERSHIP                                                        205

   1. All message-passing environments, such as MPI [MPI08] and BOINC [Uni08a].
   2. Map-reduce [Jac08].
   3. Client-server systems, including RPC, web services, and pretty much any system
      with a back-end database server.
   4. Shared-nothing database systems.
   5. Fork-join systems with separate per-process address spaces.
   6. Process-based parallelism, such as the Erlang language.

   7. Private variables, for example, C-language on-stack auto variables, in threaded
      environments.
   8. Many parallel linear-algebra algorithms, especially those well-suited for GPGPUs.1
   9. Operating-system kernels adapted for networking, where each connection (also
      called flow [DKS89, Zha89, McK90]) is assigned to a specific thread. One recent
      example of this approach is the IX operating system [BPP+ 16]. IX does have some
      shared data structures, which use synchronization mechanisms to be described in
      Section 9.5.

    Data ownership is perhaps the most underappreciated synchronization mechanism
in existence. When used properly, it delivers unrivaled simplicity, performance, and
scalability. Perhaps its simplicity costs it the respect that it deserves. Hopefully a greater
appreciation for the subtlety and power of data ownership will lead to greater level of
respect, to say nothing of leading to greater performance and scalability coupled with
reduced complexity.

  1 But note that a great many other classes of applications have also been ported to

GPGPUs [Mat17, AMD20, NVi17a, NVi17b].

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
206   CHAPTER 8. DATA OWNERSHIP

                                  v2025.12.18a
