                                         If a little knowledge is a dangerous thing, just think
                                         what you could do with a lot of knowledge!
                                                                                      Unknown

Chapter 14

Advanced Synchronization

This chapter covers synchronization techniques used for lockless algorithms and parallel
real-time systems.
    Although lockless algorithms can be quite helpful when faced with extreme re-
quirements, they are no panacea. For example, as noted at the end of Chapter 5, you
should thoroughly apply partitioning, batching, and well-tested packaged weak APIs
(see Chapters 8 and 9) before even thinking about lockless algorithms.
    But after doing all that, you still might find yourself needing the advanced techniques
described in this chapter. To that end, Section 14.1 summarizes techniques used
thus far for avoiding locks and Section 14.2 gives a brief overview of non-blocking
synchronization. Memory ordering is also quite important, but it warrants its own
chapter, namely Chapter 15.
    The second form of advanced synchronization provides the stronger forward-progress
guarantees needed for parallel real-time computing, which is the topic of Section 14.3.

14.1      Avoiding Locks

                                         We are confronted with insurmountable
                                         opportunities.
                                                                                     Walt Kelly

Although locking is the workhorse of parallelism in production, in many situations
performance, scalability, and real-time response can all be greatly improved through use
of lockless techniques. A particularly impressive example of such a lockless technique
is the statistical counters described in Section 5.2, which avoids not only locks, but
also read-modify-write atomic operations, memory barriers, and even cache misses for
counter increments. Other examples we have covered include:

   1. The fastpaths through a number of other counting algorithms in Chapter 5.

   2. The fastpath through resource allocator caches in Section 6.4.3.

   3. The maze solver in Section 6.5.

   4. The data-ownership techniques in Chapter 8.

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
462                              CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

   5. The reference-counting, hazard-pointer, and RCU techniques in Chapter 9.
   6. The lookup code paths in Chapter 10.
   7. Many of the techniques in Chapter 13.

    In short, lockless techniques are quite useful and are heavily used. However, it
is best if lockless techniques are hidden behind a well-defined API, such as the inc_
count(), memblock_alloc(), rcu_read_lock(), and so on. The reason for this is
that undisciplined use of lockless techniques is a good way to create difficult bugs. If
you believe that finding and fixing such bugs is easier than avoiding them, please re-read
Chapters 11 and 12.

14.2      Non-Blocking Synchronization
                                         Never worry about theory as long as the machinery
                                         does what it’s supposed to do.
                                                                          Robert A. Heinlein

The term non-blocking synchronization (NBS) [Her90] describes eight classes of
linearizable algorithms with differing forward-progress guarantees [ACHS13], which
are as follows:

   1. Bounded population-oblivious wait-free synchronization: Every thread will make
      progress within a specific finite period of time, where this period of time is
      independent of the number of threads [HS08]. This level is widely considered to
      be even less achievable than bounded wait-free synchronization.
   2. Bounded wait-free synchronization: Every thread will make progress within
      a specific finite period of time [Her91]. This level is widely considered to be
      unachievable, which might be why Alitarh et al. omitted it [ACHS13].
   3. Wait-free synchronization: Every thread will make progress in finite time [Her93].
   4. Lock-free synchronization: At least one thread will make progress in finite
      time [Her93].
   5. Obstruction-free synchronization: Every thread will make progress in finite time
      in the absence of contention [HLM03].
   6. Clash-free synchronization: At least one thread will make progress in finite time
      in the absence of contention [ACHS13].
   7. Starvation-free synchronization: Every thread will make progress in finite time
      in the absence of failures [ACHS13].
   8. Deadlock-free synchronization: At least one thread will make progress in finite
      time in the absence of failures [ACHS13].

   NBS class 1 was formulated some time before 2015, classes 2, 3, and 4 were first
formulated in the early 1990s, class 5 was first formulated in the early 2000s, and class 6
was first formulated in 2013. The final two classes have seen informal use for a great
many decades, but were reformulated in 2013.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
14.2. NON-BLOCKING SYNCHRONIZATION                                                      463

Quick Quiz 14.1: Given that there will always be a sharply limited number of CPUs available,
is population obliviousness really useful?

     In theory, any parallel algorithm can be cast into wait-free form, but there are a
relatively small subset of NBS algorithms that are in common use. A few of these are
listed in the following section.

14.2.1      Simple NBS
Perhaps the simplest NBS algorithm is atomic update of an integer counter using
fetch-and-add (atomic_add_return()) primitives. This section lists a few additional
commonly used NBS algorithms in roughly increasing order of complexity.

14.2.1.1    NBS Sets
One simple NBS algorithm implements a set of integers in an array. Here the array
index indicates a value that might be a member of the set and the array element indicates
whether or not that value actually is a set member. The linearizability criterion for
NBS algorithms requires that reads from and updates to the array either use atomic
instructions or be accompanied by memory barriers, but in the not-uncommon case
where linearizability is not important, simple volatile loads and stores suffice, for
example, using READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE().
    An NBS set may also be implemented using a bitmap, where each value that might
be a member of the set corresponds to one bit. Reads and updates must normally
be carried out via atomic bit-manipulation instructions, although compare-and-swap
(cmpxchg() or CAS) instructions can also be used.

14.2.1.2    NBS Counters
The statistical counters algorithm discussed in Section 5.2 can be considered to be
bounded-wait-free, but only by using a cute definitional trick in which the sum is
considered to be approximate rather than exact.1 Given sufficiently wide error bounds
that are a function of the length of time that the read_count() function takes to sum
the counters, it is not possible to prove that any non-linearizable behavior occurred. This
definitely (if a bit artificially) classifies the statistical-counters algorithm as bounded
wait-free. This algorithm is probably the most heavily used NBS algorithm in the Linux
kernel.

14.2.1.3    Half-NBS Queue
Another common NBS algorithm is the atomic queue where elements are enqueued
using an atomic exchange instruction [MS98b], followed by a store into the ->next
pointer of the new element’s predecessor, as shown in Listing 14.1, which shows the
userspace-RCU library implementation [Des09b]. Line 9 updates the tail pointer to
reference the new element while returning a reference to its predecessor, which is stored
in local variable old_tail. Line 10 then updates the predecessor’s ->next pointer
to reference the newly added element, and finally line 11 returns an indication as to
whether or not the queue was initially empty.

   1 Citation needed. I heard of this trick verbally from Mark Moir.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
464                                 CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

Listing 14.1: NBS Enqueue Algorithm
1    static inline bool
2    ___cds_wfcq_append(struct cds_wfcq_head *head,
3                       struct cds_wfcq_tail *tail,
4                       struct cds_wfcq_node *new_head,
5                       struct cds_wfcq_node *new_tail)
6    {
7            struct cds_wfcq_node *old_tail;
8
9            old_tail = uatomic_xchg(&tail->p, new_tail);
10           CMM_STORE_SHARED(old_tail->next, new_head);
11           return old_tail != &head->node;
12   }
13
14   static inline bool
15   _cds_wfcq_enqueue(struct cds_wfcq_head *head,
16                     struct cds_wfcq_tail *tail,
17                     struct cds_wfcq_node *new_tail)
18   {
19           return ___cds_wfcq_append(head, tail,
20                                     new_tail, new_tail);
21   }

    Although mutual exclusion is required to dequeue a single element (so that dequeue
is blocking), it is possible to carry out a non-blocking removal of the entire contents
of the queue. What is not possible is to dequeue any given element in a non-blocking
manner: The enqueuer might have failed between lines 9 and 10 of the listing, so that
the element in question is only partially enqueued. This results in a half-NBS algorithm
where enqueues are NBS but dequeues are blocking. This algorithm is nevertheless
heavily used in practice, in part because most production software is not required to
tolerate arbitrary fail-stop errors.
 Quick Quiz 14.2: Wait! In order to dequeue all elements, both the ->head and ->tail
 pointers must be changed, which cannot be done atomically on typical computer systems. So
 how is this supposed to work???

14.2.1.4      NBS Stack
Listing 14.2 shows the LIFO push algorithm, which boasts lock-free push and bounded
wait-free pop (lifo-push.c), forming an NBS stack. The origins of this algorithm are
unknown, but it was referred to in a patent granted in 1975 [BS75]. This patent was
filed in 1973, a few months before your editor saw his first computer, which had but one
CPU.
     Lines 1–4 show the node_t structure, which contains an arbitrary value and a
pointer to the next structure on the stack and line 7 shows the top-of-stack pointer.
     The list_push() function spans lines 9–20. Line 11 allocates a new node and
line 14 initializes it. Line 17 initializes the newly allocated node’s ->next pointer, and
line 18 attempts to push it on the stack. If line 19 detects cmpxchg() failure, another
pass through the loop retries. Otherwise, the new node has been successfully pushed,
and this function returns to its caller. Note that line 19 resolves races in which two
concurrent instances of list_push() attempt to push onto the stack. The cmpxchg()
will succeed for one and fail for the other, causing the other to retry, thereby selecting
an arbitrary order for the two node on the stack.
     The list_pop_all() function spans lines 23–34. The xchg() statement on
line 25 atomically removes all nodes on the stack, placing the head of the resulting list
in local variable p and setting top to NULL. This atomic operation serializes concurrent

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
14.2. NON-BLOCKING SYNCHRONIZATION                                                465

Listing 14.2: NBS Stack Algorithm
1    struct node_t {
2            value_t val;
3            struct node_t *next;
4    };
5
6    // LIFO list structure
7    struct node_t* top;
8
9    void list_push(value_t v)
10   {
11           struct node_t *newnode = malloc(sizeof(*newnode));
12           struct node_t *oldtop;
13
14           newnode->val = v;
15           oldtop = READ_ONCE(top);
16           do {
17                   newnode->next = oldtop;
18                   oldtop = cmpxchg(&top, newnode->next, newnode);
19           } while (newnode->next != oldtop);
20   }
21
22
23   void list_pop_all(void (foo)(struct node_t *p))
24   {
25           struct node_t *p = xchg(&top, NULL);
26
27           while (p) {
28                   struct node_t *next = p->next;
29
30                   foo(p);
31                   free(p);
32                   p = next;
33           }
34   }

calls to list_pop_all(): One of them will get the list, and the other a NULL pointer,
at least assuming that there were no concurrent calls to list_push().
     An instance of list_pop_all() that obtains a non-empty list in p processes this
list in the loop spanning lines 27–33. Line 28 prefetches the ->next pointer, line 30
invokes the function referenced by foo() on the current node, line 31 frees the current
node, and line 32 sets up p for the next pass through the loop.
     But suppose that a pair of list_push() instances run concurrently with a list_
pop_all() with a list initially containing a single Node 𝐴. Here is one way that this
scenario might play out:

     1. The first list_push() instance pushes a new Node 𝐵, executing through line 17,
        having just stored a pointer to Node 𝐴 into Node 𝐵’s ->next pointer.
     2. The list_pop_all() instance runs to completion, setting top to NULL and
        freeing Node 𝐴.
     3. The second list_push() instance runs to completion, pushing a new Node 𝐶,
        but happens to allocate the memory that used to belong to Node 𝐴.
     4. The first list_push() instance executes the cmpxchg() on line 18. Because
        new Node 𝐶 has the same address as the newly freed Node 𝐴, this cmpxchg()
        succeeds and this list_push() instance runs to completion.

   Note that both pushes and the popall all ran successfully despite the reuse of
Node 𝐴’s memory. This is an unusual property: Most data structures require protection
against what is often called the ABA problem.

                                                                                          v2025.12.18a
466                             CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

     But this property holds only for algorithm written in assembly language. The sad fact
is that most languages (including C and C++) do not support pointers to lifetime-ended
objects, such as the pointer to the old Node 𝐴 contained in Node 𝐵’s ->next pointer.
In fact, compilers are within their rights to assume that if two pointers (call them p and
q) were returned from two different calls to malloc(), then those pointers must not be
equal. Real compilers really will generate the constant false in response to a p==q
comparison. A pointer to an object that has been freed, but whose memory has been
reallocated for a compatibly typed object is termed a zombie pointer.
     Many concurrent applications avoid this problem by carefully hiding the memory
allocator from the compiler, thus preventing the compiler from making inappropriate
assumptions. This obfuscatory approach currently works in practice, but might well one
day fall victim to increasingly aggressive optimizers. There is work underway in both
the C and C++ standards committees to address this problem [MMS19, MMM+ 20]. In
the meantime, please exercise great care when coding ABA-tolerant algorithms.
Quick Quiz 14.3: So why not ditch antique languages like C and C++ for something more
modern?

14.2.2     Applicability of NBS Benefits
The most heavily cited NBS benefits stem from its forward-progress guarantees, its
tolerance of fail-stop bugs, and from its linearizability. Each of these is discussed in
one of the following sections.

14.2.2.1   NBS Forward Progress Guarantees
NBS’s forward-progress guarantees have caused many to suggest its use in real-time
systems, and NBS algorithms are in fact used in a great many such systems. However, it
is important to note that forward-progress guarantees are largely orthogonal to those
that form the basis of real-time programming:

   1. Real-time forward-progress guarantees usually have some definite time associated
      with them, for example, “scheduling latency must be less than 100 microseconds.”
      In contrast, the most popular forms of NBS only guarantees that progress will be
      made in finite time, with no definite bound.
   2. Real-time forward-progress guarantees are often probabilistic, as in the soft-real-
      time guarantee that “at least 99.9 % of the time, scheduling latency must be less
      than 100 microseconds.” In contrast, many of NBS’s forward-progress guarantees
      are unconditional, which can impose additional unnecessary complexity and
      performance degradation.
   3. Real-time forward-progress guarantees are often conditioned on environmental
      constraints, for example, only being honored: (1) For the highest-priority tasks,
      (2) When each CPU spends at least a certain fraction of its time idle, and
      (3) When I/O rates are below some specified maximum. In contrast, NBS’s
      forward-progress guarantees are often unconditional, again incurring unnecessary
      complexity and performance degradation. On the other hand, some recent NBS
      work accommodates some conditional guarantees [ACHS13].
   4. An important component of a real-time program’s environment is the scheduler.
      NBS algorithms assume a worst-case demonic scheduler, though for whatever

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
14.2. NON-BLOCKING SYNCHRONIZATION                                                    467

      reason, not a scheduler so demonic that it simply refuses to ever run the application
      housing the NBS algorithm. In contrast, real-time systems assume that the
      scheduler is doing its level best to satisfy any scheduling constraints it knows
      about, and, in the absence of such constraints, its level best to honor process
      priorities and to provide fair scheduling to processes of the same priority. Non-
      demonic schedulers allow real-time programs to use simpler algorithms than
      those required for NBS [ACHS13, Bra11].

   5. The progress guarantees provided by non-blocking synchronization are most
      useful in overload conditions. However, overload conditions are most likely to
      cause queueing delays that, in many real-world systems, will cause the program
      (or even the system running that program) to be terminated with prejudice. As a
      rough rule of thumb, latency increases as the reciprocal of the idle time. In other
      words, if a nearly idle system has latency 𝑇, then a 50 % idle system will have
      latency 2𝑇, a 10 % idle (90 % utilized) system will have latency 10𝑇, a 1 % idle
      system (99 % utilized) will have latency 100𝑇, and so on. This situation means
      that many latency-sensitive systems will actively limit load, for example, to 50 %.

   6. In the not-uncommon case where a given computed result is nice to have rather
      than critically important, use of timeouts can cause a blocking operation to have
      non-blocking properties that are often sufficient in practice.

   7. NBS forward-progress guarantee classes assume that a number of underlying
      operations (such as system calls) are lock-free or even wait-free, when in fact
      these operations are blocking on common-case computer systems.

   8. NBS forward-progress guarantees are often achieved by subdividing operations.
      For example, in order to avoid a blocking dequeue operation, an NBS algorithm
      might substitute a non-blocking polling operation. This is fine in theory, but not
      helpful in practice to real-world programs that require an element to propagate
      through the queue in a timely fashion.

   9. Real-time forward-progress guarantees usually apply only in the absence of
      software bugs. In contrast, many classes of NBS guarantees apply even in the
      face of fail-stop bugs, though obviously not in the face of software bugs in the
      general arbitrarily misbehaving case.

 10. NBS forward-progress guarantee classes imply linearizability. In contrast, real-
     time forward progress guarantees usually do not require ordering constraints such
     as linearizability. Once again, providing linearizability when it is not needed can
     unnecessarily increase complexity and decrease performance.

 11. Although the simpler NBS algorithms combine exemplary simplicity, forward-
     progress, guarantees, and performance, other NBS algorithms are quite complex.
     This added complexity can result in increased development and maintenance
     costs, decreased performance, and decreased reliability.

Quick Quiz 14.4: Why does anyone care about demonic schedulers?

    To reiterate, despite these differences, workarounds, and objections, a number of
NBS algorithms are extremely useful and are heavily used in practice. As always, use
the right tool for the job!

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
468                               CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

14.2.2.2   NBS Underlying Operations
An NBS algorithm can be truly non-blocking only if the underlying operations that
it uses are also non-blocking. In a surprising number of cases, this is not the case in
practice.
    For example, non-blocking algorithms often allocate memory. In theory, this is fine,
given the existence of lock-free memory allocators [Mic04b]. But in practice, most
environments must eventually obtain memory from operating-system kernels, which
commonly use locking. Therefore, unless all the memory that will ever be needed is
somehow preallocated, a “non-blocking” algorithm that allocates memory will not be
non-blocking when running on common-case real-world computer systems.
    This same point clearly also applies to algorithms performing I/O operations or
otherwise interacting with their environment.
    Perhaps surprisingly, this point also applies to ostensibly non-blocking algorithms
that do only plain loads and stores, such as the counters discussed in Section 14.2.1.2.
And at first glance, those loads and stores that can be compiled into single load and
store instructions, respectively, would seem to be not just non-blocking, but bounded
population-oblivious wait free.
    Except that load and store instructions are not necessarily either fast or deterministic.
For example, as noted in Chapter 3, cache misses can consume thousands of CPU cycles.
Worse yet, the measured cache-miss latencies can be a function of the number of CPUs,
as illustrated in Figure 5.1. It is only reasonable to assume that these latencies also
depend on the details of the system’s interconnect. In addition, given that hardware
vendors generally do not publish upper bounds for cache-miss latencies, it seems brave
to assume that memory-reference instructions are in fact wait-free in modern computer
systems. And the antique systems for which such bounds are available suffer from
profound overall slowness.
    Furthermore, hardware is not the only source of slowness for memory-reference
instructions. For example, when running on typical computer systems, both loads
and stores can result in page faults. Which cause in-kernel page-fault handlers to be
invoked. Which might acquire locks, or even do I/O, potentially even using something
like network file system (NFS). All of which are most emphatically blocking operations.
    Nor are page faults the only kernel-induced hazard. A given CPU might be
interrupted at any time, and the interrupt handler might run for some time. During this
time, the user-mode ostensibly non-blocking algorithm will not be running at all. This
situation raises interesting questions about the forward-progress guarantees provided by
system calls relying on interrupts, for example, the membarrier() system call.
    Things do look bleak, but the non-blocking nature of such algorithms can be at least
partially redeemed using a number of approaches:

   1. Run on bare metal, with paging disabled. If you are both brave and confident that
      you can write code that is free of wild-pointer bugs, this approach might be for
      you.

   2. Run on a non-blocking operating-system kernel [GC96]. Such kernels are quite
      rare, in part because they have traditionally completely failed to provide the
      hoped-for performance and scalability advantages over lock-based kernels. But
      perhaps you should write one.

   3. Use facilities such as mlockall() to avoid page faults, while also ensuring that
      your program preallocates all the memory it will ever need at boot time. This can

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
14.2. NON-BLOCKING SYNCHRONIZATION                                                       469

      work well, but at the expense of severe common-case underutilization of memory.
      In environments that are cost-constrained or power-limited, this approach is not
      likely to be feasible.

   4. Use facilities such as the Linux kernel’s NO_HZ_FULL tickless mode [Cor13].
      In recent versions of the Linux kernel, this mode directs interrupts away from
      a designated set of CPUs. However, this can sharply limit throughput for
      applications that are I/O bound during even part of their operation.

   Given these considerations, it is no surprise that non-blocking synchronization is far
more important in theory than it is in practice.

14.2.2.3   NBS Subdivided Operations
One common trick that provides a given algorithm a loftier place on the NBS ranking
is to replace blocking operations with a polling API. For example, instead of having
a reliable dequeue operation that might be merely lock-free or even blocking, instead
provide a dequeue operation that will spuriously fail in a wait-free manner rather than
exhibiting dreaded lock-free or blocking behaviors.
     This can work well in theory, but a common effect in practice is to merely move the
lock-free or blocking behavior out of that specific algorithm and into the hapless code
making use of that algorithm. In such cases, not only has nothing has been gained by
this trick, but this trick has increased the complexity of all users of this algorithm.
     With concurrent algorithms as elsewhere, maximizing a specific metric is no
substitute for thinking carefully about the needs of one’s users.

14.2.2.4   NBS Fail-Stop Tolerance
Of the classes of NBS algorithms, wait-free synchronization (bounded or otherwise), lock-
free synchronization, obstruction-free synchronization, and clash-free synchronization
guarantee forward progress even in the presence of fail-stop bugs. An example fail-stop
bug might cause some thread to be preempted indefinitely. As we will see, this fail-stop-
tolerant property can be useful, but the fact is that composing a set of fail-stop-tolerant
mechanisms does not necessarily result in a fail-stop-tolerant system. To see this,
consider a system made up of a series of wait-free queues, where an element is removed
from one queue in the series, processed, and then added to the next queue.
    If a thread is preempted in the midst of a queuing operation, in theory all is well
because the wait-free nature of the queue will guarantee forward progress. But in
practice, the element being processed is lost because the fail-stop-tolerant nature of the
wait-free queues does not extend to the code using those queues.
    Nevertheless, there are a few applications where NBS’s rather limited fail-stop-
tolerance is useful. For example, in some network-based or web applications, a fail-stop
event will eventually result in a retransmission, which will restart any work that was lost
due to the fail-stop event. Systems running such applications can therefore be heavily
loaded, even to the point where the scheduler can no longer provide any reasonable
fairness guarantee. In constrast, if a thread fail-stops while holding a lock, the application
might need to be restarted. Nevertheless, NBS is not a panacea even within this restricted
area, due to the possibility of spurious retransmissions due to pure scheduling delays.
In some cases, it may be more efficient to reduce the load to avoid queueing delays,
which will also improve the scheduler’s ability to provide fair access, reducing or even

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
470                                     CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

eliminating the fail-stop events, thus reducing the number of retry operations, in turn
further reducing the load.

14.2.2.5     NBS Linearizability
It is important to note that linearizability can be quite useful, especially when analyzing
concurrent code made up of strict locking and fully ordered atomic operations.2
Furthermore, this handling of fully ordered atomic operations automatically covers
simple NBS algorithms.
     However, the linearization points of a complex NBS algorithms are often buried deep
within that algorithm, and thus not visible to users of a library function implementing
a part of such an algorithm. Therefore, any claims that users benefit from the
linearizability properties of complex NBS algorithms should be regarded with deep
suspicion [HKLP12].
     It is sometimes asserted that linearizability is necessary for developers to produce
proofs of correctness for their concurrent code. However, such proofs are the exception
rather than the rule, and modern developers who do produce proofs often use modern
proof techniques that do not depend on linearizability. Furthermore, developers
frequently use modern proof techniques that do not require a full specification, given
that developers often learn their specification after the fact, one bug at a time. A few
such proof techniques were discussed in Chapter 12.3
     It is often asserted that linearizability maps well to sequential specifications, which
are said to be more natural than are concurrent specifications [RR20]. But this assertion
fails to account for our highly concurrent objective universe. This universe can only be
expected to select for ability to cope with concurrency, especially for those participating
in team sports or overseeing small children. In addition, given that the teaching of
sequential computing is still believed to be somewhat of a black art [PBCE20], it is
reasonable to expect that teaching of concurrent computing is in a similar state of
disarray. Therefore, focusing on only one proof technique is unlikely to be a good way
forward.
     Again, please understand that linearizability is quite useful in many situations. Then
again, so is that venerable tool, the hammer. But there comes a point in the field of
computing where one should put down the hammer and pick up a keyboard. Similarly,
it appears that there are times when linearizability is not the best tool for the job.
     To their credit, there are some linearizability advocates who are aware of some of its
shortcomings [RR20]. There are also proposals to extend linearizability, for example,
interval-linearizability, which is intended to handle the common case of operations
that require non-zero time to complete [CnRR18]. It remains to be seen whether these
proposals will result in theories able to handle modern concurrent software artifacts,
especially given that several of the proof techniques discussed in Chapter 12 already
handle many modern concurrent software artifacts.

    2 For example, the Linux kernel’s value-returning atomic operations.
    3 A memorable verbal discussion with an advocate of linearizability resulted in question:

“So the reason linearizability is important is to rescue 1980s proof techniques?” The advocate
immediately replied in the affirmative, then spent some time disparaging a particular modern
proof technique. Oddly enough, that technique was one of those successfully applied to
Linux-kernel RCU.

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                       471

14.2.3     NBS Discussion
It is possible to create fully non-blocking queues [MS96], however, such queues are
much more complex than the half-NBS algorithm outlined above. The lesson here is to
carefully consider your actual requirements. Relaxing irrelevant requirements can often
result in great improvements in simplicity, performance, and scalability.
     Recent research points to another important way to relax requirements. It turns
out that systems providing fair scheduling can enjoy most of the benefits of wait-
free synchronization even when running algorithms that provide only non-blocking
synchronization, both in theory [ACHS13] and in practice [AB13]. Because most
schedulers used in production do in fact provide fairness, the more-complex algorithms
providing wait-free synchronization usually provide no practical advantages over simpler
and faster non-wait-free algorithms.
     Interestingly enough, fair scheduling is but one beneficial constraint that is often
respected in practice. Other sets of constraints can permit blocking algorithms to
achieve deterministic real-time response. For example, given: (1) Fair locks granted
in FIFO order within a given priority level, (2) Priority inversion avoidance (for
example, priority inheritance [TS95, WTS96] or priority ceiling), (3) A bounded
number of threads, (4) Bounded critical section durations, (5) Bounded load, and
(6) Absence of fail-stop bugs, lock-based applications can provide deterministic response
times [Bra11, SM04a]. This approach of course blurs the distinction between blocking
and wait-free synchronization, which is all to the good. Hopefully theoretical frameworks
will continue to improve their ability to describe software actually used in practice.
     Those who feel that theory should lead the way are referred to the inimitable Peter
Denning, who said of operating systems: “Theory follows practice” [Den15], or to
the eminent Tony Hoare, who said of the whole of engineering: “In all branches of
engineering science, the engineering starts before the science; indeed, without the early
products of engineering, there would be nothing for the scientist to study!” [Mor07]. Of
course, once an appropriate body of theory becomes available, it is wise to make use of
it. However, note well that the first appropriate body of theory is often one thing and
the first proposed body of theory quite another.
Quick Quiz 14.5: It seems like the various members of the NBS hierarchy are rather useless.
So why bother with them at all???

   Proponents of NBS algorithms sometimes call out real-time computing as an
important NBS beneficiary. The next section looks more deeply at the forward-progress
needs of real-time systems.

14.3      Parallel Real-Time Computing

                                         One always has time enough if one applies it well.
                                                                 Johann Wolfgang von Göthe

An important emerging area in computing is that of parallel real-time computing.
Section 14.3.1 looks at a number of definitions of “real-time computing”, moving
beyond the usual sound bites to more meaningful criteria. Section 14.3.2 surveys the
sorts of applications that need real-time response. Section 14.3.3 notes that parallel real-
time computing is upon us, and discusses when and why parallel real-time computing

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
472                                 CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

can be useful. Section 14.3.4 gives a brief overview of how parallel real-time systems
may be implemented, with Sections 14.3.5 and 14.3.6 focusing on operating systems
and applications, respectively. Finally, Section 14.3.7 outlines how to decide whether or
not your application needs real-time facilities.

14.3.1     What is Real-Time Computing?
One traditional way of classifying real-time computing is into the categories of hard
real time and soft real time, where the macho hard real-time applications never miss
their deadlines, but the wimpy soft real-time applications miss their deadlines quite
often.

14.3.1.1   Soft Real Time
It should be easy to see problems with this definition of soft real time. For one thing, by
this definition, any piece of software could be said to be a soft real-time application:
“My application computes million-point Fourier transforms in half a picosecond.” “No
way!!! The clock cycle on this system is more than three hundred picoseconds!” “Ah,
but it is a soft real-time application!” If the term “soft real time” is to be of any use
whatsoever, some limits are clearly required.
     We might therefore say that a given soft real-time application must meet its response-
time requirements at least some fraction of the time, for example, we might say that it
must execute in less than 20 microseconds 99.9 % of the time.
     This of course raises the question of what is to be done when the application fails
to meet its response-time requirements. The answer varies with the application, but
one possibility is that the system being controlled has sufficient stability and inertia
to render harmless the occasional late control action. Another possibility is that the
application has two ways of computing the result, a fast and deterministic but inaccurate
method on the one hand and a very accurate method with unpredictable compute time
on the other. One reasonable approach would be to start both methods in parallel, and
if the accurate method fails to finish in time, kill it and use the answer from the fast
but inaccurate method. One candidate for the fast but inaccurate method is to take no
control action during the current time period, and another candidate is to take the same
control action as was taken during the preceding time period.
     In short, it does not make sense to talk about soft real time without some measure
of exactly how soft it is.

14.3.1.2   Hard Real Time
In contrast, the definition of hard real time is quite definite. After all, a given system
either always meets its deadlines or it doesn’t.
    Unfortunately, a strict application of this definition would mean that there can never
be any hard real-time systems. The reason for this is fancifully depicted in Figure 14.1.
And although you can always construct a more robust system, perhaps with redundancy,
your adversary can always get a bigger hammer. But don’t take my word for it: Ask the
dinosaurs.
    Then again, perhaps it is unfair to blame the software for what is clearly not just a
hardware problem, but a bona fide big-iron hardware problem at that.4 This suggests
that we define hard real-time software as software that will always meet its deadlines,
   4 Or, given modern hammers, a big-steel problem.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                             473

            Figure 14.1: Real-Time Response, Meet Hammer

           Figure 14.2: Real-Time Response: Hardware Matters

                                                                     v2025.12.18a
474                               CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

              Figure 14.3: Real-Time Response: Notification Insufficient

but only in the absence of a hardware failure. Unfortunately, failure is not always
an option, as fancifully depicted in Figure 14.2. We simply cannot expect the poor
gentleman depicted in that figure to be reassured our saying “Rest assured that if a
missed deadline results in your tragic death, it most certainly will not have been due to
a software problem!” Hard real-time response is a property of the entire system, not
just of the software.
    But if we cannot demand perfection, perhaps we can make do with notification,
similar to the soft real-time approach noted earlier. Then if the Life-a-Tron in Figure 14.2
is about to miss its deadline, it can alert the hospital staff.
    Unfortunately, this approach has the trivial solution fancifully depicted in Figure 14.3.
A system that always immediately issues a notification that it won’t be able to meet its
deadline complies with the letter of the law, but is completely useless. There clearly
must also be a requirement that the system meets its deadline some fraction of the
time, or perhaps that it be prohibited from missing its deadlines on more than a certain
number of consecutive operations.
    We clearly cannot take a sound-bite approach to either hard or soft real time. The
next section therefore takes a more real-world approach.

14.3.1.3   Real-World Real Time

Although sentences like “Hard real-time systems always meet their deadlines!” are
catchy and easy to memorize, something else is needed for real-world real-time
systems. Although the resulting specifications are harder to memorize, they can simplify
construction of a real-time system by imposing constraints on the environment, the
workload, and the real-time application itself.

Environmental Constraints Constraints on the environment address the objection to
open-ended promises of response times implied by “hard real time”. These constraints
might specify permissible operating temperatures, air quality, levels and types of
electromagnetic radiation, and, to Figure 14.1’s point, levels of shock and vibration.
    Of course, some constraints are easier to meet than others. Any number of people
have learned the hard way that commodity computer components often refuse to operate
at sub-freezing temperatures, which suggests a set of climate-control requirements.

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                           475

    An old college friend once had the challenge of operating a real-time system in an
atmosphere featuring some rather aggressive chlorine compounds, a challenge that he
wisely handed off to his colleagues designing the hardware. In effect, my colleague
imposed an atmospheric-composition constraint on the environment immediately
surrounding the computer, a constraint that the hardware designers met through use of
physical seals.
    Another old college friend worked on a computer-controlled system that sputtered
ingots of titanium using an industrial-strength arc in a vacuum. From time to time, the
arc would decide that it was bored with its path through the ingot of titanium and choose
a far shorter and more entertaining path to ground. As we all learned in our physics
classes, a sudden shift in the flow of electrons creates an electromagnetic wave, with
larger shifts in larger flows creating higher-power electromagnetic waves. And in this
case, the resulting electromagnetic pulses were sufficient to induce a quarter of a volt
potential difference in the leads of a small “rubber ducky” antenna located more than 400
meters away. This meant that nearby conductors experienced higher voltages, courtesy
of the inverse-square law. This included those conductors making up the computer
controlling the sputtering process. In particular, the voltage induced on that computer’s
reset line was sufficient to actually reset the computer, mystifying everyone involved.
This situation was addressed using hardware, including some elaborate shielding and a
fiber-optic network with the lowest bitrate I have ever heard of, namely 9600 baud. Less
spectacular electromagnetic environments can often be handled by software through
use of error detection and correction codes. That said, it is important to remember that
although error detection and correction codes can reduce failure rates, they normally
cannot reduce them all the way down to zero, which can present yet another obstacle to
achieving hard real-time response.
    There are also situations where a minimum level of energy is required, for example,
through the power leads of the system and through the devices through which the system
is to communicate with that portion of the outside world that is to be monitored or
controlled.
 Quick Quiz 14.6: But what about battery-powered systems? They don’t require energy flowing
 into the system as a whole.

    A number of systems are intended to operate in environments with impressive levels of
shock and vibration, for example, engine control systems. More strenuous requirements
may be found when we move away from continuous vibrations to intermittent shocks.
For example, during my undergraduate studies, I encountered an old Athena ballistics
computer, which was designed to continue operating normally even if a hand grenade
went off nearby.5 And finally, the “black boxes” used in airliners must continue operating
before, during, and after a crash.
    Of course, it is possible to make hardware more robust against environmental shocks
and insults. Any number of ingenious mechanical shock-absorbing devices can reduce
the effects of shock and vibration, multiple layers of shielding can reduce the effects of
low-energy electromagnetic radiation, error-correction coding can reduce the effects of
high-energy radiation, various potting and sealing techniques can reduce the effect of
air quality, and any number of heating and cooling systems can counter the effects of
temperature. In extreme cases, triple modular redundancy can reduce the probability
that a fault in one part of the system will result in incorrect behavior from the overall
    5 Decades later, the acceptance tests for some types of computer systems involve large

detonations, and some types of communications networks must deal with what is delicately
termed “ballistic jamming.”

                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
476                               CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

system. However, all of these methods have one thing in common: Although they can
reduce the probability of failure, they cannot reduce it to zero.
    These environmental challenges are often met via robust hardware, however, the
workload and application constraints in the next two sections are often handled in
software.

Workload Constraints Just as with people, it is often possible to prevent a real-time
system from meeting its deadlines by overloading it. For example, if the system is being
interrupted too frequently, it might not have sufficient CPU bandwidth to handle its
real-time application. A hardware solution to this problem might limit the rate at which
interrupts were delivered to the system. Possible software solutions include disabling
interrupts for some time if they are being received too frequently, resetting the device
generating too-frequent interrupts, or even avoiding interrupts altogether in favor of
polling.
    Overloading can also degrade response times due to queueing effects, so it is not
unusual for real-time systems to overprovision CPU bandwidth, so that a running system
has (say) 80 % idle time. This approach also applies to storage and networking devices.
In some cases, separate storage and networking hardware might be reserved for the sole
use of high-priority portions of the real-time application. In short, it is not unusual
for this hardware to be mostly idle, given that response time is more important than
throughput in real-time systems.
Quick Quiz 14.7: But given the results from queueing theory, won’t low utilization merely
improve the average response time rather than improving the worst-case response time? And
isn’t worst-case response time all that most real-time systems really care about?

    Of course, maintaining sufficiently low utilization requires great discipline through-
out the design and implementation. There is nothing quite like a little feature creep to
destroy deadlines.

Application Constraints It is easier to provide bounded response time for some
operations than for others. For example, it is quite common to see response-time
specifications for interrupts and for wake-up operations, but quite rare for (say) filesystem
unmount operations. One reason for this is that it is quite difficult to bound the amount
of work that a filesystem-unmount operation might need to do, given that the unmount
is required to flush all of that filesystem’s in-memory data to mass storage.
     This means that real-time applications must be confined to operations for which
bounded latencies can reasonably be provided. Other operations must either be pushed
out into the non-real-time portions of the application or forgone entirely.
     There might also be constraints on the non-real-time portions of the application.
For example, is the non-real-time application permitted to use the CPUs intended for
the real-time portion? Are there time periods during which the real-time portion of the
application is expected to be unusually busy, and if so, is the non-real-time portion of
the application permitted to run at all during those times? Finally, by what amount
is the real-time portion of the application permitted to degrade the throughput of the
non-real-time portion?

Real-World Real-Time Specifications As can be seen from the preceding sections,
a real-world real-time specification needs to include constraints on the environment,
on the workload, and on the application itself. In addition, for the operations that the

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                           477

real-time portion of the application is permitted to make use of, there must be constraints
on the hardware and software implementing those operations.
    For each such operation, these constraints might include a maximum response time
(and possibly also a minimum response time) and a probability of meeting that response
time. A probability of 100 % indicates that the corresponding operation must provide
hard real-time service.
    In some cases, both the response times and the required probabilities of meeting
them might vary depending on the parameters to the operation in question. For example,
a network operation over a local LAN would be much more likely to complete in (say)
100 microseconds than would that same network operation over a transcontinental
WAN. Furthermore, a network operation over a copper or fiber LAN might have an
extremely high probability of completing without time-consuming retransmissions,
while that same networking operation over a lossy WiFi network might have a much
higher probability of missing tight deadlines. Similarly, a read from a tightly coupled
solid-state disk (SSD) could be expected to complete much more quickly than that same
read to an old-style USB-connected rotating-rust disk drive.6
    Some real-time applications pass through different phases of operation. For example,
a real-time system controlling a plywood lathe that peels a thin sheet of wood (called
“veneer”) from a spinning log must: (1) Load the log into the lathe, (2) Position the log
on the lathe’s chucks so as to expose the largest cylinder contained within that log to
the blade, (3) Start spinning the log, (4) Continuously vary the knife’s position so as
to peel the log into veneer, (5) Remove the remaining core of the log that is too small
to peel, and (6) Wait for the next log. Each of these six phases of operation might
well have its own set of deadlines and environmental constraints, for example, one
would expect phase 4’s deadlines to be much more severe than those of phase 6, as in
milliseconds rather than seconds. One might therefore expect that low-priority work
would be performed in phase 6 rather than in phase 4. In any case, careful choices of
hardware, drivers, and software configuration would be required to support phase 4’s
more severe requirements.
    A key advantage of this phase-by-phase approach is that the latency budgets
can be broken down, so that the application’s various components can be developed
independently, each with its own latency budget. Of course, as with any other kind of
budget, there will likely be the occasional conflict as to which component gets which
fraction of the overall budget, and as with any other kind of budget, strong leadership
and a sense of shared goals can help to resolve these conflicts in a timely fashion. And,
again as with other kinds of technical budget, a strong validation effort is required in
order to ensure proper focus on latencies and to give early warning of latency problems.
A successful validation effort will almost always include a good test suite, which might
be unsatisfying to the theorists, but has the virtue of helping to get the job done. As a
point of fact, as of early 2021, most real-world real-time system use an acceptance test
rather than formal proofs.
    However, the widespread use of test suites to validate real-time systems does have
a very real disadvantage, namely that real-time software is validated only on specific
configurations of hardware and software. Adding additional configurations requires
additional costly and time-consuming testing. Perhaps the field of formal verification

     6 Important safety tip: Worst-case response times from USB devices can be extremely

long. Real-time systems should therefore take care to place any USB devices well away from
critical paths.

                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
478                                 CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

will advance sufficiently to change this situation, but as of early 2021, rather large
advances are required.
Quick Quiz 14.8: Formal verification is already quite capable, benefiting from decades of
intensive study. Are additional advances really required, or is this just a practitioner’s excuse to
continue to lazily ignore the awesome power of formal verification?

    In addition to latency requirements for the real-time portions of the application,
there will likely be performance and scalability requirements for the non-real-time
portions of the application. These additional requirements reflect the fact that ultimate
real-time latencies are often attained by degrading scalability and average performance.
    Software-engineering requirements can also be important, especially for large
applications that must be developed and maintained by large teams. These requirements
often favor increased modularity and fault isolation.
    This is a mere outline of the work that would be required to specify deadlines and
environmental constraints for a production real-time system. It is hoped that this outline
clearly demonstrates the inadequacy of the sound-bite-based approach to real-time
computing.

14.3.2     Who Needs Real-Time?
It is possible to argue that all computing is in fact real-time computing. For one
example, when you purchase a birthday gift online, you expect the gift to arrive
before the recipient’s birthday. And in fact even turn-of-the-millennium web services
observed sub-second response constraints [Boh01], and requirements have not eased
with the passage of time [DHJ+ 07]. It is nevertheless useful to focus on those real-time
applications whose response-time requirements cannot be achieved straightforwardly
by non-real-time systems and applications. Of course, as hardware costs decrease and
bandwidths and memory sizes increase, the line between real-time and non-real-time
will continue to shift, but such progress is by no means a bad thing.
Quick Quiz 14.9: Differentiating real-time from non-real-time based on what can “be achieved
straightforwardly by non-real-time systems and applications” is a travesty! There is absolutely
no theoretical basis for such a distinction!!! Can’t we do better than that???

     Real-time computing is used in industrial-control applications, ranging from manu-
facturing to avionics; scientific applications, perhaps most spectacularly in the adaptive
optics used by large Earth-bound telescopes to de-twinkle starlight; military applications,
including the afore-mentioned avionics; and financial-services applications, where the
first computer to recognize an opportunity is likely to reap most of the profit. These
four areas could be characterized as “in search of production”, “in search of life”, “in
search of death”, and “in search of money”.
     Financial-services applications differ subtly from applications in the other three
categories in that money is non-material, meaning that non-computational latencies
are quite small. In contrast, mechanical delays inherent in the other three categories
provide a very real point of diminishing returns beyond which further reductions in the
application’s real-time response provide little or no benefit. This means that financial-
services applications, along with other real-time information-processing applications,
face an arms race, where the application with the lowest latencies normally wins.
Although the resulting latency requirements can still be specified as described in
Paragraph “Real-World Real-Time Specifications” on Page 476, the unusual nature

                                                                                                       v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                     479

                      Stimulus
                                      Hard                  Non-Real-Time
                                    Real-Time                  Strategy
                      Response      "Reflexes"                and Planning

                            Figure 14.4: Real-Time Reflexes

of these requirements has led some to refer to financial and information-processing
applications as “low latency” rather than “real time”.
    Regardless of exactly what we choose to call it, there is substantial need for real-time
computing [Pet06, Inm07].

14.3.3     Who Needs Parallel Real-Time?
It is less clear who really needs parallel real-time computing, but the advent of
low-cost multicore systems has brought it to the fore regardless. Unfortunately, the
traditional mathematical basis for real-time computing assumes single-CPU systems,
with a few exceptions that prove the rule [Bra11]. Fortunately, there are a couple
of ways of squaring modern computing hardware to fit the real-time mathematical
circle, and a few Linux-kernel hackers have been encouraging academics to make this
transition [dOCdO19, Gle10].
    One approach is to recognize the fact that many real-time systems resemble
biological nervous systems, with responses ranging from real-time reflexes to non-real-
time strategizing and planning, as depicted in Figure 14.4. The hard real-time reflexes,
which read from sensors and control actuators, run real-time on a single CPU or on
special-purpose hardware such as an FPGA. The non-real-time strategy and planning
portion of the application runs on the remaining CPUs. Strategy and planning activities
might include statistical analysis, periodic calibration, user interface, supply-chain
activities, and preparation. For an example of high-compute-load preparation activities,
think back to the veneer-peeling application discussed in Paragraph “Real-World Real-
Time Specifications” on Page 476. While one CPU is attending to the high-speed
real-time computations required to peel one log, the other CPUs might be analyzing the
size and shape of the next log in order to determine how to position the next log so as to
obtain the largest cylinder of high-quality wood. It turns out that many applications have
non-real-time and real-time components [BMP08], so this approach can often be used
to allow traditional real-time analysis to be combined with modern multicore hardware.
    Another trivial approach is to shut off all but one hardware thread so as to return to
the settled mathematics of uniprocessor real-time computing. However, this approach
gives up potential cost and energy-efficiency advantages. That said, obtaining these
advantages requires overcoming the parallel performance obstacles covered in Chapter 3,
and not merely on average, but instead in the worst case.
    Implementing parallel real-time systems can therefore be quite a challenge. Ways of
meeting this challenge are outlined in the following section.

14.3.4     Implementing Parallel Real-Time Systems
We will look at two major styles of real-time systems, event-driven and polling. An
event-driven real-time system remains idle much of the time, responding in real time
to events passed up through the operating system to the application. Alternatively,

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
480                               CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

                                        Scripting languages             1s
                                                                    100 ms
                                          Linux 2.4 kernel
                                                                     10 ms
                                     Real-time Java (with GC)
                                                                      1 ms
                                      Linux 2.6.x/3.x kernel
                                      Real-time Java (no GC)
                                        Linux 4.x/5.x kernel         100 μs
                                         Linux -rt patchset
                                                                      10 μs
                                    Specialty RTOSes (no MMU)
                                                                       1 μs
                                       Hand-coded assembly
                                                                     100 ns
                                      Custom digital hardware
                                                                      10 ns
                                                                       1 ns

                                      Custom analog hardware         100 ps

                       Figure 14.5: Real-Time Response Regimes

the system could instead be running a background non-real-time workload. A polling
real-time system features a real-time thread that is CPU bound, running in a tight loop
that polls inputs and updates outputs on each pass. This tight polling loop often executes
entirely in user mode, reading from and writing to hardware registers that have been
mapped into the user-mode application’s address space. Alternatively, some applications
place the polling loop into the kernel, for example, using loadable kernel modules.
    Regardless of the style chosen, the approach used to implement a real-time system
will depend on the deadlines, for example, as shown in Figure 14.5. Starting from the
top of this figure, if you can live with response times in excess of one second, you might
well be able to use scripting languages to implement your real-time application—and
scripting languages are in fact used surprisingly often, not that I necessarily recommend
this practice. If the required latencies exceed several tens of milliseconds, old 2.4
versions of the Linux kernel can be used, not that I necessarily recommend this practice,
either. Special real-time Java implementations can provide real-time response latencies
of a few milliseconds, even when the garbage collector is used. The Linux 2.6.x and 3.x
kernels can provide real-time latencies of a few hundred microseconds if painstakingly
configured, tuned, and run on real-time-friendly hardware. Special real-time Java
implementations can provide real-time latencies below 100 microseconds if use of the
garbage collector is carefully avoided. (But note that avoiding the garbage collector
means also avoiding Java’s large standard libraries, thus also avoiding Java’s productivity
advantages.) The Linux 4.x and 5.x kernels can provide sub-hundred-microsecond
latencies, but with all the same caveats as for the 2.6.x and 3.x kernels. A Linux kernel
incorporating the -rt patchset can provide latencies well below 20 microseconds, and
specialty real-time operating systems (RTOSes) running without MMUs can provide
sub-ten-microsecond latencies. Achieving sub-microsecond latencies typically requires
hand-coded assembly or even special-purpose hardware.
    Of course, careful configuration and tuning are required all the way down the stack. In
particular, if the hardware or firmware fails to provide real-time latencies, there is nothing
that the software can do to make up for the lost time. Worse yet, high-performance
hardware sometimes sacrifices worst-case behavior to obtain greater throughput. In
fact, timings from tight loops run with interrupts disabled can provide the basis for a
high-quality random-number generator [MOZ09]. Furthermore, some firmware does
cycle-stealing to carry out various housekeeping tasks, in some cases attempting to
cover its tracks by reprogramming the victim CPU’s hardware clocks. Of course, cycle

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                                                                                      481

                          RTOS Process
                                         RTOS Process
                                                        Linux Process
                                                                        Linux Process
                                                                                        Linux Process
                                                                                                        Linux Process

                                                                                                                        Linux Process
                                                                                                                                        Linux Process
                                                                                                          RCU read-side
                                                                Linux                                     critical sections

                                                                Kernel                                         Spinlock
                                                                                                          critical sections
                                                                                                        Interrupt handlers
                                                                    Scheduling
                                                                       Clock                             Interrupt disable
                                                                     Interrupt                           Preempt disable

                                                                        RTOS

                         Figure 14.6: Linux Ported to RTOS

stealing is expected behavior in virtualized environment, but people are nevertheless
working towards real-time response in virtualized environments [Gle12, Kis14]. It
is therefore critically important to evaluate your hardware’s and firmware’s real-time
capabilities.
     But given competent real-time hardware and firmware, the next layer up the stack is
the operating system, which is covered in the next section.

14.3.5    Implementing Parallel Real-Time Operating Systems
There are a number of strategies that may be used to implement a real-time system. One
approach is to port a general-purpose non-real-time OS on top of a special purpose
real-time operating system (RTOS), as shown in Figure 14.6. The green “Linux Process”
boxes represent non-real-time processes running on the Linux kernel, while the yellow
“RTOS Process” boxes represent real-time processes running on the RTOS.
    This was a very popular approach before the Linux kernel gained real-time capa-
bilities, and is still in use [xen14, Yod04b]. However, this approach requires that the
application be split into one portion that runs on the RTOS and another that runs on
Linux. Although it is possible to make the two environments look similar, for example,
by forwarding POSIX system calls from the RTOS to a utility thread running on Linux,
there are invariably rough edges.
    In addition, the RTOS must interface to both the hardware and to the Linux kernel,
thus requiring significant maintenance with changes in both hardware and kernel.
Furthermore, each such RTOS often has its own system-call interface and set of system
libraries, which can balkanize both ecosystems and developers. In fact, these problems
seem to be what drove the combination of RTOSes with Linux, as this approach allowed
access to the full real-time capabilities of the RTOS, while allowing the application’s
non-real-time code full access to Linux’s open-source ecosystem.
    Although pairing RTOSes with the Linux kernel was a clever and useful short-term
response during the time that the Linux kernel had minimal real-time capabilities, it
also motivated adding real-time capabilities to the Linux kernel. Progress towards this

                                                                                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
482                                                                                                            CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

                                                                                                                                                                             RT Linux Process

                                                                                                                                                                                                    RT Linux Process
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RT Linux Process
                                                                                                                  Linux Process
                                                                                                                                     Linux Process
                                                                                                                                                         Linux Process
                                                                                                                                                                                 RCU read-side
                                                                                                                           Linux                                                 critical sections

                                                                                                                           Kernel                                                     Spinlock
                                                                                                                                                                                 critical sections
                                                                                                                                                                            Interrupt handlers
                                                                                                                               Scheduling
                                                                                                                                  Clock                                        Interrupt disable
                                                                                                                                Interrupt                                      Preempt disable

                                                                                                                     CONFIG_PREEMPT=n
                                                      RT Linux Process
                                                                         RT Linux Process
                                                                                            RT Linux Process

                                                                                                                                                                         RT Linux Process

                                                                                                                                                                                                RT Linux Process
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RT Linux Process

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RT Linux Process
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RT Linux Process

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RT Linux Process
      Linux Process
                      Linux Process
                                      Linux Process

                                                                                                               Linux Process

                                                                                                                                  Linux Process

                                                                                                                                                      Linux Process

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Linux Process

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Linux Process
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Linux Process
                                                         RCU read-side                                                                                                      RCU read-side                                                                                                        RCU read-side
              Linux                                      critical sections                                             Linux                                                critical sections                                                         Linux                                      critical sections

              Kernel                                          Spinlock
                                                         critical sections
                                                                                                                       Kernel                                                    Spinlock
                                                                                                                                                                            critical sections
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kernel                                          Spinlock
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 critical sections
                                                      Interrupt handlers                                                                                                 Interrupt handlers                                                                                                   Interrupt handlers
                  Scheduling                                                                                               Scheduling                                                                                                                     Scheduling
                     Clock                              Interrupt disable                                                     Clock                                        Interrupt disable                                                                 Clock                              Interrupt disable
                   Interrupt                           Preempt disable                                                      Interrupt                                     Preempt disable                                                                  Interrupt                           Preempt disable

         CONFIG_PREEMPT=y                                                                                        CONFIG_PREEMPT=y                                                                                                                 CONFIG_PREEMPT=y
              Pre-2008                                                                                           (With preemptible RCU)                                                                                                          (With threaded interrupts)
                                                                                                                                                                             RT Linux Process
                                                                                                                                                                                                    RT Linux Process
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RT Linux Process
                                                                                                                  Linux Process
                                                                                                                                     Linux Process
                                                                                                                                                         Linux Process

                                                                                                                                                                                 RCU read-side
                                                                                                                           Linux                                                 critical sections

                                                                                                                           Kernel                                                     Spinlock
                                                                                                                                                                                 critical sections
                                                                                                                                                                            Interrupt handlers
                                                                                                                               Scheduling
                                                                                                                                  Clock                                        Interrupt disable
                                                                                                                                Interrupt                                      Preempt disable

                                                                                                                                                     -rt patchset

                                                  Figure 14.7: Linux-Kernel Real-Time Implementations

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                     483

goal is shown in Figure 14.7. The upper row shows a diagram of the Linux kernel with
preemption disabled, thus having essentially no real-time capabilities. The middle row
shows a set of diagrams showing the increasing real-time capabilities of the mainline
Linux kernel with preemption enabled. Finally, the bottom row shows a diagram
of the Linux kernel with the -rt patchset applied, maximizing real-time capabilities.
Functionality from the -rt patchset is added to mainline, hence the increasing capabilities
of the mainline Linux kernel over time. Nevertheless, the most demanding real-time
applications continue to use the -rt patchset.
    The non-preemptible kernel shown at the top of Figure 14.7 is built with CONFIG_
PREEMPT=n, so that execution within the Linux kernel cannot be preempted. This means
that the kernel’s real-time response latency is bounded below by the longest code path in
the Linux kernel, which is indeed long. However, user-mode execution is preemptible,
so that one of the real-time Linux processes shown in the upper right may preempt any
of the non-real-time Linux processes shown in the upper left anytime the non-real-time
process is executing in user mode.
    The middle row of Figure 14.7 shows three stages (from left to right) in the
development of Linux’s preemptible kernels. In all three stages, most process-level code
within the Linux kernel can be preempted. This of course greatly improves real-time
response latency, but preemption is still disabled within RCU read-side critical sections,
spinlock critical sections, interrupt handlers, interrupt-disabled code regions, and
preempt-disabled code regions, as indicated by the red boxes in the left-most diagram in
the middle row of the figure. The advent of preemptible RCU allowed RCU read-side
critical sections to be preempted, as shown in the central diagram, and the advent of
threaded interrupt handlers allowed device-interrupt handlers to be preempted, as shown
in the right-most diagram. Of course, a great deal of other real-time functionality was
added during this time, however, it cannot be as easily represented on this diagram. It
will instead be discussed in Section 14.3.5.1.
    The bottom row of Figure 14.7 shows the -rt patchset, which features threaded
(and thus preemptible) interrupt handlers for many devices, which also allows the
corresponding “interrupt-disabled” regions of these drivers to be preempted. These
drivers instead use locking to coordinate the process-level portions of each driver with its
threaded interrupt handlers. Finally, in some cases, disabling of preemption is replaced
by disabling of migration. These measures result in excellent response times in many
systems running the -rt patchset [RMF19, dOCdO19].
    A final approach is simply to get everything out of the way of the real-time process,
clearing all other processing off of any CPUs that this process needs, as shown in
Figure 14.8. This was implemented in the 3.10 Linux kernel via the CONFIG_NO_HZ_
FULL Kconfig parameter [Cor13, Wei12]. It is important to note that this approach
requires at least one housekeeping CPU to do background processing, for example
running kernel daemons. However, when there is only one runnable task on a given
non-housekeeping CPU, scheduling-clock interrupts are shut off on that CPU, removing
an important source of interference and OS jitter. With a few exceptions, the kernel
does not force other processing off of the non-housekeeping CPUs, but instead simply
provides better performance when only one runnable task is present on a given CPU. Any
number of userspace tools may be used to force a given CPU to have no more that one
runnable task. If configured properly, a non-trivial undertaking, CONFIG_NO_HZ_FULL
offers real-time threads levels of performance that come close to those of bare-metal
systems [ACA+ 18]. Frédéric Weisbecker produced a practical guide to CONFIG_NO_
HZ_FULL configuration [Wei22d, Wei22b, Wei22e, Wei22c, Wei22a, Wei22f].

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
484                                                     CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

                                                                         RT Linux Process
                                                                                            RT Linux Process
                                                                                                               RT Linux Process
                        Linux Process

                                        Linux Process

                                                         Linux Process

                                                                                                                                  NO_HZ_FULL Linux Process

                                                                                                                                                             NO_HZ_FULL Linux Process
                                                                            RCU read-side
                                Linux                                       critical sections

                                Kernel                                           Spinlock
                                                                            critical sections
                                                                         Interrupt handlers
                                    Scheduling
                                       Clock                               Interrupt disable
                                     Interrupt                            Preempt disable

                                          Figure 14.8: CPU Isolation

    The CONFIG_NO_HZ_FULL approach focuses primarily on reducing jitter from
scheduling clock interrupts, which is the major concern for many workloads. However,
ever-increasing CPU counts mean that it is increasingly advantageous to run real-time
and non-realtime applications on a single system at the same time. These non-realtime
systems are likely to need to remap memory, and worse yet the kernel may also need to
remap kernel memory on their behalf. This will result in TLB-flush IPIs being sent to
all CPUs, including the nohz_full CPUs, which will induce undesirable jitter on the
real-time workload.
    These TLB-flush IPIs can be avoided on architectures such as ARM and PowerPC that
provide machine instructions that flush other CPUs’ TLBs, but even on these architectures,
CPUs will still be subject to IPIs due to scheduling events, the smp_text_poke() IPIs
supporting in-kernel self-modifying code, the Linux-kernel smp_call_function()
and irq_queue_work() primitives, and much else besides. Schneider [Sch25] is
working on IPIs that do not affect userspace execution, deferring them until the next
kernel entry. This work currently features the smp_text_poke() IPIs supporting in-
kernel self-modifying code. Work has also started on the more challenging IPIs flushing
kernel TLBs, which are still needed for systems not providing off-CPU TLB-flush
machine instructions.
    However, even when the entire system is dedicated to the real-time application,
the most aggressive real-time applications would be best served by deferring or
otherwise preventing all IPIs. Zhou et al. [ZLZ+ 25] therefore propose placing yet more
housekeeping responsibility onto the real-time application. In their approach, all IPIs to
CPUs running real-time applications are deferred until that application reaches a safe
point where those IPIs’ latencies can be tolerated. The application then calls into the
kernel, which processes those deferred IPIs.
    This last approach might be criticized as having some serious usability issues, but it
achieves 0.5-microsecond latencies, which constitutes an improvement of more than an
order of magnitude over the best latencies reported for Linux-kernel real-time systems.
For some users, this improvement will more than justify the additional effort and care

                                                                                                                                                                                        v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                    485

required by this approach. Other users might wish to contribute to, or at least encourage,
Schneider’s IPI-deferral work.
    There has of course been much debate over which of these approaches is best for real-
time systems, and this debate has been going on for quite some time [Cor04a, Cor04c].
As usual, the answer seems to be “It depends,” as discussed in the following sections.
Section 14.3.5.1 considers event-driven real-time systems, and Section 14.3.5.2 considers
real-time systems that use a CPU-bound polling loop.

14.3.5.1    Event-Driven Real-Time Support
The operating-system support required for event-driven real-time applications is quite
extensive, however, this section will focus on only a few items, namely timers, threaded
interrupts, priority inheritance, preemptible RCU, and preemptible spinlocks.

Timers are clearly critically important for real-time operations. After all, if you
cannot specify that something be done at a specific time, how are you going to respond
by that time? Even in non-real-time systems, large numbers of timers are generated,
so they must be handled extremely efficiently. Example uses include retransmit timers
for TCP connections (which are almost always canceled before they have a chance to
fire),7 timed delays (as in sleep(1), which are rarely canceled), and timeouts for the
poll() system call (which are often canceled before they have a chance to fire). A
good data structure for such timers would therefore be a priority queue whose addition
and deletion primitives were fast and O (1) in the number of timers posted.
     The classic data structure for this purpose is the calendar queue, which in the Linux
kernel is called the timer wheel. This age-old data structure is also heavily used in
discrete-event simulation. The idea is that time is quantized, for example, in the Linux
kernel, the duration of the time quantum is the period of the scheduling-clock interrupt.
A given time can be represented by an integer, and any attempt to post a timer at some
non-integral time will be rounded to a convenient nearby integral time quantum.
     One straightforward implementation would be to allocate a single array, indexed by
the low-order bits of the time. This works in theory, but in practice systems create large
numbers of long-duration timeouts (for example, the two-hour keepalive timeouts for
TCP sessions) that are almost always canceled. These long-duration timeouts cause
problems for small arrays because much time is wasted skipping timeouts that have not
yet expired. On the other hand, an array that is large enough to gracefully accommodate
a large number of long-duration timeouts would consume too much memory, especially
given that performance and scalability concerns require one such array for each and
every CPU.
     A common approach for resolving this conflict is to provide multiple arrays in a
hierarchy. At the lowest level of this hierarchy, each array element represents one unit
of time. At the second level, each array element represents 𝑁 units of time, where 𝑁 is
the number of elements in each array. At the third level, each array element represents
𝑁 2 units of time, and so on up the hierarchy. This approach allows the individual arrays
to be indexed by different bits, as illustrated by Figure 14.9 for an unrealistically small
eight-bit clock. Here, each array has 16 elements, so the low-order four bits of the time
(currently 0xf) index the low-order (rightmost) array, and the next four bits (currently
0x1) index the next level up. Thus, we have two arrays each with 16 elements, for a

   7 At least assuming reasonably low packet-loss rates!

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
486                               CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

                                            0x              x0
                                            1x              x1
                                            2x              x2
                                            3x              x3
                                            4x              x4
                                            5x              x5
                                            6x              x6
                                            7x              x7
                                            8x              x8
                                            9x              x9
                                            ax              xa
                                            bx              xb
                                            cx              xc
                                            dx              xd
                                            ex              xe
                                             fx             xf

                            1f

                                 Figure 14.9: Timer Wheel

total of 32 elements, which, taken together, is much smaller than the 256-element array
that would be required for a single array.
    This approach works extremely well for throughput-based systems. Each timer
operation is O (1) with small constant, and each timer element is touched at most 𝑚 + 1
times, where 𝑚 is the number of levels.
    Unfortunately, timer wheels do not work well for real-time systems, and for two
reasons. The first reason is that there is a harsh tradeoff between timer accuracy and timer
overhead, which is fancifully illustrated by Figures 14.10 and 14.11. In Figure 14.10,
timer processing happens only once per millisecond, which keeps overhead acceptably
low for many (but not all!) workloads, but which also means that timeouts cannot
be set for finer than one-millisecond granularities. On the other hand, Figure 14.11
shows timer processing taking place every ten microseconds, which provides acceptably
fine timer granularity for most (but not all!) workloads, but which processes timers so
frequently that the system might well not have time to do anything else.
    The second reason is the need to cascade timers from higher levels to lower levels.
Referring back to Figure 14.9, we can see that any timers enqueued on element 1x in
the upper (leftmost) array must be cascaded down to the lower (rightmost) array so
that may be invoked when their time arrives. Unfortunately, there could be a large
number of timeouts waiting to be cascaded, especially for timer wheels with larger
numbers of levels. The power of statistics causes this cascading to be a non-problem for
throughput-oriented systems, but cascading can result in problematic degradations of
latency in real-time systems.
    Of course, real-time systems could simply choose a different data structure, for
example, some form of heap or tree, giving up O (1) bounds on insertion and deletion
operations to gain O (log 𝑛) limits on data-structure-maintenance operations. This can
be a good choice for special-purpose RTOSes, but is inefficient for general-purpose
systems such as Linux, which routinely support extremely large numbers of timers.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                     487

                 Figure 14.10: Timer Wheel at 1 kHz

                Figure 14.11: Timer Wheel at 100 kHz

                                                             v2025.12.18a
488                              CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

                                                          Return From
                     Interrupt                             Interrupt      Mainline
        Mainline
                                    Interrupt Handler
         Code                                                              Code

                                      Long Latency:
                                 Degrades Response Time

                    Figure 14.12: Non-Threaded Interrupt Handler

    The solution chosen for the Linux kernel’s -rt patchset is to differentiate between
timers that schedule later activity and timeouts that schedule error handling for low-
probability errors such as TCP packet losses. One key observation is that error handling
is normally not particularly time-critical, so that a timer wheel’s millisecond-level
granularity is good and sufficient. Another key observation is that error-handling
timeouts are normally canceled very early, often before they can be cascaded. In
addition, systems commonly have many more error-handling timeouts than they do
timer events, so that an O (log 𝑛) data structure should provide acceptable performance
for timer events.
    However, it is possible to do better, namely by simply refusing to cascade timers.
Instead of cascading, the timers that would otherwise have been cascaded all the way
down the calendar queue are handled in place. This does result in up to a few percent
error for the time duration, but the few situations where this is a problem can instead
use tree-based high-resolution timers (hrtimers).
    In short, the Linux kernel’s -rt patchset uses timer wheels for error-handling timeouts
and a tree for timer events, providing each category the required quality of service.

Threaded interrupts are used to address a significant source of degraded real-time
latencies, namely long-running interrupt handlers, as shown in Figure 14.12. These
latencies can be especially problematic for devices that can deliver a large number of
events with a single interrupt, which means that the interrupt handler will run for an
extended period of time processing all of these events. Worse yet are devices that can
deliver new events to a still-running interrupt handler, as such an interrupt handler might
well run indefinitely, thus indefinitely degrading real-time latencies.
    One way of addressing this problem is the use of threaded interrupts shown in
Figure 14.13. Interrupt handlers run in the context of a preemptible IRQ thread, which
runs at a configurable priority. The device interrupt handler then runs for only a short
time, just long enough to make the IRQ thread aware of the new event. As shown in
the figure, threaded interrupts can greatly improve real-time latencies, in part because
interrupt handlers running in the context of the IRQ thread may be preempted by
high-priority real-time threads.
    However, there is no such thing as a free lunch, and there are downsides to threaded
interrupts. One downside is increased interrupt latency. Instead of immediately running
the interrupt handler, the handler’s execution is deferred until the IRQ thread gets around
to running it. Of course, this is not a problem unless the device generating the interrupt
is on the real-time application’s critical path.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                          489

                                             Return From

                                 Interrupt
                     Interrupt                Interrupt    Mainline
       Mainline
        Code                                                Code              Preemptible
                                                                              IRQ Thread

                                                                      Interrupt Handler

                            Short Latency:
                       Improved Response Time

                      Figure 14.13: Threaded Interrupt Handler

    Another downside is that poorly written high-priority real-time code might starve
the interrupt handler, for example, preventing networking code from running, in turn
making it very difficult to debug the problem. Developers must therefore take great
care when writing high-priority real-time code. This has been dubbed the Spiderman
principle: With great power comes great responsibility.

Priority inheritance is used to handle priority inversion, which can be caused by,
among other things, locks acquired by preemptible interrupt handlers [SRL90]. Suppose
that a low-priority thread holds a lock, but is preempted by a group of medium-priority
threads, at least one such thread per CPU. If an interrupt occurs, a high-priority IRQ
thread will preempt one of the medium-priority threads, but only until it decides to
acquire the lock held by the low-priority thread. Unfortunately, the low-priority thread
cannot release the lock until it starts running, which the medium-priority threads prevent
it from doing. So the high-priority IRQ thread cannot acquire the lock until after one of
the medium-priority threads releases its CPU. In short, the medium-priority threads are
indirectly blocking the high-priority IRQ threads, a classic case of priority inversion.
     Note that this priority inversion could not happen with non-threaded interrupts
because the low-priority thread would have to disable interrupts while holding the lock,
which would prevent the medium-priority threads from preempting it.
     In the priority-inheritance solution, the high-priority thread attempting to acquire
the lock donates its priority to the low-priority thread holding the lock until such time
as the lock is released, thus preventing long-term priority inversion.
     Of course, priority inheritance does have its limitations. For example, if you
can design your application to avoid priority inversion entirely, you will likely obtain
somewhat better latencies [Yod04b]. This should be no surprise, given that priority
inheritance adds a pair of context switches to the worst-case latency. That said, priority
inheritance can convert indefinite postponement into a limited increase in latency, and
the software-engineering benefits of priority inheritance may outweigh its latency costs
in many applications.
     Another limitation is that it addresses only lock-based priority inversions within
the context of a given operating system. One priority-inversion scenario that it cannot
address is a high-priority thread waiting on a network socket for a message that is
to be written by a low-priority process that is preempted by a set of CPU-bound

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
490                               CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

                    Figure 14.14: Priority Inversion and User Input

medium-priority processes. In addition, a potential disadvantage of applying priority
inheritance to user input is fancifully depicted in Figure 14.14.
    A final limitation involves reader-writer locking. Suppose that we have a very large
number of low-priority threads, perhaps even thousands of them, each of which read-
holds a particular reader-writer lock. Suppose that all of these threads are preempted by
a set of medium-priority threads, with at least one medium-priority thread per CPU.
Finally, suppose that a high-priority thread awakens and attempts to write-acquire this
same reader-writer lock. No matter how vigorously we boost the priority of the threads
read-holding this lock, it could well be a good long time before the high-priority thread
can complete its write-acquisition.
    There are a number of possible solutions to this reader-writer lock priority-inversion
conundrum:

   1. Only allow one read-acquisition of a given reader-writer lock at a time. (This is
      the approach traditionally taken by the Linux kernel’s -rt patchset.)

   2. Only allow 𝑁 read-acquisitions of a given reader-writer lock at a time, where 𝑁
      is the number of CPUs.

   3. Only allow 𝑁 read-acquisitions of a given reader-writer lock at a time, where 𝑁
      is a number specified somehow by the developer.

   4. Prohibit high-priority threads from write-acquiring reader-writer locks that are
      ever read-acquired by threads running at lower priorities. (This is a variant of the
      priority ceiling protocol [SRL90].)

Quick Quiz 14.10: But if you only allow one reader at a time to read-acquire a reader-writer
lock, isn’t that the same as an exclusive lock???

    The no-concurrent-readers restriction eventually became intolerable, so the -rt
developers looked more carefully at how the Linux kernel uses reader-writer spinlocks.
They learned that time-critical code rarely uses those parts of the kernel that write-acquire
reader-writer locks, so that the prospect of writer starvation was not a show-stopper.
They therefore constructed a real-time reader-writer lock in which write-side acquisitions
use priority inheritance among each other, but where read-side acquisitions take absolute
priority over write-side acquisitions. This approach appears to be working well in

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                        491

Listing 14.3: Preemptible Linux-Kernel RCU
1    void __rcu_read_lock(void)
2    {
3            current->rcu_read_lock_nesting++;
4            barrier();
5    }
6
7    void __rcu_read_unlock(void)
8    {
9            barrier();
10           if (!--current->rcu_read_lock_nesting)
11                   barrier();
12                   if (READ_ONCE(current->rcu_read_unlock_special.s)) {
13                           rcu_read_unlock_special(t);
14                   }
15   }

practice, and is another lesson in the importance of clearly understanding what your
users really need.
    One interesting detail of this implementation is that both the rt_read_lock() and
the rt_write_lock() functions enter an RCU read-side critical section and both the
rt_read_unlock() and the rt_write_unlock() functions exit that critical section.
This is necessary because non-realtime kernels’ reader-writer locking functions disable
preemption across their critical sections, and there really are reader-writer locking
use cases that rely on the fact that synchronize_rcu() will therefore wait for all
pre-existing reader-writer-lock critical sections to complete. Let this be a lesson to you:
Understanding what your users really need is critically important to correct operation,
not just to performance. Not only that, but what your users really need changes over
time.
    This has the side-effect that all of a -rt kernel’s reader-writer locking critical sections
are subject to RCU priority boosting. This provides at least a partial solution to the
problem of reader-writer lock readers being preempted for extended periods of time.
    It is also possible to avoid reader-writer lock priority inversion by converting the
reader-writer lock to RCU, as briefly discussed in the next section.

Preemptible RCU can sometimes be used as a replacement for reader-writer lock-
ing [MW07, MBWW12, MFW+ 24], as was discussed in Section 9.5. Where it can be
used, it permits readers and updaters to run concurrently, which prevents low-priority
readers from inflicting any sort of priority-inversion scenario on high-priority updaters.
However, for this to be useful, it is necessary to be able to preempt long-running RCU
read-side critical sections [GMTW08]. Otherwise, long RCU read-side critical sections
would result in excessive real-time latencies.
    A preemptible RCU implementation was therefore added to the Linux kernel. This
implementation avoids the need to individually track the state of each and every task in
the kernel by keeping lists of tasks that have been preempted within their current RCU
read-side critical sections. A grace period is permitted to end: (1) Once all CPUs have
completed any RCU read-side critical sections that were in effect before the start of the
current grace period and (2) Once all tasks that were preempted while in one of those
pre-existing critical sections have removed themselves from their lists. A simplified
version of this implementation is shown in Listing 14.3. The __rcu_read_lock()
function spans lines 1–5 and the __rcu_read_unlock() function spans lines 7–15.

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
492                               CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

     Line 3 of __rcu_read_lock() increments a per-task count of the number of
nested rcu_read_lock() calls, and line 4 prevents the compiler from reordering the
subsequent code in the RCU read-side critical section to precede the rcu_read_lock().
     Line 9 of __rcu_read_unlock() prevents the compiler from reordering the code
in the critical section with the remainder of this function. Line 10 decrements the nesting
count and checks to see if it has become zero, in other words, if this corresponds to the
outermost rcu_read_unlock() of a nested set. If so, line 11 prevents the compiler
from reordering this nesting update with line 12’s check for special handling. If special
handling is required, then the call to rcu_read_unlock_special() on line 13 carries
it out.
     There are several types of special handling that can be required, but we will focus on
that required when the RCU read-side critical section has been preempted. In this case,
the task must remove itself from the list that it was added to when it was first preempted
within its RCU read-side critical section. However, it is important to note that these lists
are protected by locks, which means that rcu_read_unlock() is no longer lockless.
However, the highest-priority threads will not be preempted, and therefore, for those
highest-priority threads, rcu_read_unlock() will never attempt to acquire any locks.
In addition, if implemented carefully, locking can be used to synchronize real-time
software [Bra11, SM04a].
Quick Quiz 14.11: Suppose that preemption occurs just after the load from t->rcu_read_
unlock_special.s on line 12 of Listing 14.3. Mightn’t that result in the task failing to invoke
rcu_read_unlock_special(), thus failing to remove itself from the list of tasks blocking
the current grace period, in turn causing that grace period to extend indefinitely?

    Another important real-time feature of RCU, whether preemptible or not, is the
ability to offload RCU callback execution to a kernel thread. To use this, your kernel
must be built with CONFIG_RCU_NOCB_CPU=y and booted with the rcu_nocbs= kernel
boot parameter specifying which CPUs are to be offloaded. Alternatively, any CPU
specified by the nohz_full= kernel boot parameter described in Section 14.3.5.2 will
also have its RCU callbacks offloaded.
    In short, this preemptible RCU implementation enables real-time response for
read-mostly data structures without the delays inherent to priority boosting of large
numbers of readers, and also without delays due to callback invocation.

Preemptible spinlocks are an important part of the -rt patchset due to the long-
duration spinlock-based critical sections in the Linux kernel. This functionality has
not yet reached mainline: Although they are a conceptually simple substitution of
sleeplocks for spinlocks, they have proven relatively controversial. In addition the
real-time functionality that is already in the mainline Linux kernel suffices for a
great many use cases, which slowed the -rt patchset’s development rate in the early
2010s [Edg13, Edg14]. However, preemptible spinlocks are absolutely necessary to the
task of achieving real-time latencies down in the tens of microseconds. Fortunately,
Linux Foundation organized an effort to fund moving the remaining code from the -rt
patchset to mainline.

Per-CPU variables are used heavily in the Linux kernel for performance reasons.
Unfortunately for real-time applications, many use cases for per-CPU variables require
coordinated update of multiple such variables, which is normally provided by disabling

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                      493

preemption, which in turn degrades real-time latencies. Real-time applications clearly
need some other way of coordinating per-CPU variable updates.
    One alternative is to supply per-CPU spinlocks, which as noted above are actually
sleeplocks, so that their critical sections can be preempted and so that priority inheritance
is provided. In this approach, code updating groups of per-CPU variables must acquire
the current CPU’s spinlock, carry out the update, then release whichever lock is acquired,
keeping in mind that a preemption might have resulted in a migration to some other
CPU. However, this approach introduces both overhead and deadlocks.
    Another alternative, which is used in the -rt patchset as of early 2021, is to convert
preemption disabling to migration disabling. This ensures that a given kernel thread
remains on its CPU through the duration of the per-CPU-variable update, but could also
allow some other kernel thread to intersperse its own update of those same variables,
courtesy of preemption. There are cases such as statistics gathering where this is not a
problem. In the surprisingly rare case where such mid-update preemption is a problem,
the use case at hand must properly synchronize the updates, perhaps through a set of
per-CPU locks specific to that use case. Although introducing locks again introduces the
possibility of deadlock, the per-use-case nature of these locks makes any such deadlocks
easier to manage and avoid.

Closing event-driven remarks. There are of course any number of other Linux-kernel
components that are critically important to achieving world-class real-time latencies,
for example, deadline scheduling [dO18b, dO18a], however, those listed in this section
give a good feeling for the workings of the Linux kernel augmented by the -rt patchset.

14.3.5.2   Polling-Loop Real-Time Support
At first glance, use of a polling loop might seem to avoid all possible operating-system
interference problems. After all, if a given CPU never enters the kernel, the kernel is
completely out of the picture. And the traditional approach to keeping the kernel out of
the way is simply not to have a kernel, and many real-time applications do indeed run
on bare metal, particularly those running on eight-bit microcontrollers.
     One might hope to get bare-metal performance on a modern operating-system kernel
simply by running a single CPU-bound user-mode thread on a given CPU, avoiding all
causes of interference. Although the reality is of course more complex, it is becoming
possible to do just that, courtesy of the NO_HZ_FULL implementation led by Frederic
Weisbecker [Cor13, Wei12] that was accepted into version 3.10 of the Linux kernel.
Nevertheless, considerable care is required to properly set up such an environment, as
it is necessary to control a number of possible sources of OS jitter. The discussion
below covers the control of several sources of OS jitter, including device interrupts,
kernel threads and daemons, scheduler real-time throttling (this is a feature, not a bug!),
timers, non-real-time device drivers, in-kernel global synchronization, scheduling-clock
interrupts, page faults, and finally, non-real-time hardware and firmware.
     Interrupts are an excellent source of large amounts of OS jitter. Unfortunately, in
most cases interrupts are absolutely required in order for the system to communicate with
the outside world. One way of resolving this conflict between OS jitter and maintaining
contact with the outside world is to reserve a small number of housekeeping CPUs, and
to force all interrupts to these CPUs. The Documentation/IRQ-affinity.txt file
in the Linux source tree describes how to direct device interrupts to specified CPUs,
which as of early 2021 involves something like the following:

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
494                              CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

  $ echo 0f > /proc/irq/44/smp_affinity

    This command would confine interrupt #44 to CPUs 0–3. Note that scheduling-clock
interrupts require special handling, and are discussed later in this section.
    A second source of OS jitter is due to kernel threads and daemons. Individual
kernel threads, such as RCU’s grace-period kthreads (rcu_bh, rcu_preempt, and
rcu_sched), may be forced onto any desired CPUs using the taskset command, the
sched_setaffinity() system call, or cgroups.
    Per-CPU kthreads are often more challenging, sometimes constraining hardware
configuration and workload layout. Preventing OS jitter from these kthreads requires
either that certain types of hardware not be attached to real-time systems, that all
interrupts and I/O initiation take place on housekeeping CPUs, that special kernel
Kconfig or boot parameters be selected in order to direct work away from the worker
CPUs, or that worker CPUs never enter the kernel. Specific per-kthread advice may be
found in the Linux kernel source Documentation directory at admin-guide/kernel-
per-CPU-kthreads.rst.
    A third source of OS jitter in the Linux kernel for CPU-bound threads running
at real-time priority is the scheduler itself. This is an intentional debugging feature,
designed to ensure that important non-realtime work is allotted at least 50 milliseconds
out of each second, even if there is an infinite-loop bug in your real-time application.
However, when you are running a polling-loop-style real-time application, you will need
to disable this debugging feature. This can be done as follows:

  $ echo -1 > /proc/sys/kernel/sched_rt_runtime_us

    You will of course need to be running as root to execute this command, and you will
also need to carefully consider the aforementioned Spiderman principle. One way to
minimize the risks is to offload interrupts and kernel threads/daemons from all CPUs
running CPU-bound real-time threads, as described in the paragraphs above. In addition,
you should carefully read the material in the Documentation/scheduler directory.
The material in the sched-rt-group.rst file is particularly important, especially if
you are using the cgroups real-time features enabled by the CONFIG_RT_GROUP_SCHED
Kconfig parameter.
    A fourth source of OS jitter comes from timers. In most cases, keeping a given CPU
out of the kernel will prevent timers from being scheduled on that CPU. One important
exception are recurring timers, where a given timer handler posts a later occurrence
of that same timer. If such a timer gets started on a given CPU for any reason, that
timer will continue to run periodically on that CPU, inflicting OS jitter indefinitely. One
crude but effective way to offload recurring timers is to use CPU hotplug to offline all
worker CPUs that are to run CPU-bound real-time application threads, online these
same CPUs, then start your real-time application.
    A fifth source of OS jitter is provided by device drivers that were not intended for
real-time use. For an old canonical example, in 2005, the VGA driver would blank the
screen by zeroing the frame buffer with interrupts disabled, which resulted in tens of
milliseconds of OS jitter. One way of avoiding device-driver-induced OS jitter is to
carefully select devices that have been used heavily in real-time systems, and which
have therefore had their real-time bugs fixed. Another way is to confine the device’s

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                               495

Listing 14.4: Locating Sources of OS Jitter
1   cd /sys/kernel/debug/tracing
2   echo 1 > max_graph_depth
3   echo function_graph > current_tracer
4   # run workload
5   cat per_cpu/cpuN/trace

interrupts and all code using that device to designated housekeeping CPUs. A third way
is to test the device’s ability to support real-time workloads and fix any real-time bugs.8
     A sixth source of OS jitter is provided by some in-kernel full-system synchronization
algorithms, perhaps most notably the global TLB-flush algorithm. This can be avoided by
avoiding memory-unmapping operations, and especially avoiding unmapping operations
within the kernel. As of early 2021, the way to avoid in-kernel unmapping operations is
to avoid unloading kernel modules.
     A seventh source of OS jitter is provided by scheduling-clock interrrupts and RCU
callback invocation. These may be avoided by building your kernel with the NO_HZ_
FULL Kconfig parameter enabled, and then booting with the nohz_full= parameter
specifying the list of worker CPUs that are to run real-time threads. For example,
nohz_full=2-7 would designate CPUs 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 as worker CPUs, thus
leaving CPUs 0 and 1 as housekeeping CPUs. The worker CPUs would not incur
scheduling-clock interrupts as long as there is no more than one runnable task on each
worker CPU, and each worker CPU’s RCU callbacks would be invoked on one of the
housekeeping CPUs. A CPU that has suppressed scheduling-clock interrupts due to
there only being one runnable task on that CPU is said to be in adaptive ticks mode
or in nohz_full mode. It is important to ensure that you have designated enough
housekeeping CPUs to handle the housekeeping load imposed by the rest of the system,
which requires careful benchmarking and tuning.
     An eighth source of OS jitter is page faults. Because most Linux implementations
use an MMU for memory protection, real-time applications running on these systems
can be subject to page faults. Use the mlock() and mlockall() system calls to pin
your application’s pages into memory, thus avoiding major page faults. Of course, the
Spiderman principle applies, because locking down too much memory may prevent the
system from getting other work done.
     A ninth source of OS jitter is unfortunately the hardware and firmware. It is therefore
important to use systems that have been designed for real-time use.
     Unfortunately, this list of OS-jitter sources can never be complete, as it will change
with each new version of the kernel. This makes it necessary to be able to track down
additional sources of OS jitter. Given a CPU 𝑁 running a CPU-bound usermode thread,
the commands shown in Listing 14.4 will produce a list of all the times that this CPU
entered the kernel. Of course, the N on line 5 must be replaced with the number of the
CPU in question, and the 1 on line 2 may be increased to show additional levels of
function call within the kernel. The resulting trace can help track down the source of
the OS jitter.
     As always, there is no free lunch, and NO_HZ_FULL is no exception. As noted earlier,
NO_HZ_FULL makes kernel/user transitions more expensive due to the need for delta
process accounting and the need to inform kernel subsystems (such as RCU) of the
transitions. As a rough rule of thumb, NO_HZ_FULL helps with many types of real-time
    8 If you take this approach, please submit your fixes upstream so that others can benefit.

After all, when you need to port your application to a later version of the Linux kernel, you
will be one of those “others”.

                                                                                                       v2025.12.18a
496                                     CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

and heavy-compute workloads, but hurts other workloads that feature high rates of
system calls and I/O [ACA+ 18]. Additional limitations, tradeoffs, and configuration
advice may be found in Documentation/timers/no_hz.rst file in the Linux source
tree.
    As you can see, obtaining bare-metal performance when running CPU-bound
real-time threads on a general-purpose OS such as Linux requires painstaking attention
to detail. Automation would of course help, and some automation has been applied,
but given the relatively small number of users, automation can be expected to appear
relatively slowly. Nevertheless, the ability to gain near-bare-metal performance while
running a general-purpose operating system promises to ease construction of some
types of real-time systems.

14.3.6       Implementing Parallel Real-Time Applications
Developing real-time applications is a wide-ranging topic, and this section can only
touch on a few aspects. To this end, Section 14.3.6.1 looks at a few software components
commonly used in real-time applications, Section 14.3.6.2 provides a brief overview
of how polling-loop-based applications may be implemented, Section 14.3.6.3 gives
a similar overview of streaming applications, and Section 14.3.6.4 briefly covers
event-based applications.

14.3.6.1     Real-Time Components
As in all areas of engineering, a robust set of components is essential to productivity and
reliability. This section is not a full catalog of real-time software components—such a
catalog would fill multiple books—but rather a brief overview of the types of components
available.
    A natural place to look for real-time software components would be algorithms
offering wait-free synchronization [Her91], and in fact lockless algorithms are very
important to real-time computing. However, wait-free synchronization only guarantees
forward progress in finite time. Although a century is finite, this is unhelpful when your
deadlines are measured in microseconds, let alone milliseconds.
    Nevertheless, there are some important wait-free algorithms that do provide bounded
response time, including atomic test and set, atomic exchange, atomic fetch-and-add,
single-producer/single-consumer FIFO queues based on circular arrays, and numerous
per-thread partitioned algorithms. In addition, recent research has confirmed the
observation that algorithms with lock-free guarantees9 also provide the same latencies
in practice (in the wait-free sense), assuming a stochastically fair scheduler and absence
of fail-stop bugs [ACHS13]. This means that many non-wait-free stacks and queues are
nevertheless appropriate for real-time use.
 Quick Quiz 14.12: But isn’t correct operation despite fail-stop bugs a valuable fault-tolerance
 property?

    In practice, locking is often used in real-time programs, theoretical concerns
notwithstanding. However, under more severe constraints, lock-based algorithms can
also provide bounded latencies [Bra11]. These constraints include:

    9 Wait-free algorithms guarantee that all threads make progress in finite time, while

lock-free algorithms only guarantee that at least one thread will make progress in finite time.
See Section 14.2 for more details.

                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                         497

   1. Fair scheduler. In the common case of a fixed-priority scheduler, the bounded
      latencies are provided only to the highest-priority threads.
   2. Sufficient bandwidth to support the workload. An implementation rule supporting
      this constraint might be “There will be at least 50 % idle time on all CPUs during
      normal operation,” or, more formally, “The offered load will be sufficiently low
      to allow the workload to be schedulable at all times.”
   3. No fail-stop bugs.
   4. FIFO locking primitives with bounded acquisition, handoff, and release latencies.
      Again, in the common case of a locking primitive that is FIFO within priorities,
      the bounded latencies are provided only to the highest-priority threads.
   5. Some way of preventing unbounded priority inversion. The priority-ceiling and
      priority-inheritance disciplines mentioned earlier in this chapter suffice.
   6. Bounded nesting of lock acquisitions. We can have an unbounded number of
      locks, but only as long as a given thread never acquires more than a few of them
      (ideally only one of them) at a time.
   7. Bounded number of threads. In combination with the earlier constraints, this
      constraint means that there will be a bounded number of threads waiting on any
      given lock.
   8. Bounded time spent in any given critical section. Given a bounded number of
      threads waiting on any given lock and a bounded critical-section duration, the
      wait time will be bounded.

Quick Quiz 14.13: I couldn’t help but spot the word “include” before this list. Are there other
constraints?

    This result opens a vast cornucopia of algorithms and data structures for use in
real-time software—and validates long-standing real-time practice.
    Of course, a careful and simple application design is also extremely important. The
best real-time components in the world cannot make up for a poorly thought-out design.
For parallel real-time applications, synchronization overheads clearly must be a key
component of the design.

14.3.6.2   Polling-Loop Applications
Many real-time applications consist of a single CPU-bound loop that reads sensor data,
computes a control law, and writes control output. If the hardware registers providing
sensor data and taking control output are mapped into the application’s address space,
this loop might be completely free of system calls. But beware of the Spiderman
principle: With great power comes great responsibility, in this case the responsibility
to avoid bricking the hardware by making inappropriate references to the hardware
registers.
    This arrangement is often run on bare metal, without the benefits of (or the
interference from) an operating system. However, increasing hardware capability and
increasing levels of automation motivates increasing software functionality, for example,
user interfaces, logging, and reporting, all of which can benefit from an operating
system.

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
498                                 CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

Listing 14.5: Timed-Wait Test Program
1    if (clock_gettime(CLOCK_REALTIME, &timestart) != 0) {
2            perror("clock_gettime 1");
3            exit(-1);
4    }
5    if (nanosleep(&timewait, NULL) != 0) {
6            perror("nanosleep");
7            exit(-1);
8    }
9    if (clock_gettime(CLOCK_REALTIME, &timeend) != 0) {
10           perror("clock_gettime 2");
11           exit(-1);
12   }

    One way of gaining much of the benefit of running on bare metal while still having
access to the full features and functions of a general-purpose operating system is to use
the Linux kernel’s NO_HZ_FULL capability, described in Section 14.3.5.2.

14.3.6.3      Streaming Applications
One type of big-data real-time application takes input from numerous sources, processes
it internally, and outputs alerts and summaries. These streaming applications are often
highly parallel, processing different information sources concurrently.
     One approach for implementing streaming applications is to use dense-array circular
FIFOs to connect different processing steps [Sut13]. Each such FIFO has only a single
thread producing into it and a (presumably different) single thread consuming from
it. Fan-in and fan-out points use threads rather than data structures, so if the output of
several FIFOs needed to be merged, a separate thread would input from them and output
to another FIFO for which this separate thread was the sole producer. Similarly, if the
output of a given FIFO needed to be split, a separate thread would input from this FIFO
and output to several FIFOs as needed.
     This discipline might seem restrictive, but it allows communication among threads
with minimal synchronization overhead, and minimal synchronization overhead is
important when attempting to meet tight latency constraints. This is especially true
when the amount of processing for each step is small, so that the synchronization
overhead is significant compared to the processing overhead.
     The individual threads might be CPU-bound, in which case the advice in Sec-
tion 14.3.6.2 applies. On the other hand, if the individual threads block waiting for data
from their input FIFOs, the advice of the next section applies.

14.3.6.4      Event-Driven Applications
We will use fuel injection into a mid-sized industrial engine as a fanciful example for
event-driven applications. Under normal operating conditions, this engine requires that
the fuel be injected within a one-degree interval surrounding top dead center. If we
assume a 1,500-RPM rotation rate, we have 25 rotations per second, or about 9,000
degrees of rotation per second, which translates to 111 microseconds per degree. We
therefore need to schedule the fuel injection to within a time interval of about 100
microseconds.
    Suppose that a timed wait was to be used to initiate fuel injection, although if you are
building an engine, I hope you supply a rotation sensor. We need to test the timed-wait
functionality, perhaps using the test program shown in Listing 14.5. Unfortunately, if
we run this program, we can get unacceptable timer jitter, even in a -rt kernel.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                                                         499

    One problem is that POSIX CLOCK_REALTIME is, oddly enough, not intended
for real-time use. Instead, it means “realtime” as opposed to the amount of CPU
time consumed by a process or thread. For real-time use, you should instead use
CLOCK_MONOTONIC. However, even with this change, results are still unacceptable.
    Another problem is that the thread must be raised to a real-time priority by using
the sched_setscheduler() system call. But even this change is insufficient, because
we can still see page faults. We also need to use the mlockall() system call to pin the
application’s memory, preventing page faults. With all of these changes, results might
finally be acceptable.
    In other situations, further adjustments might be needed. It might be necessary to
affinity time-critical threads onto their own CPUs, and it might also be necessary to
affinity interrupts away from those CPUs. It might be necessary to carefully select
hardware and drivers, and it will very likely be necessary to carefully select kernel
configuration.
    As can be seen from this example, real-time computing can be quite unforgiving.

14.3.6.5   The Role of RCU

Suppose that you are writing a parallel real-time application that needs to access data
that is subject to gradual change, perhaps due to changes in temperature, humidity, and
barometric pressure. The real-time response constraints on this program are so severe
that it is not permissible to spin or block, thus ruling out locking, nor is it permissible to
use a retry loop, thus ruling out sequence locks and hazard pointers. Fortunately, the
temperature and pressure are normally controlled, so that a default hard-coded set of
data is usually sufficient.
    However, the temperature, humidity, and pressure occasionally deviate too far from
the defaults, and in such situations it is necessary to provide data that replaces the
defaults. Because the temperature, humidity, and pressure change gradually, providing
the updated values is not a matter of urgency, though it must happen within a few minutes.
The program is to use a global pointer imaginatively named cur_cal that normally
references default_cal, which is a statically allocated and initialized structure that
contains the default calibration values in fields imaginatively named a, b, and c.
Otherwise, cur_cal points to a dynamically allocated structure providing the current
calibration values.
    Listing 14.6 shows how RCU can be used to solve this problem. Lookups are
deterministic, as shown in calc_control() on lines 9–15, consistent with real-time
requirements. Updates are more complex, as shown by update_cal() on lines 17–35.

Quick Quiz 14.14: Given that real-time systems are often used for safety-critical applications,
and given that runtime memory allocation is forbidden in many safety-critical situations, what
is with the call to malloc()???

Quick Quiz 14.15: Don’t you need some kind of synchronization to protect update_cal()?

   This example shows how RCU can provide deterministic read-side data-structure
access to real-time programs.

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
500                                 CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

Listing 14.6: Real-Time Calibration Using RCU
1    struct calibration {
2            short a;
3            short b;
4            short c;
5    };
6    struct calibration default_cal = { 62, 33, 88 };
7    struct calibration cur_cal = &default_cal;
8
9    short calc_control(short t, short h, short press)
10   {
11           struct calibration *p;
12
13           p = rcu_dereference(cur_cal);
14           return do_control(t, h, press, p->a, p->b, p->c);
15   }
16
17   bool update_cal(short a, short b, short c)
18   {
19           struct calibration *p;
20           struct calibration *old_p;
21
22           old_p = rcu_dereference(cur_cal);
23           p = malloc(sizeof(*p);
24           if (!p)
25                   return false;
26           p->a = a;
27           p->b = b;
28           p->c = c;
29           rcu_assign_pointer(cur_cal, p);
30           if (old_p == &default_cal)
31                   return true;
32           synchronize_rcu();
33           free(old_p);
34           return true;
35   }

14.3.7       Real Time vs. Real Fast: How to Choose?
The choice between real-time and real-fast computing can be a difficult one. Because
real-time systems often inflict a throughput penalty on non-real-time computing, using
real-time when it is not required is unwise, as fancifully depicted by Figure 14.15.
    On the other hand, failing to use real-time when it is required can also cause
problems, as fancifully depicted by Figure 14.16. It is almost enough to make you feel
sorry for the boss!
    One rule of thumb uses the following four questions to help you choose:

     1. Is average long-term throughput the only goal?
     2. Is it permissible for heavy loads to degrade response times?

     3. Is there high memory pressure, ruling out use of the mlockall() system call?
     4. Does the basic work item of your application take more than 100 milliseconds to
        complete?

    If the answer to any of these questions is “yes”, you should choose real-fast over
real-time, otherwise, real-time might be for you.
    Choose wisely, and if you do choose real-time, make sure that your hardware,
firmware, and operating system are up to the job!

                                                                                          v2025.12.18a
14.3. PARALLEL REAL-TIME COMPUTING                              501

          Figure 14.15: The Dark Side of Real-Time Computing

           Figure 14.16: The Dark Side of Real-Fast Computing

                                                                      v2025.12.18a
502   CHAPTER 14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION

                                             v2025.12.18a
