                                          The art of progress is to preserve order amid change
                                          and to preserve change amid order.
                                                                       Alfred North Whitehead

Chapter 15

Advanced Synchronization:
Memory Ordering

Causality and sequencing are deeply intuitive, and hackers often have a strong grasp
of these concepts. These intuitions can be quite helpful when writing, analyzing, and
debugging not only sequential code, but also parallel code that makes use of standard
mutual-exclusion mechanisms such as locking. Unfortunately, these intuitions break
down completely in complex concurrent code, such as that in the Linux-kernel, which
often uses weakly ordered atomic operations and memory barriers. One example of
such code implements the standard mutual-exclusion mechanisms themselves, while
another example implements fast paths that use weaker synchronization. Insults to
intuition notwithstanding, some argue that weakness is a virtue [Alg13]. Vice or virtue,
this chapter will help you gain an understanding of memory ordering, that, with practice,
will be sufficient to implement synchronization primitives and performance-critical fast
paths.

     First, Section 15.1 provides some reliable intuitions and useful rules of thumb, which
can often provide a useful alternative to learning the full Linux-kernel memory model
(LKMM). However, those working on fast-paths or concurrency primitives will need the
additional detail provided by the following sections. Section 15.2 will demonstrate that
real computer systems can reorder memory references, give some reasons why they do
so, and provide some information on how to prevent undesired reordering. Sections 15.3
and 15.4 will cover the types of pain that hardware and compilers, respectively, can
inflict on unwary parallel programmers. Section 15.5 gives an overview of the benefits
of modeling memory ordering at higher levels of abstraction. Finally, Section 15.6
follows up with more detail on a few representative hardware platforms.

Quick Quiz 15.1: This chapter has been rewritten since the first edition, and heavily edited
since the second edition. Did memory ordering change all that since 2014, let alone since 2021?

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
504 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

15.1       Memory-Model Intuitions

                                          Almost all people are intelligent. It is method that
                                          they lack.
                                                                                    F. W. Nichol

This section is for people who would like to avoid learning all the details of the
Linux-kernel memory model (LKMM), the better to get on with their concurrency lives.
The good news is that learning a very small fraction of LKMM can get you most of its
benefits.
    But first, it is necessary to understand that useful ordering is a property not of any
single component of the system, but of the system as a whole. For example, it does not
help for the hardware to preserve ordering if the compiler does not also do so. Nor
does it help for both the hardware and compiler to provide ways to preserve ordering
if developers fail to use them. The Linux kernel adds architecture-specific assembly-
language primitives to the mix, which must also preserve the required orderings. In
short, all the components of the system must work together to provide any needed
ordering.
    Next, it is necessary to understand the temporal and non-temporal nature of
communication from one thread to another when using memory as the communications
medium, as will be discussed in detail in Section 15.3.7. The key point is that although
loads and stores are conceptually simple, on real multicore hardware significant periods
of time are required for their effects to become visible to all other threads. Strange
though it might seem, this means that a given store’s value might not be returned by a
load that happens later in wall-clock time, and it also means that a given store’s value
might be overwritten by a store that happens earlier in wall-clock time.
    The simple and intuitive case occurs when one thread loads a value that some other
thread stored. This straightforward cause-and-effect case exhibits temporal behavior, so
that the software can safely assume that the store instruction completed before the load
instruction started. In real life, the load instruction might well have started quite some
time before the store instruction did, but all modern hardware must carefully hide such
cases from the software. Software will thus see the expected temporal cause-and-effect
behavior when one thread loads a value that some other thread stores, as will be discussed
in Section 15.3.7.3.
    This intuitive temporal behavior provides the basis for the next section’s transitive
intuitions.

15.1.1     Transitive Intuitions
This section lists intuitions regarding single threads or variables, locking, release-acquire
chains, RCU, and fully ordered code.

15.1.1.1   Singular Intuitive Bliss

A program that has only one variable or only one thread will see all accesses in
order. There is quite a bit of code that can attain adequate performance when running
single-threaded on modern computer systems, but this book is primarily about software
that needs multiple CPUs. On, then, to the next section.

                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
15.1. MEMORY-MODEL INTUITIONS                                                      505

Time

                CPU 0

                Section
                Critical
                Before
                 Lock

                 Section
                 Critical
                                          CPU 1
                Unlock

                                          Section
                                          Critical
                                          Before
                Section
                Critical
                 After

                                           Lock

                                           Section
                                           Critical
                                                                    CPU 2
                                          Unlock

                                                                    Section
                                                                    Critical
                                                                    Before
                                          Section
                                          Critical
                                           After
                                                                     Lock

                                                                     Section
                                                                     Critical
                                                                    Unlock

                                                                    Section
                                                                    Critical
                            Figure 15.1: Locking Intuitions          After

15.1.1.2   Locking Intuitions
Another transitive intuition involves that much-maligned workhorse, locking, as will be
described in more detail in Section 15.5.2, to say nothing of Chapter 7. This section
contains a graphical description followed by a verbal description.
   The graphical description is shown in Figure 15.1, which shows a lock being acquired
and released by CPUs 0, 1, and 2 in that order. The solid black arrows depict the
unlock-lock ordering. The dotted lines emanating from them to the wide green arrows
show the effects on ordering. In particular:

   1. The fact that CPU 0’s unlock precedes CPU 1’s lock ensures that any access
      executed by CPU 0 within or before its critical section will be seen by accesses
      executed by CPU 1 within and after its critical section.

   2. The fact that CPU 0’s unlock precedes CPU 2’s lock ensures that any access
      executed by CPU 0 within or before its critical section will be seen by accesses
      executed by CPU 2 within and after its critical section.

   3. The fact that CPU 1’s unlock precedes CPU 2’s lock ensures that any access
      executed by CPU 1 within or before its critical section will be seen by accesses
      executed by CPU 2 within and after its critical section.

                                                                                          v2025.12.18a
506 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

     In short, lock-based ordering is transitive through CPUs 0, 1, and 2. A key point
is that this ordering extends beyond the critical sections, so that everything before an
earlier lock release is seen by everything after a later lock acquisition.
     For those who prefer words to diagrams, code holding a given lock will see the
accesses in all prior critical sections for that same lock, transitively. And if such code
sees the accesses in a given critical section, it will also see the accesses in all of that
CPU’s code preceding that critical section. In other words, when a CPU releases a given
lock, all of that lock’s subsequent critical sections will see the accesses in all of that
CPU’s code preceding that lock release.
     Inversely, code holding a given lock will be protected from seeing the accesses in
any subsequent critical sections for that same lock, again, transitively. And if such
code is protected against seeing the accesses in a given critical section, it will also be
protected against seeing the accesses in all of that CPU’s code following that critical
section. In other words, when a CPU acquires a given lock, all of that lock’s previous
critical sections will be protected from seeing the accesses in all of that CPU’s code
following that lock acquisition.
     But what does it mean to “see accesses” and exactly what accesses are seen?
     To start, an access is either a load or a store, possibly occurring as part of a
read-modify-write operation.
     If a CPU’s code prior to its release of a given lock contains an access A to a given
variable, then for an access B to that same variable contained in any CPU’s code
following a later acquisition of that same lock:

   1. If A and B are both loads, then B will return either the same value that A did or
      some later value.

   2. If A is a load and B is a store, then B will overwrite either the value loaded by A
      or some later value.

   3. If A is a store and B is a load, then B will return either the value stored by A or
      some later value.

   4. If A and B are both stores, then B will overwrite either the value stored by A or
      some later value.

   Here, “some later value” is shorthand for “the value stored by some intervening
access”.
Quick Quiz 15.2: But what about reader-writer locking?

    Locking is strongly intuitive, which is one reason why it has survived so many
attempts to eliminate it. This is also one reason why you should use it where it applies.

15.1.1.3   Release-Acquire Intuitions
Release-acquire chains also behave in a transitively intuitive manner not unlike that
of locking, except that release-acquire chains do not provide mutual exclusion. This
section also contains a graphical description followed by a verbal description.
    The graphical description is shown in Figure 15.2, which shows a release-acquire
chain extending through CPUs 0, 1, and 2. The solid black arrows depict the release-
acquire ordering. The dotted lines emanating from them to the wide green arrows show
the effects on ordering.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
15.1. MEMORY-MODEL INTUITIONS                                                                       507

 Time

                     CPU 0

                      Release
                      Before
                    Release A

                      Release
                       After
                                                       CPU 1

                                                        Acquire
                                                        Before
                                                      Acquire A

                                                                                         CPU 2
                                                      Release B

                                                                                          Acquire
                                                                                          Before
                                                        Release
                                                         After
                                                                                       Acquire B

                                                                                         Acquire
                                                                                          After
                                Figure 15.2: Release-Acquire Intuitions

    1. The fact that CPU 0’s release of A is read by CPU 1’s acquire of A ensures that
       any accesses executed by CPU 0 prior to its release will be seen by any accesses
       executed by CPU 1 after its acquire.
    2. The fact that CPU 1’s release of B is read by CPU 2’s acquire of B ensures that
       any accesses executed by CPU 1 prior to its release will be seen by any accesses
       executed by CPU 2 after its acquire.
    3. Note also that CPU 0’s release of A is read by CPU 1’s acquire of A, which
       precedes CPU 1’s release of B, which is read by CPU 2’s acquire of B. Taken
       together, all this ensures that any accesses executed by CPU 0 prior to its release
       will be seen by any accesses executed by CPU 2 after its acquire.

    This illustrates that properly constructed release-acquire ordering is transitive
through CPUs 0, 1, and 2, and in fact may be extended through as many CPUs as
needed.1
    For those who prefer words to diagrams, when an acquire loads the value stored by
a release, discussed in Section 15.3.7.4, then the code following that release will see all
accesses preceding the acquire. More precisely, if CPU 0 does an acquire that loads the
value stored by CPU 1’s release, than all the subsequent accesses executed by CPU 0
will see the all of CPU 1’s accesses prior to its release.
    Similarly, the accesses preceding that release access will be protected from seeing
the accesses following the acquire access. (More precision is left as an exercise to the
reader.)

     1 But please note that stray stores to either A or B can break the release-acquire chain, as

illustrated by Listing 15.27.

                                                                                                          v2025.12.18a
508 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

    Releases and acquires can be chained, for example CPU 0’s release stores the
value loaded by CPU 1’s acquire, a later release by CPU 1 stores the value loaded by
CPU 2’s acquire, and so on. The accesses following a given acquire will see the accesses
preceding each prior release in the chain, and, inversely, the accesses preceding a given
release will be protected from seeing the accesses following each later acquire in the
chain. Some long-chain examples will be illustrated by Listings 15.22, 15.23, and 15.24
on pages 541–543, respectively.
    The seeing and not seeing of accesses works the same way as described in Sec-
tion 15.1.1.2.
    However, as will be illustrated by Listing 15.27 on page 544, the acquire access
must load exactly what was stored by the release access. Any intervening store that
is not itself part of that same release-acquire chain will break the chain. And again,
release-acquire chains do not provide mutual exclusion.
    Nevertheless, properly constructed release-acquire chains are transitive, intuitive,
and useful.

15.1.1.4   RCU Intuitions

As noted in Section 9.5.2 on page 235, RCU provides a number of ordering guarantees.
    The first is the publish-subscribe mechanism described in Section 9.5.2.1 on
page 235. This resembles the acquire-release chains discussed in the previous section,
but substitutes a member of the rcu_dereference() family of primitives for the
smp_load_acquire(). Unlike smp_load_acquire(), the ordering implied by rcu_
dereference() applies only to subsequent accesses that dereference the pointer
returned by that rcu_dereference() as shown in Figure 9.10 on page 235.
    The second guarantee says that if any part of an RCU read-side critical section
precedes the beginning of a grace period, then the entirety of that critical section
precedes the end of that grace period, as shown in Figure 9.11 on page 238.
    The third guarantee says that if any part of an RCU read-side critical section follows
the end of a grace period, then the entirety of that critical section follows the beginning
of that grace period, as shown in Figure 9.12 on page 238.
    Both of these two guarantees are discussed in Section 9.5.2.2 on page 237, with more
examples shown in Figures 9.13 and 9.14 on pages 239 and 241. These two guarantees
have further version-maintenance consequences that are discussed in Section 9.5.2.3 on
page 240.
    These guarantees will be discussed somewhat more formally in Section 15.5.3 on
page 565.
    Much of the sophistication of RCU lies not in its guarantees, but in its use cases,
which are the subject of Section 9.5.4 starting on page 260.

15.1.1.5   Fully Ordered Intuitions

A more extreme example of transitivity places at least one smp_mb() between each pair
of accesses. All accesses seen by any given access will also be seen by all later accesses.
    The resulting program will be fully ordered, if somewhat slow. Such programs will
be sequentially consistent and much loved by formal-verification experts who specialize
in tried-and-true 1980s proof techniques. But slow or not, smp_mb() is always there
when you need it!

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
15.1. MEMORY-MODEL INTUITIONS                                                            509

                        Time

                                CPU 0

                                Memory
                               Reference
                                  to X

                                  Ordering
                                Memory
                               Reference
                                  to Y

                                                       CPU 1

                                                      Memory
                                                     Reference
                                                        to Y

                                                        Ordering
                                                      Memory
                                                     Reference
                                                        to X

                   Figure 15.3: If-Then Nature of Memory Ordering

    Nevertheless, there are situations that cannot be addressed by these intuitive
approaches. The next section therefore presents a more complete, if less transitive, set
of rules of thumb.

15.1.2     Rules of Thumb
The transitive intuitions presented in the previous section are very appealing, at least as
memory models go. Unfortunately, hardware is under no obligation to provide temporal
cause-and-effect illusions when one thread’s store overwrites a value either loaded or
stored by some other thread. It is quite possible that, from the software’s viewpoint, an
earlier store will overwrite a later store’s value, but only if those two stores were executed
by different threads, as will be illustrated by Figure 15.16 on page 538. Similarly, a later
load might well read a value overwritten by an earlier store, but again only if that load
and store were executed by different threads, as will be illustrated by Figure 15.15 on
page 536. This counter-intuitive behavior occurs due to the need to buffer stores in order
to achieve adequate performance, as will be discussed in Section 15.3.7.2 on page 536.
    As a result, situations where one thread reads a value written by some other thread
can make do with far weaker ordering than can situations where one thread overwrites
a value loaded or stored by some other thread. These differences are captured by the
following rules of thumb. However, it is important to note that none of these rules
involve mutual exclusion. There is instead an if-then nature to these rules, as illustrated

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
510 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

by Figure 15.3. In the figure, if CPU 1’s reference to Y follows that of CPU 0, and if
both CPUs provide sufficient ordering between their two accesses, then CPU 0’s access
to X will also precede that of CPU 1.
    The first rule of thumb is that memory-ordering operations are only required where
there is a possibility of interaction between at least two variables shared among at least
two threads, which underlies the singular intuitive bliss presented in Section 15.1.1.1.
In light of the intervening material, this single sentence encapsulates many of the
basic rules of thumb that will be presented in Section 15.2.3 on page 518, for example,
keeping in mind that “memory-barrier pairing” is a two-thread special case of “cycle”.
And, as always, if a single-threaded program will provide sufficient performance, why
bother with parallelism?2 After all, avoiding parallelism also avoids the added cost and
complexity of memory-ordering operations.
    The second rule of thumb involves load-buffering situations: If all thread-to-thread
communication in a given cycle use store-to-load links (that is, the next thread’s load
returns the value stored by the previous thread), minimal ordering suffices. Minimal
ordering includes dependencies and acquires as well as all stronger ordering operations.
Because a lock acquisition must load the lock-word value stored by any prior release of
that lock, this rule of thumb underlies the locking intuitions presented in Section 15.1.1.2.
    The third rule of thumb involves release-acquire chains: If all but one of the links
in a given cycle is a store-to-load link, it is sufficient to use release-acquire pairs for
each of those store-to-load links, as will be illustrated by Listings 15.23 and 15.24
starting on page 542. This rule underlies the release-acquire intuitions presented in
Section 15.1.1.3.
    You can replace a given acquire with a dependency in environments permitting
this, keeping in mind that the C11 standard’s memory model does not fully respect
dependencies. Therefore, a dependency leading to a load must be headed by a READ_
ONCE() or an rcu_dereference(): A plain C-language load is not sufficient. In
addition, carefully review Sections 15.4.2 and 15.4.3, on pages 550 and 553, because
a dependency broken by your compiler will not order anything. The two threads
sharing the sole non-store-to-load link can sometimes substitute WRITE_ONCE() plus
smp_wmb() for smp_store_release() on the one hand, and READ_ONCE() plus
smp_rmb() for smp_load_acquire() on the other. However, the wise developer will
check such substitutions carefully, for example, using the herd tool as described in
Section 12.3 on page 415.
 Quick Quiz 15.3: Why is it necessary to use heavier-weight ordering for load-to-store and
 store-to-store links, but not for store-to-load links? What on earth makes store-to-load links so
 special???

    The fourth and final rule of thumb identifies where full memory barriers (or stronger)
are required: If a given cycle contains two or more non-store-to-load links (that is, a
total of two or more links that are either load-to-store or store-to-store links), you will
need at least one full barrier between each pair of non-store-to-load links in that cycle,
as will be illustrated by Listing 15.19 on page 538 and most especially by the example
presented in Section 15.3.8 on page 542. Full barriers include smp_mb(), successful
full-strength non-void atomic RMW operations, and other atomic RMW operations in
conjunction with either smp_mb__before_atomic() or smp_mb__after_atomic().
Any of RCU’s grace-period-wait primitives (synchronize_rcu() and friends) also

    2 Hobbyists and researchers should of course feel free to ignore this and many other

cautions.

                                                                                                     v2025.12.18a
15.2. ORDERING: WHY AND HOW?                                                                          511

act as full barriers, but at far greater expense than smp_mb(). With strength comes
expense, though full barriers usually hurt performance more than they hurt scalability.
The extreme logical endpoint of this rule of thumb underlies the fully ordered intuitions
presented in Section 15.1.1.5.
    Recapping the rules:

    1. Memory-ordering operations are required only if at least two variables are shared
       by at least two threads.
    2. If all links in a cycle are store-to-load links, then minimal ordering suffices.
    3. If all but one of the links in a cycle are store-to-load links, then each store-to-load
       link may use a release-acquire pair.
    4. Otherwise, at least one full barrier is required between each pair of non-store-to-
       load links.

    Note that an architecture is permitted to provide stronger guarantees, as will be
discussed in Section 15.6, but these guarantees may only be relied upon in code that runs
only for that architecture. In addition, more accurate memory models [AMM+ 18] may
give stronger guarantees with lower-overhead operations than do these rules of thumb,
albeit at the expense of greater complexity. In these more formal memory-ordering
papers, a store-to-load link is an example of a reads-from (rf) link, a load-to-store link
is an example of a from-reads (fr) link, and a store-to-store link is an example of a
coherence (co) link.
    One final word of advice: Use of raw memory-ordering primitives is a last resort. It
is almost always better to use existing primitives, such as locking or RCU, thus letting
those primitives do the memory ordering for you.
    With that said, the next section describes why hardware misorders memory references
and some of the things that you can do about it.

15.2         Ordering: Why and How?
                                                   Nothing is orderly till people take hold of it.
                                                   Everything in creation lies around loose.
                                                                               Henry Ward Beecher, updated

One motivation for memory ordering can be seen in the trivial-seeming litmus test in
Listing 15.1 (C-SB+o-o+o-o.litmus), which at first glance might appear to guarantee
that the exists clause never triggers.3 After all, if 0:r2=0 as shown in the exists
clause,4 we might hope that Thread P0()’s load from x1 into r2 must have happened
before Thread P1()’s store to x1, which might raise further hopes that Thread P1()’s
load from x0 into r2 must happen after Thread P0()’s store to x0, so that 1:r2=2, thus
never triggering the exists clause. The example is symmetric, so similar reasoning
might lead us to hope that 1:r2=0 guarantees that 0:r2=2. Unfortunately, the lack
of memory barriers dashes these hopes. The CPU is within its rights to reorder the
    3 Purists would instead insist that the exists clause is never satisfied, but we use “trigger”

here by analogy with assertions.
    4 That is, Thread P0()’s instance of local variable r2 equals zero. See Section 12.2.1 for

documentation of litmus-test nomenclature.

                                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
512 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.1: Memory Misordering: Store-Buffering Litmus Test
1    C C-SB+o-o+o-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            int r2;
8
9            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
10           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
11   }
12
13   P1(int *x0, int *x1)
14   {
15           int r2;
16
17           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
18           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
19   }
20
21   exists (1:r2=0 /\ 0:r2=0)

statements within both Thread P0() and Thread P1(), even on relatively strongly
ordered systems such as x86.
 Quick Quiz 15.4: The compiler can also reorder Thread P0()’s and Thread P1()’s memory
 accesses in Listing 15.1, right?

     This willingness to reorder can be confirmed using tools such as litmus7 [AMT14],
which found that the counter-intuitive ordering happened 314 times out of 100,000,000
trials on an x86 laptop. Oddly enough, the perfectly legal outcome where both loads
return the value 2 occurred less frequently, in this case, only 167 times.5 The lesson here
is clear: Increased counter-intuitivity does not necessarily imply decreased probability!
     The following sections show exactly how this intuition breaks down, and then put
forward some mental models of memory ordering that can help you avoid these pitfalls.
     Section 15.2.1 gives a brief overview of why hardware misorders memory accesses,
and then Section 15.2.2 gives an equally brief overview of how you can thwart such
misordering. Finally, Section 15.2.3 lists some basic rules of thumb, which will be
further refined in later sections. These sections focus on hardware reordering, but rest
assured that compilers reorder much more aggressively than hardware ever dreamed of
doing. Compiler-induced reordering will be taken up in Section 15.4.

15.2.1       Why Hardware Misordering?
But why does memory misordering happen in the first place? Can’t CPUs keep track of
ordering on their own? Isn’t that why we have computers in the first place, to keep track
of things?
    Many people do indeed expect their computers to keep track of things, but many also
insist that they keep track of things quickly. In fact, so intense is the focus on performance
that modern CPUs are extremely complex, as can be seen in the simplified block diagram
in Figure 15.4. Those needing to squeeze the last few percent of performance from their
systems will in turn need to pay close attention to the fine details of this figure when
tuning their software. Except that this close attention to detail means that when a given

    5 Please note that results are sensitive to the exact hardware configuration, how heavily

the system is loaded, and much else besides. So why not try it out on your own system?

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
15.2. ORDERING: WHY AND HOW?                                                                                                                                                                    513

 128 Entry         32 KB Instruction Cache                                                                         4 µops
   ITLB                    (8 way)                                                                                          Retirement Register File
                                                                          96 Entry Reorder Buffer (ROB)
                                       128 Bit
                                                                                                                            (Program Visible State)
                                                                                                  4 µops
                    32 Byte Pre-Decode,                                                                                                                                                     Shared
                                                                                                 32 Entry Reservation Station                                                              L2 Cache
                        Fetch Buffer
Instruction                            6 Instructions
                                                                 Port 0                  Port 1                    Port 5           Port 3           Port 4      Port 2                    (16 way)
Fetch Unit
                              18 Entry                                      SSE                      SSE
                                                                                                                 ALU          SSE          Store        Store       Load
                                                                 ALU       Shuffle      ALU         Shuffle
                         Instruction Queue                                  ALU                      MUL
                                                                                                                Branch        ALU         Address       Data       Address
                                                                                                                                                                                           256 Entry
                                                                    128 Bit                                                                                                                L2 DTLB
     Micro-    Complex     Simple     Simple       Simple           FMUL
                                                                                              128 Bit                                     Memory Ordering Buffer
                                                                                              FADD
     code      Decoder    Decoder    Decoder      Decoder            FDIV                                                                        (MOB)
                   4 µops      1 µop         1 µop       1 µop                                                                                        Store          Load
                                                                          Internal Results Bus                                                       128 Bit                       256
                                                                                                                                128 Bit                                             Bit
                     7+ Entry µop Buffer                                                                                                                                                   Shared Bus
                                                                                                              32 KB Dual Ported Data Cache                      16 Entry
                                       4 µops                                                                                                                                               Interface
                                                                                                                         (8 way)                                 DTLB
                                                                                                                                                                                               Unit
                     Register Alias Table
                        and Allocator
                                     4 µops

                                                         Figure 15.4: Intel Core 2 Architecture

  128 Entry        32 KB Instruction Cache                                                                         4 µops
    ITLB                   (8 way)                                                                                          Retirement Register File
                                                                          96 Entry Reorder Buffer (ROB)
                                        128 Bit
                                                                                                                            (Program Visible State)
                                                                                                 4 µops
                     32 Byte Pre-Decode,                                                                                                                                                   Shared
                                                                                                 32 Entry Reservation Station                                                             L2 Cache
                         Fetch Buffer
 Instruction                            6 Instructions
                                                                 Port 0                  Port 1                   Port 5            Port 3          Port 4      Port 2      256           (16 way)
                                                                                                                                                                             Bit

                                                                                                                                                                                                he
 Fetch Unit
                              18 Entry
                         Instruction Queue
                                                                   U
                                                                 ALU
                                                                            SSE
                                                                           Shuffle
                                                                            ALU
                                                                                        ALU
                                                                                                     SSE
                                                                                                    Shuffle
                                                                                                     MUL
                                                                                                                 ALU
                                                                                                                Branch
                                                                                                                             SSE
                                                                                                                             ALU
                                                                                                                                       Store
                                                                                                                                      Address
                                                                                                                                                       Store
                                                                                                                                                       Data
                                                                                                                                                                   Load
                                                                                                                                                                  Address
                                                                                                                                                                                          Cac
                                                                                                                                                                                          256 Entry
                                                                 CP
                                                                    128 Bit
                                                                                                                                      Memory Orderinge r
                                                                                                                                                     Buffer
                                                                                                                                                                                          L2 DTLB
                                                                                                                                               Buff
                                                                                            128 Bit
      Micro-   Complex      Simple    Simple       Simple           FMUL
                                                                                            FADD
                                                                                                                                             (MOB)
                                                                                                                                             re
      code     Decoder     Decoder   Decoder      Decoder            FDIV

                    4 µops      1 µop        1 µop       1 µop                                                                            Sto Store                Load
                                                                          Internal Results Bus                                                      128 Bit
                                                                                                                                128 Bit
                         7+ Entry µop Buffer                                                                                                                                              Shared Bus
                                                                                                              32 KB Dual Ported Data Cache                     16 Entry
                                        4 µops                                                                                                                                             Interface
                                                                                                                         (8 way)                                DTLB
                                                                                                                                                                                              Unit
                     Register Alias Table
                        and Allocator
                                       4 µops

                                         Figure 15.5: Intel Core 2 Architecture Simplified

CPU degrades with age, the software will no longer run quickly on it. For example, if
the leftmost ALU fails, software tuned to take full advantage of all of the ALUs might
well run more slowly than untuned software. One solution to this problem is to take
systems out of service as soon as any of their CPUs start degrading.
    Another option is to recall the lessons of Chapter 3, especially the lesson that for
many important workloads, main memory cannot keep up with modern CPUs, which
can execute hundreds of instructions in the time required to fetch a single variable from
memory. For such workloads, the detailed internal structure of the CPU is irrelevant,
and the CPU can instead be approximated by the blue shapes in Figure 15.5 labeled
CPU, store buffer, and cache.
    Because of these data-intensive workloads, CPUs sport increasingly large caches,
as was seen back in Figure 3.12, which means that although the first load by a given
CPU from a given variable will result in an expensive cache miss as was discussed in
Section 3.1.7, subsequent repeated loads from that variable by that CPU might execute
very quickly because the initial cache miss will have loaded that variable into that CPU’s
cache.
    However, it is also necessary to accommodate frequent concurrent stores from
multiple CPUs to a set of shared variables. In cache-coherent systems, if the caches hold
multiple copies of a given variable, all the copies of that variable must have the same
value. This works extremely well for concurrent loads, but not so well for concurrent

                                                                                                                                                                                                        v2025.12.18a
514 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

                        CPU 0                             CPU 1

                              Store                 Store
                              Buffer                 Buffer

                        Cache                            Cache

                                        Memory

                Figure 15.6: System Architecture With Store Buffers

                           do I out things of
                            Look! can order.

                   Figure 15.7: CPUs Can Do Things Out of Order

stores: Each store must do something about all copies of the old value (another cache
miss!), which, given the finite speed of light and the atomic nature of matter, will be
slower than impatient software hackers would like. And these strings of stores are the
reason for the blue block labelled store buffer in Figure 15.5.
    Removing the internal CPU complexity from Figure 15.5, adding a second CPU, and
showing main memory results in Figure 15.6. When a given CPU stores to a variable
not present in that CPU’s cache, then the new value is instead placed in that CPU’s store
buffer. The CPU can then proceed immediately, without having to wait for the store to
do something about all the old values of that variable residing in other CPUs’ caches.
    Although store buffers can greatly increase performance, they can cause instructions
and memory references to execute out of order, which can in turn cause serious confusion,
as fancifully illustrated in Figure 15.7.
    In particular, store buffers cause the memory misordering illustrated by Listing 15.1.
Table 15.1 shows the steps leading to this misordering. Row 1 shows the initial state,
where CPU 0 has x1 in its cache and CPU 1 has x0 in its cache, both variables having a
value of zero. Row 2 shows the state change due to each CPU’s store (lines 9 and 17 of
Listing 15.1). Because neither CPU has the stored-to variable in its cache, both CPUs
record their stores in their respective store buffers.

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
15.2. ORDERING: WHY AND HOW?                                                            515

       Table 15.1: Memory Misordering: Store-Buffering Sequence of Events

                        CPU 0                                        CPU 1
    Instruction          Store Buffer   Cache    Instruction          Store Buffer   Cache
1   (Initial state)                     x1==0    (Initial state)                     x0==0
2   x0 = 2;              x0==2          x1==0    x1 = 2;              x1==2          x0==0
3   r2 = x1; (0)         x0==2          x1==0    r2 = x0; (0)         x1==2          x0==0
4   (Read-invalidate)    x0==2          x0==0    (Read-invalidate)    x1==2          x1==0
5   (Finish store)                      x0==2    (Finish store)                      x1==2

Quick Quiz 15.5: But wait!!! On row 2 of Table 15.1 both x0 and x1 each have two values at
the same time, namely zero and two. How can that possibly work???

     Row 3 shows the two loads (lines 10 and 18 of Listing 15.1). Because the variable
being loaded by each CPU is in that CPU’s cache, each load immediately returns the
cached value, which in both cases is zero.
     But the CPUs are not done yet: Sooner or later, they must empty their store buffers.
Because caches move data around in relatively large blocks called cachelines, and
because each cacheline can hold several variables, each CPU must get the cacheline into
its own cache so that it can update the portion of that cacheline corresponding to the
variable in its store buffer, but without disturbing any other part of the cacheline. Each
CPU must also ensure that the cacheline is not present in any other CPU’s cache, for
which a read-invalidate operation is used. As shown on row 4, after both read-invalidate
operations complete, the two CPUs have traded cachelines, so that CPU 0’s cache now
contains x0 and CPU 1’s cache now contains x1. Once these two variables are in
their new homes, each CPU can flush its store buffer into the corresponding cache line,
leaving each variable with its final value as shown on row 5.
Quick Quiz 15.6: But don’t the values also need to be flushed from the cache to main memory?

     In summary, store buffers are needed to allow CPUs to handle store instructions
efficiently, but they can result in counter-intuitive memory misordering.
     But what do you do if your algorithm really needs its memory references to be
ordered? For example, suppose that you are communicating with a driver using a pair of
flags, one that says whether or not the driver is running and the other that says whether
there is a request pending for that driver. The requester needs to set the request-pending
flag, then check the driver-running flag, and if false, wake the driver. Once the driver has
serviced all the pending requests that it knows about, it needs to clear its driver-running
flag, then check the request-pending flag to see if it needs to restart. This very reasonable
approach cannot work unless there is some way to make sure that the hardware processes
the stores and loads in order. This is the subject of the next section.

15.2.2     How to Force Ordering?
It turns out that there are compiler directives and synchronization primitives (such as
locking and RCU) that are responsible for maintaining the illusion of ordering through
use of memory barriers (for example, smp_mb() in the Linux kernel). These memory
barriers can be explicit instructions, as they are on Arm, POWER, Itanium, and Alpha,

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
516 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.2: Memory Ordering: Store-Buffering Litmus Test
1    C C-SB+o-mb-o+o-mb-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            int r2;
8
9              WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
10             smp_mb();
11             r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
12   }
13
14   P1(int *x0, int *x1)
15   {
16           int r2;
17
18             WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
19             smp_mb();
20             r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
21   }
22
23   exists (1:r2=0 /\ 0:r2=0)

              Table 15.2: Memory Ordering: Store-Buffering Sequence of Events

                              CPU 0                                       CPU 1
          Instruction          Store Buffer   Cache   Instruction          Store Buffer   Cache
1         (Initial state)                     x1==0   (Initial state)                     x0==0
2         x0 = 2;              x0==2          x1==0   x1 = 2;              x1==2          x0==0
3         smp_mb();            x0==2          x1==0   smp_mb();            x1==2          x0==0
4         (Read-invalidate)    x0==2          x0==0   (Read-invalidate)    x1==2          x1==0
5         (Finish store)                      x0==2   (Finish store)                      x1==2
6         r2 = x1; (2)                        x1==2   r2 = x0; (2)                        x0==2

or they can be implied by other instructions, as they often are on x86. Since these
standard synchronization primitives preserve the illusion of ordering, your path of least
resistance is to simply use these primitives, thus allowing you to stop reading this
section.
    However, if you need to implement the synchronization primitives themselves, or
if you are simply interested in understanding how memory ordering works, read on!
The first stop on the journey is Listing 15.2 (C-SB+o-mb-o+o-mb-o.litmus), which
places an smp_mb() Linux-kernel full memory barrier between the store and load in
both P0() and P1(), but is otherwise identical to Listing 15.1. These barriers prevent
the counter-intuitive outcome from happening on 100,000,000 trials on my x86 laptop.
Interestingly enough, the added overhead due to these barriers causes the legal outcome
where both loads return the value two to happen more than 800,000 times, as opposed
to only 167 times for the barrier-free code in Listing 15.1.
    These barriers have a profound effect on ordering, as can be seen in Table 15.2.
Although the first two rows are the same as in Table 15.1 and although the smp_mb()
instructions on row 3 do not change state in and of themselves, they do cause the stores
to complete (rows 4 and 5) before the loads (row 6), which rules out the counter-intuitive
outcome shown in Table 15.1. Note that variables x0 and x1 each still have more than

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
          15.2. ORDERING: WHY AND HOW?                                                                  517

                         Table 15.3: Linux-Kernel Memory-Ordering Cheat Sheet

                                               Prior Ordered Operation               Subsequent Ordered Operation
Operation Providing Ordering              C    Self    R     W     RMW       Self    R     W     DR     DW      RMW        SV
Store, for example, WRITE_ONCE()                Y                                                                          Y
Load, for example, READ_ONCE()                  Y                                                 Y       Y                Y
_relaxed() RMW operation                        Y                                                 Y       Y                Y
*_dereference()                                 Y                                                 Y       Y                Y
Successful *_acquire()                          R                                    Y     Y      Y       Y        Y       Y
Successful *_release()                    C            Y     Y       Y        W                                            Y
smp_rmb()                                              Y             R               Y            Y               R
smp_wmb()                                                    Y       W                     Y              Y       W
smp_mb() and synchronize_rcu()            CP           Y     Y       Y               Y     Y      Y       Y       Y
Successful full-strength non-void RMW     CP    Y      Y     Y       Y        Y      Y     Y      Y       Y       Y        Y
smp_mb__before_atomic()                   CP           Y     Y       Y               a     a      a       a       Y
smp_mb__after_atomic()                    CP           a     a       Y               Y     Y      Y       Y       Y

                                   Key:       C: Ordering is cumulative
                                              P: Ordering propagates
                                              R: Read, for example, READ_ONCE(), or read portion of RMW
                                              W: Write, for example, WRITE_ONCE(), or write portion of RMW
                                              Y: Provides the specified ordering
                                               a: Provides specified ordering given intervening RMW atomic operation
                                            DR: Dependent read (address dependency, Section 15.3.3)
                                            DW: Dependent write (address, data, or control dependency, Sections 15.3.3–15.3.5)
                                         RMW: Atomic read-modify-write operation
                                            Self: Orders self, as opposed to accesses both before and after
                                             SV: Orders later accesses to the same variable
                                   Applies to Linux kernel v4.15 and later.

          one value on row 2, however, as promised earlier, the smp_mb() invocations straighten
          things out in the end.
              Although full barriers such as smp_mb() have extremely strong ordering guarantees,
          their strength comes at a high price in terms of foregone hardware and compiler
          optimizations. A great many situations can be handled with much weaker ordering
          guarantees that use much cheaper memory-ordering instructions, or, in some case, no
          memory-ordering instructions at all.
              Table 15.3 provides a cheatsheet of the Linux kernel’s ordering primitives and their
          guarantees. Each row corresponds to a primitive or category of primitives that might
          or might not provide ordering, with the columns labeled “Prior Ordered Operation”
          and “Subsequent Ordered Operation” being the operations that might (or might not) be
          ordered against. Cells containing “Y” indicate that ordering is supplied unconditionally,
          while other characters indicate that ordering is supplied only partially or conditionally.
          Blank cells indicate that no ordering is supplied.
              The “Store” row also covers the store portion of an atomic RMW operation. In
          addition, the “Load” row covers the load component of a successful value-returning
          _relaxed() RMW atomic operation, although the combined “_relaxed() RMW
          operation” line provides a convenient combined reference in the value-returning case. A
          CPU executing unsuccessful value-returning atomic RMW operations must invalidate

                                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
518 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

the corresponding variable from all other CPUs’ caches. Therefore, unsuccessful value-
returning atomic RMW operations have many of the properties of a store, which means
that the “_relaxed() RMW operation” line also applies to unsuccessful value-returning
atomic RMW operations.
    The *_acquire row covers smp_load_acquire(), cmpxchg_acquire(), xchg_
acquire(), and so on; the *_release row covers smp_store_release(), rcu_
assign_pointer(), cmpxchg_release(), xchg_release(), and so on; and the
“Successful full-strength non-void RMW” row covers atomic_add_return(), atomic_
add_unless(), atomic_dec_and_test(), cmpxchg(), xchg(), and so on. The
“Successful” qualifiers apply to primitives such as atomic_add_unless(), cmpxchg_
acquire(), and cmpxchg_release(), which have no effect on either memory or on
ordering when they indicate failure, as indicated by the earlier “_relaxed() RMW
operation” row.
    Column “C” indicates cumulativity and propagation, as explained in Sections 15.3.7.1
and 15.3.7.2. In the meantime, this column can usually be ignored when there are at
most two threads involved.
 Quick Quiz 15.7: The rows in Table 15.3 seem quite random and confused. Whatever is the
 conceptual basis of this table???

 Quick Quiz 15.8: Why is Table 15.3 missing smp_mb__after_unlock_lock() and smp_
 mb__after_spinlock()?

    It is important to note that this table is just a cheat sheet, and is therefore in no way
a replacement for a good understanding of memory ordering. To begin building such an
understanding, the next section will present some basic rules of thumb.

15.2.3     Basic Rules of Thumb
This section presents some basic rules of thumb that are “good and sufficient” for a
great many situations. In fact, you could write a great deal of concurrent code having
excellent performance and scalability without needing anything more than these rules
of thumb. More sophisticated rules of thumb will be presented in Section 15.1.
 Quick Quiz 15.9: But how can I know that a given project can be designed and coded within
 the confines of these rules of thumb?

A given thread sees its own accesses in order. This rule assumes that loads and
stores from/to shared variables use READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE(), respectively.
Otherwise, the compiler can profoundly scramble6 your code, and sometimes the CPU
can do a bit of scrambling as well, as discussed in Section 15.6.4.

Interrupts and signal handlers are part of a thread. Both interrupt and signal
handlers happen between a pair of adjacent instructions in a thread. This means that a
given handler appears to execute atomically from the viewpoint of the interrupted thread,
at least at the assembly-language level. However, the C and C++ languages do not define
the results of handlers and interrupted threads sharing plain variables. Instead, such
shared variables must be sig_atomic_t, lock-free atomics, or volatile.

   6 Many compiler writers prefer the word “optimize”.

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
15.2. ORDERING: WHY AND HOW?                                                          519

                    CPU 0

                   Memory
                                 .... memory barriers guarantee X0 before X1.
                 Reference X0

                   Memory
                   Barrier

                   Memory
                 Reference Y0
                                                      CPU 1

                      Given Y0 before Y1 ...         Memory
                                                   Reference Y1

                                                      Memory
                                                      Barrier

                                                     Memory
                                                   Reference X1

        Figure 15.8: Memory Barriers Provide Conditional If-Then Ordering

    On the other hand, because the handler executes within the interrupted thread’s
context, the memory ordering used to synchronize communication between the handler
and the thread can be extremely lightweight. For example, the counterpart of an acquire
load is a READ_ONCE() followed by a barrier() compiler directive and the counterpart
of a release store is a barrier() followed by a WRITE_ONCE(). The counterpart of a
full memory barrier is barrier(). Finally, disabling interrupts or signals (as the case
may be) within the thread excludes handlers.

Ordering has conditional if-then semantics. Figure 15.8 illustrates this for memory
barriers. Assuming that both memory barriers are strong enough, if CPU 1’s access Y1
happens after CPU 0’s access Y0, then CPU 1’s access X1 is guaranteed to happen after
CPU 0’s access X0.
Quick Quiz 15.10: How can you tell which memory barriers are strong enough for a given
use case?

    Listing 15.2 is a case in point. The smp_mb() on lines 10 and 19 serve as the
barriers, the store to x0 on line 9 as X0, the load from x1 on line 11 as Y0, the store to
x1 on line 18 as Y1, and the load from x0 on line 20 as X1. Applying the if-then rule
step by step, we know that the store to x1 on line 18 happens after the load from x1
on line 11 if P0()’s local variable r2 is set to the value zero. The if-then rule would
then state that the load from x0 on line 20 happens after the store to x0 on line 9. In
other words, P1()’s local variable r2 is guaranteed to end up with the value two only if
P0()’s local variable r2 ends up with the value zero. This underscores the point that
memory ordering guarantees are conditional, not absolute.
    Although Figure 15.8 specifically mentions memory barriers, this same if-then rule
applies to the rest of the Linux kernel’s ordering operations.

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
520 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Ordering operations must be paired. If you carefully order the operations in one
thread, but then fail to do so in another thread, then there is no ordering. Both threads
must provide ordering for the if-then rule to apply.7

Ordering operations almost never speed things up. If you find yourself tempted to
add a memory barrier in an attempt to force a prior store to be flushed to memory faster,
resist! Adding ordering usually slows things down. Of course, there are situations
where adding instructions speeds things up, as was shown by Figure 9.22 on page 262,
but careful benchmarking is required in such cases. And even then, it is quite possible
that although you sped things up a little bit on your system, you might well have slowed
things down significantly on your users’ systems. Or on your future system.

Ordering operations are not magic. When your program is failing due to some
race condition, it is often tempting to toss in a few memory-ordering operations in an
attempt to barrier your bugs out of existence. A far better reaction is to use higher-level
primitives in a carefully designed manner. With concurrent programming, it is almost
always better to design your bugs out of existence than to hack them down to lower
probabilities.

These are only rough rules of thumb. Although these rules of thumb cover the vast
majority of situations seen in actual practice, as with any set of rules of thumb, they do
have their limits. The next section will demonstrate some of these limits by introducing
trick-and-trap litmus tests that are intended to insult your intuition while increasing your
understanding. These litmus tests will also illuminate many of the concepts represented
by the Linux-kernel memory-ordering cheat sheet shown in Table 15.3, and can be
automatically analyzed given proper tooling [AMM+ 18]. Section 15.1 will circle back
to this cheat sheet, presenting a more sophisticated set of rules of thumb in light of
learnings from all the intervening tricks and traps.
Quick Quiz 15.11: Wait!!! Where do I find this tooling that automatically analyzes litmus
tests???

15.3       Tricks and Traps
                                                Knowing where the trap is—that’s the first step in
                                                evading it.
                                                               Duke Leto Atreides, Dune, Frank Herbert

Now that you know that hardware can reorder memory accesses and that you can prevent
it from doing so, the next step is to get you to admit that your intuition has a problem.
This painful task is taken up by Section 15.3.1, which presents some code demonstrating
that scalar variables can take on multiple values simultaneously, and by Sections 15.3.2
through 15.3.7, which show a series of intuitively correct code fragments that fail
miserably on real hardware. Once your intuition has made it through the grieving
process, later sections will summarize the basic rules that memory ordering follows.

   7 In Section 15.3.7.2, pairing will be generalized to cycles.

                                                                                                         v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                                 521

Listing 15.3: Software Logic Analyzer
1   state.variable = mycpu;
2   lasttb = oldtb = firsttb = gettb();
3   while (state.variable == mycpu) {
4           lasttb = oldtb;
5           oldtb = gettb();
6           if (lasttb - firsttb > 1000)
7                   break;
8   }

                  CPU 1                1                         2
                  CPU 2                              2

                  CPU 3   3                          2

                  CPU 4                          4                      2

                          0     100        200           300   400   500 (ns)

              Figure 15.9: A Variable With Multiple Simultaneous Values

    But first, let’s take a quick look at just how many values a single variable might have
at a single point in time.

15.3.1      Variables With Multiple Values
It is natural to think of a variable as taking on a well-defined sequence of values in a
well-defined, global order. Unfortunately, the next stop on the journey says “goodbye”
to this comforting fiction. Hopefully, you already started to say “goodbye” in response
to row 2 of Tables 15.1 and 15.2, and if so, the purpose of this section is to drive this
point home.
     To this end, consider the program fragment shown in Listing 15.3. This code
fragment is executed in parallel by several CPUs. Line 1 sets a shared variable to the
current CPU’s ID, line 2 initializes several variables from a gettb() function that
delivers the value of a fine-grained hardware “timebase” counter that is synchronized
among all CPUs (not available from all CPU architectures, unfortunately!), and the loop
from lines 3–8 records the length of time that the variable retains the value that this
CPU assigned to it. Of course, one of the CPUs will “win”, and would thus never exit
the loop if not for the check on lines 6–7.
Quick Quiz 15.12: What assumption is the code fragment in Listing 15.3 making that might
not be valid on real hardware?

    Upon exit from the loop, firsttb will hold a timestamp taken shortly after the
assignment and lasttb will hold a timestamp taken before the last sampling of the
shared variable that still retained the assigned value, or a value equal to firsttb if
the shared variable had changed before entry into the loop. This allows us to plot each
CPU’s view of the value of state.variable over a 532-nanosecond time period, as
shown in Figure 15.9. This data was collected in 2006 on 1.5 GHz POWER5 system
with 8 cores, each containing a pair of hardware threads. CPUs 1, 2, 3, and 4 recorded
the values, while CPU 0 controlled the test. The timebase counter period was about
5.32 ns, sufficiently fine-grained to allow observations of intermediate cache states.
    Each horizontal bar represents the observations of a given CPU over time, with
the gray regions to the left indicating the time before the corresponding CPU’s first
measurement. During the first 5 ns, only CPU 3 has an opinion about the value of the

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
522 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

variable. During the next 10 ns, CPUs 2 and 3 disagree on the value of the variable,
but thereafter agree that the value is “2”, which is in fact the final agreed-upon value.
However, CPU 1 believes that the value is “1” for almost 300 ns, and CPU 4 believes
that the value is “4” for almost 500 ns.
Quick Quiz 15.13: How could CPUs possibly have different views of the value of a single
variable at the same time?

Quick Quiz 15.14: Why do CPUs 2 and 3 come to agreement so quickly, when it takes so
long for CPUs 1 and 4 to come to the party?

     And if you think that the situation with four CPUs was intriguing, consider
Figure 15.10, which shows the same situation, but with 15 CPUs each assigning their
number to a single shared variable at time 𝑡 = 0. Both diagrams in the figure are drawn
in the same way as Figure 15.9. The only difference is that the unit of horizontal axis
is timebase ticks, with each tick lasting about 5.3 nanoseconds. The entire sequence
therefore lasts a bit longer than the events recorded in Figure 15.9, consistent with the
increase in number of CPUs. The upper diagram shows the overall picture, while the
lower one zooms in on the first 50 timebase ticks. Again, CPU 0 coordinates the test, so
does not record any values.
     All CPUs eventually agree on the final value of 9, but not before the values 15
and 12 take early leads. Note that there are fourteen different opinions on the variable’s
value at time 21 indicated by the vertical line in the lower diagram. Note also that all
CPUs see sequences whose orderings are consistent with the directed graph shown in
Figure 15.11. Nevertheless, these figures underscore the importance of proper use of
memory-ordering operations.
     How many values can a single variable take on at a single point in time? As many as
one per store buffer in the system! We have therefore entered a regime where we must
bid a fond farewell to comfortable intuitions about values of variables and the passage
of time. This is the regime where memory-ordering operations are needed.
     But remember well the lessons from Chapters 3 and 6. Having all CPUs store
concurrently to the same variable is no way to design a parallel program, at least not if
performance and scalability are at all important to you.
     Unfortunately, memory ordering has many other ways of insulting your intuition,
and not all of these ways conflict with performance and scalability. The next section
overviews reordering of unrelated memory reference.

15.3.2     Memory-Reference Reordering
Section 15.2.1 showed that even relatively strongly ordered systems like x86 can reorder
prior stores with later loads, at least when the store and load are to different variables.
This section builds on that result, looking at the other combinations of loads and stores.

15.3.2.1   Load Followed By Load
Listing 15.4 (C-MP+o-wmb-o+o-o.litmus) shows the classic message-passing litmus
test, where x0 is the message and x1 is a flag indicating whether or not a message
is available. In this test, the smp_wmb() forces P0() stores to be ordered, but no
ordering is specified for the loads. Relatively strongly ordered architectures, such as x86,
do enforce ordering. However, weakly ordered architectures often do not [AMP+ 11].
Therefore, the exists clause on line 19 of the listing can trigger.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                                                                                                 523

 CPU 1                  1              6              4                   10                                   15                         3                    9
 CPU 2                                                          2                                                                         3                    9
 CPU 3                                                                    3                                                                                    9

 CPU 4                                 4                             10                              15                        12                      9

 CPU 5                                 5                             10                              15                        12                      9

 CPU 6                           6                                   2                                                    15                               9

 CPU 7                           7                                   2                                                    15                               9

 CPU 8         8                                                               9

 CPU 9                                                                         9

CPU 10                                           10                                                      15                    12                      9

CPU 11                  11                            10                                                  15                   12                      9

CPU 12                                                                    12                                                                                       9

CPU 13             13                                                          12                                                                                  9

CPU 14        14                                          15                                                                         12                            9

CPU 15                                                    15                                                                         12                            9

          0             50       100       150            200       250            300                350           400             450          500           (tick)

 CPU 1                                                                                  1

 CPU 2                                                                                          2

 CPU 3                                                                                          3

 CPU 4                                                                                      4

 CPU 5                                                                                          5

 CPU 6                                                                                          6

 CPU 7                                                                                               7

 CPU 8                                                    8                                                    9

 CPU 9                                                                                          9

CPU 10                                                                                                   10

CPU 11                                                                                                   11

CPU 12                                                                               12

CPU 13                                                                               13

CPU 14                                       14                                                          15

CPU 15                                                                                          15

          0             5        10        15             20        25             30                    35         40              45        (tick)

                            Figure 15.10: A Variable With More Simultaneous Values

Listing 15.4: Message-Passing Litmus Test (No Ordering)
1    C C-MP+o-wmb-o+o-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int* x0, int* x1) {
6            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
7            smp_wmb();
8            WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
9    }
10
11   P1(int* x0, int* x1) {
12           int r2;
13           int r3;
14
15                 r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
16                 r3 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
17   }
18
19   exists (1:r2=2 /\ 1:r3=0)

                                                                                                                                                                        v2025.12.18a
524 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

                                   7   6

                                   2   4        5        11

                                           10       14

                                           15       13

                                           3        12         8

          Figure 15.11: Possible Global Orders With More Simultaneous Values

Listing 15.5: Enforcing Order of Message-Passing Litmus Test
1    C C-MP+o-wmb-o+o-rmb-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int* x0, int* x1) {
6            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
7            smp_wmb();
8            WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
9    }
10
11   P1(int* x0, int* x1) {
12           int r2;
13           int r3;
14
15           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
16           smp_rmb();
17           r3 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
18   }
19
20   exists (1:r2=2 /\ 1:r3=0)

    One rationale for reordering loads from different locations is that doing so allows
execution to proceed when an earlier load misses the cache, but the values for later loads
are already present.

 Quick Quiz 15.15: But why make load-load reordering visible to the user? Why not just use
 speculative execution to allow execution to proceed in the common case where there are no
 intervening stores, in which case the reordering cannot be visible anyway?

    Thus, portable code relying on ordered loads must add explicit ordering, for example,
the smp_rmb() shown on line 16 of Listing 15.5 (C-MP+o-wmb-o+o-rmb-o.litmus),
which prevents the exists clause from triggering.

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                                    525

Listing 15.6: Load-Buffering Litmus Test (No Ordering)
1    C C-LB+o-o+o-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            int r2;
8
9            r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10           WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
11   }
12
13   P1(int *x0, int *x1)
14   {
15           int r2;
16
17           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
18           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
19   }
20
21   exists (1:r2=2 /\ 0:r2=2)

Listing 15.7: Enforcing Ordering of Load-Buffering Litmus Test
1    C C-LB+o-r+a-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            int r2;
8
9            r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10           smp_store_release(x0, 2);
11   }
12
13   P1(int *x0, int *x1)
14   {
15           int r2;
16
17           r2 = smp_load_acquire(x0);
18           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
19   }
20
21   exists (1:r2=2 /\ 0:r2=2)

15.3.2.2      Load Followed By Store

Listing 15.6 (C-LB+o-o+o-o.litmus) shows the classic load-buffering litmus test.
Although relatively strongly ordered systems such as x86 or the IBM Mainframe do not
reorder prior loads with subsequent stores, many weakly ordered architectures really do
allow such reordering [AMP+ 11]. Therefore, the exists clause on line 21 really can
trigger.
    Although it is rare for actual hardware to exhibit this reordering [Mar17], one
situation where it might be desirable to do so is when a load misses the cache, the store
buffer is nearly full, and the cacheline for a subsequent store is ready at hand. Therefore,
portable code must enforce any required ordering, for example, as shown in Listing 15.7
(C-LB+o-r+a-o.litmus). The smp_store_release() and smp_load_acquire()
guarantee that the exists clause on line 21 never triggers.
 Quick Quiz 15.16: Why should it be rare for systems to reorder prior loads with later stores?

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
526 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.8: Message-Passing Litmus Test, No Writer Ordering (No Ordering)
1    C C-MP+o-o+o-rmb-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int* x0, int* x1) {
6            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
8    }
9
10   P1(int* x0, int* x1) {
11           int r2;
12           int r3;
13
14           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
15           smp_rmb();
16           r3 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
17   }
18
19   exists (1:r2=2 /\ 1:r3=0)

15.3.2.3      Store Followed By Store

Listing 15.8 (C-MP+o-o+o-rmb-o.litmus) once again shows the classic message-
passing litmus test, with the smp_rmb() providing ordering for P1()’s loads, but without
any ordering for P0()’s stores. Again, the relatively strongly ordered architectures do
enforce ordering, but weakly ordered architectures do not necessarily do so [AMP+ 11],
which means that the exists clause can trigger. One situation in which such reordering
could be beneficial is when the store buffer is full, another store is ready to execute,
but the cacheline needed by the oldest store is not yet available. In this situation,
allowing stores to complete out of order would allow execution to proceed. Therefore,
portable code must explicitly order the stores, for example, as shown in Listing 15.5,
thus preventing the exists clause from triggering.
 Quick Quiz 15.17: Why should strongly ordered systems pay the performance price of
 unnecessary smp_rmb() and smp_wmb() invocations? Shouldn’t weakly ordered systems
 shoulder the full cost of their misordering choices???

15.3.3       Address Dependencies
An address dependency occurs when the value returned by a load instruction is used
to compute the address used by a later memory-reference instruction. This means
that the exact same sequence of instructions used to traverse a linked data structure in
single-threaded code provides weak but extremely useful ordering in concurrent code.
 Quick Quiz 15.18: Must an address dependency begin with a load instruction? Why not
 something like xchg_relaxed(), which also loads a value from memory?

    Listing 15.9 (C-MP+o-wmb-o+o-addr-o.litmus) shows a linked variant of the
message-passing pattern. The head pointer is x1, which initially references the int
variable y (line 5), which is in turn initialized to the value 1 (line 4). P0() updates
head pointer x1 to reference x0 (line 11), but only after initializing it to 2 (line 9) and
forcing ordering (line 10). P1() picks up the head pointer x1 (line 18), and then loads
the referenced value (line 19). There is thus an address dependency from the load on
line 18 to the load on line 19. In this case, the value returned by line 18 is exactly the

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                                        527

Listing 15.9: Message-Passing Address-Dependency Litmus Test (No Ordering Before v4.15)
1    C C-MP+o-wmb-o+o-ad-o
2
3    {
4    y=1;
5    x1=y;
6    }
7
8    P0(int* x0, int** x1) {
9            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
10           smp_wmb();
11           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, x0);
12   }
13
14   P1(int** x1) {
15           int *r2;
16           int r3;
17
18           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
19           r3 = READ_ONCE(*r2);
20   }
21
22   exists (1:r2=x0 /\ 1:r3=1)

Listing 15.10: Enforced Ordering of Message-Passing Address-Dependency Litmus Test (Before
      v4.15)
1    C C-MP+o-wmb-o+ld-addr-o
2
3    {
4    y=1;
5    x1=y;
6    }
7
8    P0(int* x0, int** x1) {
9            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
10           smp_wmb();
11           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, x0);
12   }
13
14   P1(int** x1) {
15           int *r2;
16           int r3;
17
18           r2 = lockless_dereference(*x1); // Obsolete
19           r3 = READ_ONCE(*r2);
20   }
21
22   exists (1:r2=x0 /\ 1:r3=1)

address used by line 19, but many variations are possible, including field access using
the C-language -> operator, addition, subtraction, and array indexing.8
    One might hope that line 18’s load from the head pointer would be ordered before
line 19’s dereference, which is in fact the case on Linux v4.15 and later. However, prior
to v4.15, this was not the case on DEC Alpha, which could in effect use a speculated
value for the dependent load, as described in more detail in Section 15.6.1. Therefore,
on older versions of Linux, Listing 15.9’s exists clause can trigger.
    Listing 15.10 shows how to make this work reliably on pre-v4.15 Linux kernels
running on DEC Alpha, by replacing READ_ONCE() on line 18 of Listing 15.9 with

    8 But note that in the Linux kernel, the address dependency must be carried through the

pointer to the array, not through the array index.

                                                                                                    v2025.12.18a
528 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.11: S Address-Dependency Litmus Test
1    C C-S+o-wmb-o+o-addr-o
2
3    {
4    y=1;
5    x1=y;
6    }
7
8    P0(int* x0, int** x1) {
9            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
10           smp_wmb();
11           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, x0);
12   }
13
14   P1(int** x1) {
15           int *r2;
16
17           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
18           WRITE_ONCE(*r2, 3);
19   }
20
21   exists (1:r2=x0 /\ x0=2)

lockless_dereference(),9 which acts like READ_ONCE() on all platforms other
than DEC Alpha, where it acts like a READ_ONCE() followed by an smp_mb(), thereby
forcing the required ordering on all platforms, in turn preventing the exists clause
from triggering.
    But what happens if the dependent operation is a store rather than a load, for
example, in the S litmus test [AMP+ 11] shown in Listing 15.11 (C-S+o-wmb-o+o-
addr-o.litmus)? Because no production-quality platform speculates stores, it is not
possible for the WRITE_ONCE() on line 9 to overwrite the WRITE_ONCE() on line 18,
meaning that the exists clause on line 21 cannot trigger, even on DEC Alpha, even in
pre-v4.15 Linux kernels.
 Quick Quiz 15.19: But how do we know that all platforms really avoid triggering the exists
 clauses in Listings 15.10 and 15.11?

 Quick Quiz 15.20: Why the use of smp_wmb() in Listings 15.10 and 15.11? Wouldn’t
 smp_store_release() be a better choice?

 Quick Quiz 15.21: SP, MP, LB, and now S. Where do all these litmus-test abbreviations come
 from and how can anyone keep track of them?

   However, it is important to note that address dependencies can be fragile and easily
broken by compiler optimizations, as discussed in Section 15.4.2.

15.3.4        Data Dependencies
A data dependency occurs when the value returned by a load instruction is used to
compute the data stored by a later store instruction. Note well the “data” above: If
the value returned by a load was instead used to compute the address used by a later
store instruction, that would instead be an address dependency, which was covered in
Section 15.3.3. However, the existence of data dependencies means that the exact same

     9 Note that lockless_dereference() is not needed on v4.15 and later, and therefore

is not available in these later Linux kernels. Nor is it needed in versions of this book containing
this footnote.

                                                                                                      v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                                      529

Listing 15.12: Load-Buffering Data-Dependency Litmus Test
1    C C-LB+o-r+o-data-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            int r2;
8
9            r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10           smp_store_release(x0, 2);
11   }
12
13   P1(int *x0, int *x1)
14   {
15           int r2;
16
17           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
18           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, r2);
19   }
20
21   exists (1:r2=2 /\ 0:r2=2)

sequence of instructions used to update a linked data structure in single-threaded code
provides weak but extremely useful ordering in concurrent code.
    Listing 15.12 (C-LB+o-r+o-data-o.litmus) is similar to Listing 15.7, except
that P1()’s ordering between lines 17 and 18 is enforced not by an acquire load, but
instead by a data dependency: The value loaded by line 17 is what line 18 stores. The
ordering provided by this data dependency is sufficient to prevent the exists clause
from triggering.
    Just as with address dependencies, data dependencies are fragile and can be
easily broken by compiler optimizations, as discussed in Section 15.4.2. In fact, data
dependencies can be even more fragile than are address dependencies. The reason
for this is that address dependencies normally involve pointer values. In contrast, as
shown in Listing 15.12, it is tempting to carry data dependencies through integral values,
which the compiler has much more freedom to optimize into nonexistence. For but one
example, if the integer loaded was multiplied by the constant zero, the compiler would
know that the result was zero, and could therefore substitute the constant zero for the
value loaded, thus breaking the dependency.
 Quick Quiz 15.22: But wait!!! Line 17 of Listing 15.12 uses READ_ONCE(), which marks
 the load as volatile, which means that the compiler absolutely must emit the load instruction
 even if the value is later multiplied by zero. So how can the compiler possibly break this data
 dependency?

    In short, you can rely on data dependencies only if you prevent the compiler from
breaking them.

15.3.5       Control Dependencies
A control dependency occurs when the value returned by a load instruction is tested
to determine whether or not a later store instruction is executed. In other words, a
simple conditional branch or conditional-move instruction can act as a weak but low-
overhead memory-barrier instruction. However, note well the “later store instruction”:
Although all platforms respect load-to-store dependencies, many platforms do not
respect load-to-load control dependencies.

                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
530 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.13: Load-Buffering Control-Dependency Litmus Test
1    C C-LB+o-r+o-ctrl-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            int r2;
8
9            r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10           smp_store_release(x0, 2);
11   }
12
13   P1(int *x0, int *x1)
14   {
15           int r2;
16
17           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
18           if (r2 >= 0)
19                   WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
20   }
21
22   exists (1:r2=2 /\ 0:r2=2)

Listing 15.14: Message-Passing Control-Dependency Litmus Test (No Ordering)
1    C C-MP+o-r+o-ctrl-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int* x0, int* x1) {
6            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
7            smp_store_release(x1, 2);
8    }
9
10   P1(int* x0, int* x1) {
11           int r2;
12           int r3 = 0;
13
14           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
15           if (r2 >= 0)
16                   r3 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
17   }
18
19   exists (1:r2=2 /\ 1:r3=0)

    Listing 15.13 (C-LB+o-r+o-ctrl-o.litmus) shows another load-buffering ex-
ample, this time using a control dependency (line 18) to order the load on line 17 and
the store on line 19. The ordering is sufficient to prevent the exists from triggering.
    However, control dependencies are even more susceptible to being optimized out of
existence than are data dependencies, and Section 15.4.3 describes some of the rules
that must be followed in order to prevent your compiler from breaking your control
dependencies.
    It is worth reiterating that control dependencies provide ordering only from loads
to stores. Therefore, the load-to-load control dependency shown on lines 14–16 of
Listing 15.14 (C-MP+o-r+o-ctrl-o.litmus) does not provide ordering, and therefore
does not prevent the exists clause from triggering.
    In summary, control dependencies can be useful, but they are high-maintenance
items. You should therefore use them only when performance considerations permit no
other solution.
 Quick Quiz 15.23: Wouldn’t control dependencies be more robust if they were mandated by
 language standards???

                                                                                           v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                                     531

Listing 15.15: Cache-Coherent IRIW Litmus Test
1    C C-CCIRIW+o+o+o-o+o-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
8    }
9
10   P1(int *x)
11   {
12           WRITE_ONCE(*x, 2);
13   }
14
15   P2(int *x)
16   {
17           int r1;
18           int r2;
19
20            r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
21            r2 = READ_ONCE(*x);
22   }
23
24   P3(int *x)
25   {
26           int r3;
27           int r4;
28
29            r3 = READ_ONCE(*x);
30            r4 = READ_ONCE(*x);
31   }
32
33   exists(2:r1=1 /\ 2:r2=2 /\ 3:r3=2 /\ 3:r4=1)

15.3.6         Cache Coherence
On cache-coherent platforms, all CPUs agree on the order of loads and stores to a
given variable. Fortunately, when READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE() are used, almost
all platforms are cache-coherent, as indicated by the “SV” column of the cheat sheet
shown in Table 15.3. Unfortunately, this property is so popular that it has been named
multiple times, with “single-variable SC”,10 “single-copy atomic” [SF95], and just plain
“coherence” [AMP+ 11] having seen use. Rather than further compound the confusion
by inventing yet another term for this concept, this book uses “cache coherence” and
“coherence” interchangeably.
     Listing 15.15 (C-CCIRIW+o+o+o-o+o-o.litmus) shows a litmus test that tests for
cache coherence, where “IRIW” stands for “independent reads of independent writes”.
Because this litmus test uses only one variable, P2() and P3() must agree on the order
of P0()’s and P1()’s stores. In other words, if P2() believes that P0()’s store came
first, then P3() had better not believe that P1()’s store came first. And in fact the
exists clause on line 33 will trigger if this situation arises.
 Quick Quiz 15.24: But in Listing 15.15, wouldn’t be just as bad if P2()’s r1 and r2
 obtained the values 2 and 1, respectively, while P3()’s r3 and r4 obtained the values 1 and 2,
 respectively?

    It is tempting to speculate that different-sized overlapping loads and stores to a single
region of memory (as might be set up using the C-language union keyword) would
provide similar ordering guarantees. However, Flur et al. [FSP+ 17] discovered some
surprisingly simple litmus tests that demonstrate that such guarantees can be violated on
     10 Recall that SC stands for sequentially consistent.

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
532 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

                          CPU 0            CPU 1               CPU 2            CPU 3

                         Memory                                                 Memory

               Figure 15.12: Global System Bus And Multi-Copy Atomicity

real hardware. It is therefore necessary to restrict code to non-overlapping same-sized
aligned accesses to a given variable, at least if portability is a consideration.11
    Adding more variables and threads increases the scope for reordering and other
counter-intuitive behavior, as discussed in the next section.

15.3.7        Multicopy Atomicity
Threads running on a fully multicopy atomic [SF95] platform are guaranteed to agree
on the order of stores, even to different variables. A useful mental model of such a
system is the single-bus architecture shown in Figure 15.12. If each store resulted in a
message on the bus, and if the bus could accommodate only one store at a time, then any
pair of CPUs would agree on the order of all stores that they observed. Unfortunately,
building a computer system as shown in the figure, without store buffers or even caches,
would result in glacially slow computation. Most CPU vendors interested in providing
multicopy atomicity therefore instead provide the slightly weaker other-multicopy
atomicity [ARM17, Section B2.3], which excludes the CPU doing a given store from the
requirement that all CPUs agree on the order of all stores.12 This means that if only a
subset of CPUs are doing stores, the other CPUs will agree on the order of stores, hence
the “other” in “other-multicopy atomicity”. Unlike multicopy-atomic platforms, within
other-multicopy-atomic platforms, the CPU doing the store is permitted to observe its
store early, which allows its later loads to obtain the newly stored value directly from
the store buffer, which improves performance.
 Quick Quiz 15.25: Can you give a specific example showing different behavior for multicopy
 atomic on the one hand and other-multicopy atomic on the other?

    Perhaps there will come a day when all platforms provide some flavor of multi-copy
atomicity, but in the meantime, non-multicopy-atomic platforms do exist, and so software
must deal with them.
    Listing 15.16 (C-WRC+o+o-data-o+o-rmb-o.litmus) demonstrates multicopy
atomicity, that is, on a multicopy-atomic platform, the exists clause on line 28 cannot
trigger. In contrast, on a non-multicopy-atomic platform this exists clause can trigger,
despite P1()’s accesses being ordered by a data dependency and P2()’s accesses being
ordered by an smp_rmb(). Recall that the definition of multicopy atomicity requires
that all threads agree on the order of stores, which can be thought of as all stores reaching

    11 There is reason to believe that using atomic RMW operations (for example, xchg())

for all the stores will provide sequentially consistent ordering, but this has not yet been proven
either way.
    12 As of early 2021, Armv8 and x86 provide other-multicopy atomicity, IBM mainframe

provides full multicopy atomicity, and PPC provides no multicopy atomicity at all. More
detail is shown in Table 15.5 on page 576.

                                                                                                     v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                                  533

Listing 15.16: WRC Litmus Test With Dependencies (No Ordering)
1    C C-WRC+o+o-data-o+o-rmb-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
8    }
9
10   P1(int *x, int* y)
11   {
12           int r1;
13
14           r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
15           WRITE_ONCE(*y, r1);
16   }
17
18   P2(int *x, int* y)
19   {
20           int r2;
21           int r3;
22
23           r2 = READ_ONCE(*y);
24           smp_rmb();
25           r3 = READ_ONCE(*x);
26   }
27
28   exists (1:r1=1 /\ 2:r2=1 /\ 2:r3=0)

                            Store CPU 1
                      CPU 0 Buffer                         Store CPU 3
                                                    CPU 2 Buffer
                            Cache                         Cache

                              Memory                      Memory

              Figure 15.13: Shared Store Buffers And Multi-Copy Atomicity

all threads at the same time. Therefore, a non-multicopy-atomic platform can have a
store reach different threads at different times. In particular, P0()’s store might reach
P1() long before it reaches P2(), which raises the possibility that P1()’s store might
reach P2() before P0()’s store does.
     This leads to the question of why a real system constrained by the usual laws of
physics would ever trigger the exists clause of Listing 15.16. The cartoonish diagram
of a such a real system is shown in Figure 15.13. CPU 0 and CPU 1 share a store buffer,
as do CPUs 2 and 3. This means that CPU 1 can load a value out of the store buffer,
thus potentially immediately seeing a value stored by CPU 0. In contrast, CPUs 2 and 3
will have to wait for the corresponding cache line to carry this new value to them.

 Quick Quiz 15.26:        Then who would even think of designing a system with shared store
 buffers???

    Table 15.4 shows one sequence of events that can result in the exists clause in
Listing 15.16 triggering. This sequence of events will depend critically on P0() and
P1() sharing both cache and a store buffer in the manner shown in Figure 15.13.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
             534 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

                            Table 15.4: Memory Ordering: WRC Sequence of Events

            P0()                  P0() & P1()                P1()                              P2()
     Instruction           Store Buffer    Cache         Instruction       Instruction       Store Buffer   Cache
 1   (Initial state)                       y==0          (Initial state)   (Initial state)                  x==0
 2   x = 1;                x==1            y==0                                                             x==0
 3   (Read-Invalidate x)   x==1            y==0          r1 = x (1)                                         x==0
 4                         x==1 y==1       y==0          y = r1            r2 = y                           x==0
 5                         x==1            y==1          (Finish store)    (Read y)                         x==0
 6   (Respond y)           x==1            y==1                            (r2==1)                          x==0 y==1
 7                         x==1            y==1                            smp_rmb()                        x==0 y==1
 8                         x==1            y==1                            r3 = x (0)                       x==0 y==1
 9                         x==1            x==0 y==1                       (Respond x)                      y==1
10   (Finish store)                        x==1 y==1                                                        y==1

              Quick Quiz 15.27: But just how is it fair that P0() and P1() must share a store buffer and a
              cache, but P2() gets one each of its very own???

                  Row 1 shows the initial state, with the initial value of y in P0()’s and P1()’s shared
             cache, and the initial value of x in P2()’s cache.
                  Row 2 shows the immediate effect of P0() executing its store on line 7. Because
             the cacheline containing x is not in P0()’s and P1()’s shared cache, the new value (1)
             is stored in the shared store buffer.
                  Row 3 shows two transitions. First, P0() issues a read-invalidate operation to fetch
             the cacheline containing x so that it can flush the new value for x out of the shared store
             buffer. Second, P1() loads from x (line 14), an operation that completes immediately
             because the new value of x is immediately available from the shared store buffer.
                  Row 4 also shows two transitions. First, it shows the immediate effect of P1()
             executing its store to y (line 15), placing the new value into the shared store buffer.
             Second, it shows the start of P2()’s load from y (line 23).
                  Row 5 continues the tradition of showing two transitions. First, it shows P1()
             complete its store to y, flushing from the shared store buffer to the cache. Second, it
             shows P2() request the cacheline containing y.
                  Row 6 shows P2() receive the cacheline containing y, allowing it to finish its load
             into r2, which takes on the value 1.
                  Row 7 shows P2() execute its smp_rmb() (line 24), thus keeping its two loads
             ordered.
                  Row 8 shows P2() execute its load from x, which immediately returns with the
             value zero from P2()’s cache.
                  Row 9 shows P2() finally responding to P0()’s request for the cacheline containing
             x, which was made way back up on row 3.
                  Finally, row 10 shows P0() finish its store, flushing its value of x from the shared
             store buffer to the shared cache.
                  Note well that the exists clause on line 28 has triggered. The values of r1 and
             r2 are both the value one, and the final value of r3 the value zero. This strange result
             occurred because P0()’s new value of x was communicated to P1() long before it was
             communicated to P2().

                                                                                                                    v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                                 535

Listing 15.17: WRC Litmus Test With Release
1    C C-WRC+o+o-r+a-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
8    }
9
10   P1(int *x, int* y)
11   {
12           int r1;
13
14           r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
15           smp_store_release(y, r1);
16   }
17
18   P2(int *x, int* y)
19   {
20           int r2;
21           int r3;
22
23           r2 = smp_load_acquire(y);
24           r3 = READ_ONCE(*x);
25   }
26
27   exists (1:r1=1 /\ 2:r2=1 /\ 2:r3=0)

 Quick Quiz 15.28: Referring to Table 15.4, why on earth would P0()’s store take so long to
 complete when P1()’s store complete so quickly? In other words, does the exists clause on
 line 28 of Listing 15.16 really trigger on real systems?

    This counter-intuitive result happens because although dependencies do provide
ordering, they provide it only within the confines of their own thread. This three-
thread example requires stronger ordering, which is the subject of Sections 15.3.7.1
through 15.3.7.4.

15.3.7.1      Cumulativity

The three-thread example shown in Listing 15.16 requires cumulative ordering, or
cumulativity. A cumulative memory-ordering operation orders not just any given access
preceding it, but also earlier accesses by any thread to that same variable.
    Dependencies do not provide cumulativity, which is why the “C” column is blank for
the READ_ONCE() row of Table 15.3 on page 517. However, as indicated by the “C” in
their “C” column, release operations do provide cumulativity. Therefore, Listing 15.17
(C-WRC+o+o-r+a-o.litmus) substitutes a release operation for Listing 15.16’s data
dependency. Because the release operation is cumulative, its ordering applies not only
to Listing 15.17’s load from x by P1() on line 14, but also to the store to x by P0()
on line 7—but only if that load returns the value stored, which matches the 1:r1=1 in
the exists clause on line 27. This means that P2()’s load-acquire suffices to force
the load from x on line 24 to happen after the store on line 7, so the value returned is
one, which does not match 2:r3=0, which in turn prevents the exists clause from
triggering.
    These ordering constraints are depicted graphically in Figure 15.14. Note also that
cumulativity is not limited to a single step back in time. If there was another load from
x or store to x from any thread that came before the store on line 7, that prior load or

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
536 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

           CPU 0

        Store x=1       ... cumulativity guarantees CPU 0's store before CPU 1's store

                                                CPU 1

           ... and given this link ...        Load r1=x            .... memory barriers guarantee this order ...

                                             Release store
                                                 y=r1
                                                                                              CPU 2
                                                                                          Acquire load
                                                           Given this link ...
                                                                                             r2=y

                                                                                              Memory
                                                                                              Barrier

                                                                                          Load r3=x

                                           Figure 15.14: Cumulativity

                   CPU 0       WRITE_ONCE(x, 1);
                                                                                          1
                   CPU 1                                                              =
                                       0
                                                   fr                             x
                                   =
                   CPU 2       x
                   CPU 3                                r1 = READ_ONCE(x) == 0;

                                                                  Time

                       Figure 15.15: Load-to-Store is Counter-Temporal

store would also be ordered before the load on line 24, though only if both r1 and r2
both end up containing the value 1.
    In short, use of cumulative ordering operations can suppress non-multicopy-atomic
behaviors in some situations. Cumulativity nevertheless has limits, which are examined
in the next section.

15.3.7.2    Propagation
Listing 15.18 (C-W+RWC+o-r+a-o+o-mb-o.litmus) shows the limitations of cumula-
tivity and store-release, even with a full memory barrier. The problem is that although
the smp_store_release() on line 8 has cumulativity, and although that cumulativity
does order P2()’s load on line 26, the smp_store_release()’s ordering cannot
propagate through the combination of P1()’s load (line 17) and P2()’s store (line 24).
This means that the exists clause on line 29 really can trigger.
Quick Quiz 15.29: But it is not necessary to worry about propagation unless there are at least
three threads in the litmus test, right?

    This situation might seem completely counter-intuitive, but keep in mind that the
speed of light is finite and computers are of non-zero size. It therefore takes time for
the effect of the P2()’s store to x to propagate to P1(), which in turn means that it is
possible that P1()’s read from x happens much later in time, but nevertheless still sees

                                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                              537

Listing 15.18: W+RWC Litmus Test With Release (No Ordering)
1    C C-W+RWC+o-r+a-o+o-mb-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x, int *y)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
8            smp_store_release(y, 1);
9    }
10
11   P1(int *y, int *z)
12   {
13           int r1;
14           int r2;
15
16           r1 = smp_load_acquire(y);
17           r2 = READ_ONCE(*z);
18   }
19
20   P2(int *z, int *x)
21   {
22           int r3;
23
24           WRITE_ONCE(*z, 1);
25           smp_mb();
26           r3 = READ_ONCE(*x);
27   }
28
29   exists(1:r1=1 /\ 1:r2=0 /\ 2:r3=0)

the old value of zero. This situation is depicted in Figure 15.15: Just because a load
sees the old value does not mean that this load executed at an earlier time than did the
store of the new value.
    Note that Listing 15.18 also shows the limitations of memory-barrier pairing, given
that there are not two but three processes. These more complex litmus tests can instead
be said to have cycles, where memory-barrier pairing is the special case of a two-thread
cycle. The cycle in Listing 15.18 goes through P0() (lines 7 and 8), P1() (lines 16
and 17), P2() (lines 24, 25, and 26), and back to P0() (line 7). The exists clause
delineates this cycle: The 1:r1=1 indicates that the smp_load_acquire() on line 16
returned the value stored by the smp_store_release() on line 8, the 1:r2=0 indicates
that the WRITE_ONCE() on line 24 came too late to affect the value returned by the
READ_ONCE() on line 17, and finally the 2:r3=0 indicates that the WRITE_ONCE() on
line 7 came too late to affect the value returned by the READ_ONCE() on line 26. In
this case, the fact that the exists clause can trigger means that the cycle is said to be
allowed. In contrast, in cases where the exists clause cannot trigger, the cycle is said
to be prohibited.
    But what if we need to prohibit the cycle corresponding to the exists clause on
line 29 of Listing 15.18? One solution is to replace P0()’s smp_store_release() with
an smp_mb(), which Table 15.3 shows to have not only cumulativity, but also propagation.
The result is shown in Listing 15.19 (C-W+RWC+o-mb-o+a-o+o-mb-o.litmus).
 Quick Quiz 15.30: But given that smp_mb() has the propagation property, why doesn’t the
 smp_mb() on line 25 of Listing 15.18 prevent the exists clause from triggering?

    For completeness, Figure 15.16 shows that the “winning” store among a group of
stores to the same variable is not necessarily the store that started last. This should
not come as a surprise to anyone who carefully examined Figure 15.10 on page 523.
One way to rationalize the counter-temporal properties of both load-to-store and store-

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
538 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.19: W+WRC Litmus Test With More Barriers
1    C C-W+RWC+o-mb-o+a-o+o-mb-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x, int *y)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
8            smp_mb();
9            WRITE_ONCE(*y, 1);
10   }
11
12   P1(int *y, int *z)
13   {
14           int r1;
15           int r2;
16
17            r1 = smp_load_acquire(y);
18            r2 = READ_ONCE(*z);
19   }
20
21   P2(int *z, int *x)
22   {
23           int r3;
24
25            WRITE_ONCE(*z, 1);
26            smp_mb();
27            r3 = READ_ONCE(*x);
28   }
29
30   exists(1:r1=1 /\ 1:r2=0 /\ 2:r3=0)

                    CPU 0           WRITE_ONCE(x, 1);           1
                                                            =
                    CPU 1                               X
                                    0                                       2
                                =        co                             =
                    CPU 2   X                                       X
                    CPU 3   WRITE_ONCE(x, 2);

                                                        Time

                       Figure 15.16: Store-to-Store is Counter-Temporal

to-store ordering is to clearly distinguish between the temporal order in which the
store instructions executed on the one hand, and the order in which the corresponding
cacheline visited the CPUs that executed those instructions on the other. It is the
cacheline-visitation order that defines the externally visible ordering of the actual
stores. This cacheline-visitation order is not directly visible to the code executing the
store instructions, which results in the counter-intuitive counter-temporal nature of
load-to-store and store-to-store ordering.13
 Quick Quiz 15.31: But for litmus tests having only ordered stores, as shown in Listing 15.20
 (C-2+2W+o-wmb-o+o-wmb-o.litmus), research shows that the cycle is prohibited, even in
 weakly ordered systems such as Arm and Power [SSA+ 11]. Given that, is store-to-store ordering
 really always counter-temporal???

         But sometimes time really is on our side. Read on!

   13 In some hardware-multithreaded systems, the store would become visible to other

CPUs in that same core as soon as the store reached the shared store buffer. As a result, such
systems are non-multicopy atomic.

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                                    539

Listing 15.20: 2+2W Litmus Test With Write Barriers
1    C C-2+2W+o-wmb-o+o-wmb-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 1);
8            smp_wmb();
9            WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
10   }
11
12   P1(int *x0, int *x1)
13   {
14           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 1);
15           smp_wmb();
16           WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
17   }
18
19   exists (x0=1 /\ x1=1)

                  CPU 0       WRITE_ONCE(x, 1);
                                                                                      1
                  CPU 1                                                           =
                                                                              X
                  CPU 2              0              rf
                                 =
                  CPU 3
                             X                           r1 = READ_ONCE(x);

                                                  Time

                             Figure 15.17: Store-to-Load is Temporal

15.3.7.3      Happens-Before

As shown in Figure 15.17, on platforms without user-visible speculation, if a load
returns the value from a particular store, then, courtesy of the finite speed of light
and the non-zero size of modern computing systems, the store absolutely has to have
executed at an earlier time than did the load. This means that carefully constructed
programs can rely on the passage of time itself as a memory-ordering operation.

 Quick Quiz 15.32: Why don’t we just stick to sanely ordered CPU families like x86, so that
 time will always be on our side???

    Of course, just the passage of time by itself is not enough, as was seen in Listing 15.6
on page 525, which has nothing but store-to-load links and, because it provides
absolutely no ordering, still can trigger its exists clause. However, as long as each
thread provides even the weakest possible ordering, exists clause would not be able
to trigger. For example, Listing 15.21 (C-LB+a-o+o-data-o+o-data-o.litmus)
shows P0() ordered with an smp_load_acquire() and both P1() and P2() ordered
with data dependencies. These orderings, which are close to the top of Table 15.3,
suffice to prevent the exists clause from triggering.

 Quick Quiz 15.33: Can you construct a litmus test like that in Listing 15.21 that uses only
 dependencies?

    An important use of time for ordering memory accesses is covered in the next
section.

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
540 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.21: LB Litmus Test With One Acquire
1    C C-LB+a-o+o-data-o+o-data-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            int r2;
8
9            r2 = smp_load_acquire(x0);
10           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
11   }
12
13   P1(int *x1, int *x2)
14   {
15           int r2;
16
17           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
18           WRITE_ONCE(*x2, r2);
19   }
20
21   P2(int *x2, int *x0)
22   {
23           int r2;
24
25           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x2);
26           WRITE_ONCE(*x0, r2);
27   }
28
29   exists (0:r2=2 /\ 1:r2=2 /\ 2:r2=2)

15.3.7.4      Release-Acquire Chains
A minimal release-acquire chain was shown in Listing 15.7 on page 525, but these chains
can be much longer, as shown in Listing 15.22 (C-LB+a-r+a-r+a-r+a-r.litmus).
The longer the release-acquire chain, the more ordering is gained from the passage
of time, so that no matter how many threads are involved, the corresponding exists
clause cannot trigger.
     Although release-acquire chains are inherently store-to-load creatures, it turns out
that they can tolerate one load-to-store step, despite such steps being counter-temporal, as
shown in Figure 15.15 on page 536. For example, Listing 15.23 (C-ISA2+o-r+a-r+a-
r+a-o.litmus) shows a three-step release-acquire chain, but where P3()’s final access
is a READ_ONCE() from x0, which is accessed via WRITE_ONCE() by P0(), forming a
non-temporal load-to-store link between these two processes. However, because P0()’s
smp_store_release() (line 8) is cumulative, if P3()’s READ_ONCE() returns zero,
this cumulativity will force the READ_ONCE() to be ordered before P0()’s smp_store_
release(). In addition, the release-acquire chain (lines 8, 15, 16, 23, 24, and 32) forces
P3()’s READ_ONCE() to be ordered after P0()’s smp_store_release(). Because
P3()’s READ_ONCE() cannot be both before and after P0()’s smp_store_release(),
either or both of two things must be true:

     1. P3()’s READ_ONCE() came after P0()’s WRITE_ONCE(), so that the READ_
        ONCE() returned the value two, so that the exists clause’s 3:r2=0 is false.
     2. The release-acquire chain did not form, that is, one or more of the exists clause’s
        1:r2=2, 2:r2=2, or 3:r1=2 is false.

    Either way, the exists clause cannot trigger, despite this litmus test containing
a notorious load-to-store link between P3() and P0(). But never forget that release-
acquire chains can tolerate only one load-to-store link, as was seen in Listing 15.18.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                                          541

Listing 15.22: Long LB Release-Acquire Chain
1    C C-LB+a-r+a-r+a-r+a-r
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            int r2;
8
9            r2 = smp_load_acquire(x0);
10           smp_store_release(x1, 2);
11   }
12
13   P1(int *x1, int *x2)
14   {
15           int r2;
16
17           r2 = smp_load_acquire(x1);
18           smp_store_release(x2, 2);
19   }
20
21   P2(int *x2, int *x3)
22   {
23           int r2;
24
25           r2 = smp_load_acquire(x2);
26           smp_store_release(x3, 2);
27   }
28
29   P3(int *x3, int *x0)
30   {
31           int r2;
32
33           r2 = smp_load_acquire(x3);
34           smp_store_release(x0, 2);
35   }
36
37   exists (0:r2=2 /\ 1:r2=2 /\ 2:r2=2 /\ 3:r2=2)

    Release-acquire chains can also tolerate a single store-to-store step, as shown in
Listing 15.24 (C-Z6.2+o-r+a-r+a-r+a-o.litmus). As with the previous example,
smp_store_release()’s cumulativity combined with the temporal nature of the
release-acquire chain prevents the exists clause on line 35 from triggering.

 Quick Quiz 15.34: Suppose we have a short release-acquire chain along with one load-to-store
 link and one store-to-store link, like that shown in Listing 15.25. Given that there is only one of
 each type of non-store-to-load link, the exists cannot trigger, right?

    But beware: Adding a second store-to-store link allows the correspondingly updated
exists clause to trigger. To see this, review Listings 15.26 and 15.27, which have
identical P0() and P1() processes. The only code difference is that Listing 15.27 has
an additional P2() that does an smp_store_release() to the x2 variable that P0()
releases and P1() acquires. The exists clause is also adjusted to exclude executions
in which P2()’s smp_store_release() precedes that of P0().
    Running the litmus test in Listing 15.27 shows that the addition of P2() can totally
destroy the ordering from the release-acquire chain. Therefore, when constructing
release-acquire chains, please take care to construct them properly.

 Quick Quiz 15.35: There are store-to-load links, load-to-store links, and store-to-store links.
 But what about load-to-load links?

                                                                                                       v2025.12.18a
542 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.23: Long ISA2 Release-Acquire Chain
1    C C-ISA2+o-r+a-r+a-r+a-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
8            smp_store_release(x1, 2);
9    }
10
11   P1(int *x1, int *x2)
12   {
13           int r2;
14
15           r2 = smp_load_acquire(x1);
16           smp_store_release(x2, 2);
17   }
18
19   P2(int *x2, int *x3)
20   {
21           int r2;
22
23           r2 = smp_load_acquire(x2);
24           smp_store_release(x3, 2);
25   }
26
27   P3(int *x3, int *x0)
28   {
29           int r1;
30           int r2;
31
32           r1 = smp_load_acquire(x3);
33           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
34   }
35
36   exists (1:r2=2 /\ 2:r2=2 /\ 3:r1=2 /\ 3:r2=0)

   In short, properly constructed release-acquire chains form a peaceful (if rather tightly
constrained) island of intuitive bliss surrounded by a strongly counter-intuitive sea of
more complex memory-ordering constraints.

15.3.8       A Counter-Intuitive Case Study
This section will revisit Listing E.11 on page 881, which was presented in the answer to
Quick Quiz 15.29. This litmus test has only two threads, with the stores in P0() being
ordered by smp_wmb() and the accesses in P1() being ordered by smp_mb(). Despite
this litmus test’s small size and heavy ordering, the counter-intuitive outcome shown in
the exists clause is in fact allowed.
     One way to look at this was presented in the answer to Quick Quiz 15.29, namely that
the link from P0() to P1() is a store-to-store link, and that back from P1() to P0() is a
store-to-store link. Both links are counter-temporal, thus requiring full memory barriers
in both processes. Revisiting Figures 15.16 and 15.17 shows that these counter-temporal
links give the hardware considerable latitude.
     But that raises the question of exactly how hardware would go about using this
latitude to satisfy the exists clause in Listing E.11. There is no known “toy” hardware
implementation that can do this, so let us instead study the sequence of steps that the
PowerPC architecture goes through to make this happen.
     The first step in this study is to translate Listing E.11 to a PowerPC assembly
language litmus test (Section 12.2.1 on page 411):

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                  543

Listing 15.24: Long Z6.2 Release-Acquire Chain
1    C C-Z6.2+o-r+a-r+a-r+a-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
8            smp_store_release(x1, 2);
9    }
10
11   P1(int *x1, int *x2)
12   {
13           int r2;
14
15           r2 = smp_load_acquire(x1);
16           smp_store_release(x2, 2);
17   }
18
19   P2(int *x2, int *x3)
20   {
21           int r2;
22
23           r2 = smp_load_acquire(x2);
24           smp_store_release(x3, 2);
25   }
26
27   P3(int *x3, int *x0)
28   {
29           int r2;
30
31           r2 = smp_load_acquire(x3);
32           WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 3);
33   }
34
35   exists (1:r2=2 /\ 2:r2=2 /\ 3:r2=2 /\ x0=2)

Listing 15.25: Z6.2 Release-Acquire Chain (Ordering?)
1    C C-Z6.2+o-r+a-o+o-mb-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x, int *y)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
8            smp_store_release(y, 1);
9    }
10
11   P1(int *y, int *z)
12   {
13           int r1;
14
15           r1 = smp_load_acquire(y);
16           WRITE_ONCE(*z, 1);
17   }
18
19   P2(int *z, int *x)
20   {
21           int r2;
22
23           WRITE_ONCE(*z, 2);
24           smp_mb();
25           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x);
26   }
27
28   exists(1:r1=1 /\ 2:r2=0 /\ z=2)

                                                              v2025.12.18a
544 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.26: A Release-Acquire Chain Ordering Multiple Accesses
1    C C-MP+o-r+a-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int* x0, int* x1, int* x2) {
6            int r1;
7
8            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
9            r1 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10           smp_store_release(x2, 2);
11   }
12
13   P1(int* x0, int* x1, int* x2) {
14           int r2;
15           int r3;
16
17           r2 = smp_load_acquire(x2);
18           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
19           r3 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
20   }
21
22   exists (1:r2=2 /\ (1:r3=0 \/ 0:r1=2))

Listing 15.27: A Release-Acquire Chain With Added Store (Ordering?)
1    C C-MPO+o-r+a-o+o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int* x0, int* x1, int* x2) {
6            int r1;
7
8            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
9            r1 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10           smp_store_release(x2, 2);
11   }
12
13   P1(int* x0, int* x1, int* x2) {
14           int r2;
15           int r3;
16
17           r2 = smp_load_acquire(x2);
18           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
19           r3 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
20   }
21
22   P2(int* x2) {
23           smp_store_release(x2, 3);
24   }
25
26   exists (1:r2=3 /\ x2=3 /\ (1:r3=0 \/ 0:r1=2))

                                                                      v2025.12.18a
 15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                              545

 1   PPC R+lwsync+sync
 2   {
 3   0:r1=1; 0:r2=x; 0:r4=y;
 4   1:r1=2; 1:r2=y; 1:r4=x;
 5   }
 6    P0           | P1           ;
 7    stw r1,0(r2) | stw r1,0(r2) ;
 8    lwsync       | sync         ;
 9    stw r1,0(r4) | lwz r3,0(r4) ;
10   exists (y=2 /\ 1:r3=0)

     The first line identifies the type of test (PPC) and gives the test’s name. Lines 3
 and 4 initialize P0()’s and P1()’s registers, respectively. Lines 6–9 show the PowerPC
 assembly statements corresponding to the C code from Listing E.11, with the first
 column being the code for P0() and the second column being the code for P1().
 Line 7 shows the initial WRITE_ONCE() calls in both columns; the columns of line 8
 show the smp_wmb() and smp_mb() for P0() and P1(), respectively; the columns
 of line 9 shows P0()’s WRITE_ONCE() and P1()’s READ_ONCE(), respectively; and
 finally line 10 shows the exists clause.
     In order for this exists clause to be satisfied, P0()’s stw to y must precede that of
 P1(), but P1()’s later lwz from x must precede P0()’s stw to x. Seeing how this can
 happen requires a rough understanding of the following PowerPC terminology.

 Instruction commit:
       This can be thought of as the execution of that instruction as opposed to the
       memory-system consequences of having executed that instruction.
 Write reaching coherence point:
      This can be thought of as the value written being deposited into the corresponding
      cache line.
 Partial coherence commit:
       This can be thought of as the system having worked out the order in which a
       pair of values written will be deposited into the corresponding cache line, but
       potentially well before that cache line arrives. Some might argue that the data
       in Figure 15.10 suggests that real PowerPC hardware does in fact use partial
       coherence commits to handle concurrent stores by multiple hardware threads
       within a single core.
 Write propagate to thread:
      This occurs when a second hardware thread becomes aware of the first hardware
      thread’s write. The time at which a write propagates to a given thread might not
      have any relation to cache-line movement. For example, if a pair of threads share
      a store buffer, they might see each others’ writes long before the cache line gets
      involved. On the other hand, if a pair of hardware threads are widely separated,
      the first thread’s write’s value might have been deposited into the corresponding
      cache line long before the second thread learns of that write.
 Barrier propagate to thread:
      Hardware threads make each other aware of memory-barrier instructions as
      needed by propagating them to each other.
 Acknowledge sync:
      The PowerPC sync instruction implements the Linux kernel’s smp_mb() full

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
546 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

                        Figure 15.18: PPCMEM Initial R State

                         Figure 15.19: PPCMEM First R Step

      barrier. And one reason that the sync instruction provides such strong ordering is
      that each sync is not only propagated to other hardware threads, but these other
      threads must also acknowledge each sync. This two-way communication allows
      the hardware threads to cooperate to produce the required strong global ordering.

    We are now ready to step through the PowerPC sequence of events that satisfies the
above exists clause.
    To best understand this, please follow along at https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/
~pes20/ppcmem/index.html, carefully copying the above assembly-language litmus
test into the pane. The result should look as shown in Figure 15.18, give or take space
characters. Click on the “Interactive” button in the lower left, which, after a short delay,
should produce a display as shown in Figure 15.19. If the “Interactive” button refuses
to do anything, this usually means that there is a syntax error, for example, a spurious
newline character might have been introduced during the copy-paste operation.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
15.3. TRICKS AND TRAPS                                                                 547

    This display has one clickable link in each section displaying thread state, and
as the “Commit” in each link suggests, these links commit each thread’s first stw
instruction. If you prefer, you can instead click on the corresponding links listed under
“Enabled transitions” near the bottom of the screen. Note well that some of the later
memory-system transitions will appear in the upper “Storage subsystem state” section
of this display.
    The following sequence of clicks demonstrates how the exists clause can be
satisfied:
   1. Commit P0()’s first stw instruction (to x).
   2. Commit P1()’s stw instruction.
   3. Commit P0()’s lwsync instruction.
   4. Commit P0()’s second stw instruction (to y).
   5. Commit P1()’s sync instruction.
   6. At this point, there should be no clickable links in either of the two sections
      displaying thread state, but there should be quite a few of them up in the “Storage
      subsystem state”. The following steps tell you which of them to click on.
   7. Partial coherence commit: c:W y=1 ->d:W y=2. This commits the sys-
      tem to processing P0()’s store to y before P1()’s store even though neither
      store has reached either the coherence point or any other thread. One might
      imagine partial coherence commits happening within a store buffer that is shared
      by multiple hardware threads that are writing to the same variable.
   8. Write propagate to thread: d:W y=2 to Thread 0. This is necessary
      to allow P1()’s sync instruction to propagate to P0().
   9. Barrier propagate to thread: e:Sync to Thread 0.
  10. Write reaching coherence point: a:W x=1.
  11. Write reaching coherence point: c:W y=1.
  12. Write reaching coherence point: d:W y=2. These three operations were
      required in order to allow P0() to acknowledge P1()’s sync instruction.
  13. Acknowledge sync: Sync e:Sync.
  14. Back down in thread P1()’s state, click on Read i:W x=0, which loads the value
      zero, thus satisfying the exists clause. All that remains is cleanup, which can
      be carried out in any order.
  15. Commit P1()’s lwz instruction.
  16. Write propagate to thread: a:W x=1 to Thread 1.
  17. Barrier propagate to thread: b:Lwsync to Thread 1.
    At this point, you should see something like Figure 15.20. Note that the satisified
exists clause is shown in blue near the bottom, confirming that this counter-intuitive
really can happen. If you wish, you can click on “Undo” to explore other options or
click on “Reset” to start over. It can be very helpful to carry out these steps in different
orders to better understand how a non-multicopy-atomic architecture operates.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
548 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

                        Figure 15.20: PPCMEM Final R State

Quick Quiz 15.36: What happens if that lwsync instruction is instead a sync instruction?

   Although a full understanding of how this counter-intuitive outcome happens
would require hardware details that are beyond the scope of this book, this exercise
should provide some helpful intuitions. Or perhaps more accurately, destroy some
counter-productive intuitions.

15.4      Compile-Time Consternation

                                         Science increases our power in proportion as it
                                         lowers our pride.
                                                                              Claude Bernard

Most languages, including C, were developed on uniprocessor systems by people
with little or no parallel-programming experience. As a result, unless explicitly told
otherwise, these languages assume that the current CPU is the only thing that is reading
or writing memory. This in turn means that these languages’ compilers’ optimizers are
ready, willing, and oh so able to make dramatic changes to the order, number, and sizes
of memory references that your program executes. In fact, the reordering carried out by
hardware can seem quite tame by comparison.
    This section will help you tame your compiler, thus avoiding a great deal of
compile-time consternation. Section 15.4.1 describes how to keep the compiler from
destructively optimizing your code’s memory references, Section 15.4.2 describes how
to protect address and data dependencies, and finally, Section 15.4.3 describes how to
protect those delicate control dependencies.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
15.4. COMPILE-TIME CONSTERNATION                                                         549

15.4.1      Memory-Reference Restrictions
As noted in Section 4.3.4, unless told otherwise, compilers assume that nothing else is
affecting the variables that the code is accessing. Furthermore, this assumption is not
simply some design error, but is instead enshrined in various standards.14 It is worth
summarizing this material in preparation for the following sections.
    Plain accesses, as in plain-access C-language assignment statements such as “r1 = a”
or “b = 1” are subject to the shared-variable shenanigans described in Section 4.3.4.1.
Ways of avoiding these shenanigans are described in Sections 4.3.4.2–4.3.4.4 starting
on page 72:

   1. Plain accesses can tear, for example, the compiler could choose to access an
      eight-byte pointer one byte at a time. Tearing of aligned machine-sized accesses
      can be prevented by using READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE().

   2. Plain loads can fuse, for example, if the results of an earlier load from that same
      object are still in a machine register, the compiler might opt to reuse the value in
      that register instead of reloading from memory. Load fusing can be prevented
      by using READ_ONCE() or by enforcing ordering between the two loads using
      barrier(), smp_rmb(), and other means shown in Table 15.3.

   3. Plain stores can fuse, so that a store can be omitted entirely if there is a later store
      to that same variable. Store fusing can be prevented by using WRITE_ONCE()
      or by enforcing ordering between the two stores using barrier(), smp_wmb(),
      and other means shown in Table 15.3.
   4. Plain accesses can be reordered in surprising ways by modern optimizing com-
      pilers. This reordering can be prevented by enforcing ordering as called out
      above.
   5. Plain loads can be invented, for example, register pressure might cause the
      compiler to discard a previously loaded value from its register, and then reload it
      later on. Invented loads can be prevented by using READ_ONCE() or by enforcing
      ordering as called out above between the load and a later use of its value using
      barrier().
   6. Stores can be invented before a plain store, for example, by using the stored-to
      location as temporary storage. This can be prevented by use of WRITE_ONCE().
   7. Stores can be transformed into a load-check-store sequence, which can defeat
      control dependencies. This can be prevented by use of smp_load_acquire().

Quick Quiz 15.37: Why not place a barrier() call immediately before a plain store to
prevent the compiler from inventing stores?

    Please note that all of these shared-memory shenanigans can instead be avoided by
avoiding data races on plain accesses, as described in Section 4.3.4.4. After all, if there
are no data races, then each and every one of the compiler optimizations mentioned
above is perfectly safe. But for code containing data races, this list is subject to change
without notice as compiler optimizations continue becoming increasingly aggressive.

  14 Or perhaps it is a standardized design error.

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
550 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

    In short, use of READ_ONCE(), WRITE_ONCE(), barrier(), volatile, and other
primitives called out in Table 15.3 on page 517 are valuable tools in preventing the
compiler from optimizing your parallel algorithm out of existence. Compilers are starting
to provide other mechanisms for avoiding load and store tearing, for example, memory_
order_relaxed atomic loads and stores, however, work is still needed [Cor16]. In
addition, compiler issues aside, volatile is still needed to avoid fusing and invention
of accesses, including C11 atomic accesses.
    Please note that, it is possible to overdo use of READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE().
For example, if you have prevented a given variable from changing (perhaps by holding
the lock guarding all updates to that variable), there is no point in using READ_ONCE().
Similarly, if you have prevented any other CPUs or threads from reading a given variable
(perhaps because you are initializing that variable before any other CPU or thread has
access to it), there is no point in using WRITE_ONCE(). However, in my experience,
developers need to use things like READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE() more often than
they think that they do, and the overhead of unnecessary uses is quite low. In contrast,
the penalty for failing to use them when needed can be quite high.

15.4.2     Address- and Data-Dependency Difficulties
The low overheads of the address and data dependencies discussed in Sections 15.3.3
and 15.3.4, respectively, makes their use extremely attractive. Unfortunately, compilers
do not understand either address or data dependencies, although there are efforts
underway to teach them, or at the very least, standardize the process of teaching
them [MWB+ 17, MRP+ 17]. In the meantime, it is necessary to be very careful in order
to prevent your compiler from breaking your dependencies.

15.4.2.1   Give your dependency chain a good start

The load that heads your dependency chain must use proper ordering, for example
rcu_dereference() or READ_ONCE(). Failure to follow this rule can have serious
side effects:

   1. On DEC Alpha, a dependent load might not be ordered with the load heading the
      dependency chain, as described in Section 15.6.1.

   2. If the load heading the dependency chain is a C11 non-volatile memory_order_
      relaxed load, the compiler could omit the load, for example, by using a value
      that it loaded in the past.

   3. If the load heading the dependency chain is a plain load, the compiler can omit
      the load, again by using a value that it loaded in the past. Worse yet, it could
      load twice instead of once, so that different parts of your code use different
      values—and compilers really do this, especially when under register pressure.

   4. The value loaded by the head of the dependency chain must be a pointer. In
      theory, yes, you could load an integer, perhaps to use it as an array index. In
      practice, the compiler knows too much about integers, and thus has way too many
      opportunities to break your dependency chain [MWB+ 17].

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
15.4. COMPILE-TIME CONSTERNATION                                                          551

Listing 15.28: Breakable Dependencies With Comparisons
1    int reserve_int;
2    int *gp;
3    int *p;
4
5    p = rcu_dereference(gp);
6    if (p == &reserve_int)
7            handle_reserve(p);
8    do_something_with(*p); /* buggy! */

Listing 15.29: Broken Dependencies With Comparisons
1    int reserve_int;
2    int *gp;
3    int *p;
4
5    p = rcu_dereference(gp);
6    if (p == &reserve_int) {
7             handle_reserve(&reserve_int);
8             do_something_with(reserve_int); /* buggy! */
9    } else {
10            do_something_with(*p); /* OK! */
11   }

15.4.2.2      Avoid arithmetic dependency breakage
Although it is just fine to do some arithmetic operations on a pointer in your dependency
chain, you need to be careful to avoid giving the compiler too much information. After
all, if the compiler learns enough to determine the exact value of the pointer, it can use
that exact value instead of the pointer itself. As soon as the compiler does that, the
dependency is broken and all ordering is lost.

     1. Although it is permissible to compute offsets from a pointer, these offsets must not
        result in total cancellation. For example, given a char pointer cp, cp-(uintptr_
        t)cp will cancel and can allow the compiler to break your dependency chain.
        On the other hand, canceling offset values with each other is perfectly safe and
        legal. For example, if a and b are equal, cp+a-b is an identity function, including
        preserving the dependency.

     2. Comparisons can break dependencies. Listing 15.28 shows how this can happen.
        Here global pointer gp points to a dynamically allocated integer, but if memory
        is low, it might instead point to the reserve_int variable. This reserve_int
        case might need special handling, as shown on lines 6 and 7 of the listing.
        But the compiler could reasonably transform this code into the form shown in
        Listing 15.29, especially on systems where instructions with absolute addresses
        run faster than instructions using addresses supplied in registers. However, there
        is clearly no ordering between the pointer load on line 5 and the dereference on
        line 8. Please note that this is simply an example: There are a great many other
        ways to break dependency chains with comparisons.

 Quick Quiz 15.38: Why can’t you simply dereference the pointer before comparing it to
 &reserve_int on line 6 of Listing 15.28?

 Quick Quiz 15.39: But it should be safe to compare two pointer variables, right? After all,
 the compiler doesn’t know the value of either, so how can it possibly learn anything from the
 comparison?

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
552 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

    Note that a series of inequality comparisons might, when taken together, give the
compiler enough information to determine the exact value of the pointer, at which
point the dependency is broken. Furthermore, the compiler might be able to combine
information from even a single inequality comparison with other information to learn
the exact value, again breaking the dependency. Pointers to elements in arrays are
especially susceptible to this latter form of dependency breakage.

15.4.2.3   Safe comparison of dependent pointers
It turns out that there are several safe ways to compare dependent pointers:

   1. Comparisons against the NULL pointer. In this case, all the compiler can learn
      is that the pointer is NULL, in which case you are not allowed to dereference it
      anyway.

   2. The dependent pointer is never dereferenced, whether before or after the compari-
      son.

   3. The dependent pointer is compared to a pointer that references objects that were
      last modified a very long time ago, where the only unconditionally safe value of
      “a very long time ago” is “at compile time”. The key point is that something other
      than the address or data dependency guarantees ordering.

   4. Comparisons between two pointers, each of which carries an appropriate depen-
      dency. For example, you have a pair of pointers, each carrying a dependency,
      to data structures each containing a lock, and you want to avoid deadlock by
      acquiring the locks in address order.

   5. The comparison is not-equal, and the compiler does not have enough other
      information to deduce the value of the pointer carrying the dependency.

    Pointer comparisons can be quite tricky, and so it is well worth working through the
example shown in Listing 15.30. This example uses a simple struct foo shown on
lines 1–5 and two global pointers, gp1 and gp2, shown on lines 6 and 7, respectively.
This example uses two threads, namely updater() on lines 9–22 and reader() on
lines 24–39.
    The updater() thread allocates memory on line 13, and complains bitterly on
line 14 if none is available. Lines 15–17 initialize the newly allocated structure, and then
line 18 assigns the pointer to gp1. Lines 19 and 20 then update two of the structure’s
fields, and does so after line 18 has made those fields visible to readers. Please note
that unsynchronized update of reader-visible fields often constitutes a bug. Although
there are legitimate use cases doing just this, such use cases require more care than is
exercised in this example.
    Finally, line 21 assigns the pointer to gp2.
    The reader() thread first fetches gp2 on line 30, with lines 31 and 32 checking for
NULL and returning if so. Line 33 fetches field ->b and line 34 fetches gp1. If line 35
sees that the pointers fetched on lines 30 and 34 are equal, line 36 fetches p->c. Note
that line 36 uses pointer p fetched on line 30, not pointer q fetched on line 34.
    But this difference might not matter. An equals comparison on line 35 might lead
the compiler to (incorrectly) conclude that both pointers are equivalent, when in fact
they carry different dependencies. This means that the compiler might well transform

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
15.4. COMPILE-TIME CONSTERNATION                                                       553

Listing 15.30: Broken Dependencies With Pointer Comparisons
1    struct foo {
2            int a;
3            int b;
4            int c;
5    };
6    struct foo *gp1;
7    struct foo *gp2;
8
9    void updater(void)
10   {
11           struct foo *p;
12
13           p = malloc(sizeof(*p));
14           BUG_ON(!p);
15           p->a = 42;
16           p->b = 43;
17           p->c = 44;
18           rcu_assign_pointer(gp1, p);
19           WRITE_ONCE(p->b, 143);
20           WRITE_ONCE(p->c, 144);
21           rcu_assign_pointer(gp2, p);
22   }
23
24   void reader(void)
25   {
26           struct foo *p;
27           struct foo *q;
28           int r1, r2 = 0;
29
30           p = rcu_dereference(gp2);
31           if (p == NULL)
32                   return;
33           r1 = READ_ONCE(p->b);
34           q = rcu_dereference(gp1);
35           if (p == q) {
36                   r2 = READ_ONCE(p->c);
37           }
38           do_something_with(r1, r2);
39   }

line 36 to instead be r2 = READ_ONCE(q->c), which might well cause the value 44 to
be loaded instead of the expected value 144.
    Quick Quiz 15.40: But doesn’t the condition in line 35 supply a control dependency that
    would keep line 36 ordered after line 34?

    In short, great care is required to ensure that dependency chains in your source code
are still dependency chains in the compiler-generated assembly code.

15.4.3        Control-Dependency Calamities
The control dependencies described in Section 15.3.5 are attractive due to their low
overhead, but are also especially tricky because current compilers do not understand
them and can easily break them. The rules and examples in this section are intended to
help you prevent your compiler’s ignorance from breaking your code.
    A load-load control dependency requires a full read memory barrier, not simply a
data dependency barrier. Consider the following bit of code:

1    q = READ_ONCE(x);
2    if (q) {
3             <data dependency barrier>
4             q = READ_ONCE(y);
5    }

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
 554 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

     This will not have the desired effect because there is no actual data dependency, but
 rather a control dependency that the CPU may short-circuit by attempting to predict the
 outcome in advance, so that other CPUs see the load from y as having happened before
 the load from x. In such a case what’s actually required is:
 1    q = READ_ONCE(x);
 2    if (q) {
 3             <read barrier>
 4             q = READ_ONCE(y);
 5    }

     However, stores are not speculated. This means that ordering is provided for
 load-store control dependencies, as in the following example:
 1    q = READ_ONCE(x);
 2    if (q)
 3            WRITE_ONCE(y, 1);

     Control dependencies pair normally with other types of ordering operations. That
 said, please note that neither READ_ONCE() nor WRITE_ONCE() are optional! Without
 the READ_ONCE(), the compiler might fuse the load from x with other loads from x.
 Without the WRITE_ONCE(), the compiler might fuse the store to y with other stores
 to y, or, worse yet, read the value, compare it, and only conditionally do the store. Any
 of these can result in highly counter-intuitive effects on ordering.
     Worse yet, if the compiler is able to prove (say) that the value of variable x is
 always non-zero, it would be well within its rights to optimize the original example by
 eliminating the “if” statement as follows:
 1    q = READ_ONCE(x);
 2    WRITE_ONCE(y, 1); /* BUG: CPU can reorder!!! */

     Quick Quiz 15.41: But there is a READ_ONCE(), so how can the compiler prove anything
     about the value of q?

   It is tempting to try to enforce ordering on identical stores on both branches of the
“if” statement as follows:
 1    q = READ_ONCE(x);
 2    if (q) {
 3             barrier();
 4             WRITE_ONCE(y, 1);
 5             do_something();
 6    } else {
 7             barrier();
 8             WRITE_ONCE(y, 1);
 9             do_something_else();
10    }

     Unfortunately, current compilers will transform this as follows at high optimization
 levels:
 1    q = READ_ONCE(x);
 2    barrier();
 3    WRITE_ONCE(y, 1); /* BUG: No ordering!!! */
 4    if (q)
 5            do_something();
 6    else
 7            do_something_else();

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
15.4. COMPILE-TIME CONSTERNATION                                                    555

    Now there is no conditional between the load from x and the store to y, which
means that the CPU is within its rights to reorder them: The conditional is absolutely
required, and must be present in the assembly code even after all compiler optimizations
have been applied. Therefore, if you need ordering in this example, you need explicit
memory-ordering operations, for example, a release store:

1   q = READ_ONCE(x);
2   if (q) {
3            smp_store_release(&y, 1);
4            do_something();
5   } else {
6            smp_store_release(&y, 1);
7            do_something_else();
8   }

    The initial READ_ONCE() is still required to prevent the compiler from guessing the
value of x. In addition, you need to be careful what you do with the local variable q,
otherwise the compiler might be able to guess its value and again remove the needed
conditional. For example:

1   q = READ_ONCE(x);
2   if (q % MAX) {
3            WRITE_ONCE(y, 1);
4            do_something();
5   } else {
6            WRITE_ONCE(y, 2);
7            do_something_else();
8   }

    If MAX is defined to be 1, then the compiler knows that (q%MAX) is equal to zero,
in which case the compiler is within its rights to transform the above code into the
following:

1   q = READ_ONCE(x);
2   WRITE_ONCE(y, 2);
3   do_something_else();

    Given this transformation, the CPU is not required to respect the ordering between
the load from variable x and the store to variable y. It is tempting to add a barrier()
to constrain the compiler, but this does not help. The conditional is gone, and the
barrier() won’t bring it back. Therefore, if you are relying on this ordering, you
should make sure that MAX is greater than one, perhaps as follows:

1   q = READ_ONCE(x);
2   BUILD_BUG_ON(MAX <= 1);
3   if (q % MAX) {
4            WRITE_ONCE(y, 1);
5            do_something();
6   } else {
7            WRITE_ONCE(y, 2);
8            do_something_else();
9   }

    Please note once again that the stores to y differ. If they were identical, as noted
earlier, the compiler could pull this store outside of the “if” statement.
    You must also avoid excessive reliance on boolean short-circuit evaluation. Consider
this example:

                                                                                           v2025.12.18a
556 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

1   q = READ_ONCE(x);
2   if (q || 1 > 0)
3           WRITE_ONCE(y, 1);

   Because the first condition cannot fault and the second condition is always true, the
compiler can transform this example as following, defeating the control dependency:
1   q = READ_ONCE(x);
2   WRITE_ONCE(y, 1);

    This example underscores the need to ensure that the compiler cannot out-guess
your code. Never forget that, although READ_ONCE() does force the compiler to actually
emit code for a given load, it does not force the compiler to use the value loaded.
    In addition, control dependencies apply only to the then-clause and else-clause of
the if-statement in question. In particular, it does not necessarily apply to code following
the if-statement:
1   q = READ_ONCE(x);
2   if (q)
3           WRITE_ONCE(y, 1);
4   else
5           WRITE_ONCE(y, 2);
6   WRITE_ONCE(z, 1); /* BUG: No ordering. */

    It is tempting to argue that there in fact is ordering because the compiler cannot
reorder volatile accesses and also cannot reorder the writes to y with the condition.
Unfortunately for this line of reasoning, the compiler might compile the two writes to y
as conditional-move instructions, as in this fanciful pseudo-assembly language:
1   ld r1,x
2   cmp r1,$0
3   cmov,ne r4,$1
4   cmov,eq r4,$2
5   st r4,y
6   st $1,z

     A weakly ordered CPU would have no dependency of any sort between the load
from x and the store to z. The control dependencies would extend only to the pair of
cmov instructions and the store depending on them. In short, control dependencies apply
only to the stores in the “then” and “else” of the “if” in question (including functions
invoked by those two clauses), and not necessarily to code following that “if”.
     Finally, control dependencies do not provide cumulativity.15 This is demonstrated
by two related litmus tests, namely Listings 15.31 and 15.32 with the initial values of x
and y both being zero.
     The exists clause in the two-thread example of Listing 15.31 (C-LB+o-cgt-o+o-
cgt-o.litmus) will never trigger. If control dependencies guaranteed cumulativity
(which they do not), then adding a thread to the example as in Listing 15.32 (C-WWC+o-
cgt-o+o-cgt-o+o.litmus) would guarantee the related exists clause never to
trigger.
     But because control dependencies do not provide cumulativity, the exists clause
in the three-thread litmus test can trigger. If you need the three-thread example to
provide ordering, you will need smp_mb() between the load and store in P0(), that
is, just before or just after the “if” statements. Furthermore, the original two-thread
example is very fragile and should be avoided.
    15 Refer to Section 15.3.7.1 for the meaning of cumulativity.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
15.4. COMPILE-TIME CONSTERNATION                                         557

Listing 15.31: LB Litmus Test With Control Dependency
1    C C-LB+o-cgt-o+o-cgt-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x, int *y)
6    {
7            int r1;
8
9            r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
10           if (r1 > 0)
11                   WRITE_ONCE(*y, 1);
12   }
13
14   P1(int *x, int *y)
15   {
16           int r2;
17
18           r2 = READ_ONCE(*y);
19           if (r2 > 0)
20                   WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
21   }
22
23   exists (0:r1=1 /\ 1:r2=1)

Listing 15.32: WWC Litmus Test With Control Dependency (Cumulativity?)
1    C C-WWC+o-cgt-o+o-cgt-o+o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x, int *y)
6    {
7            int r1;
8
9            r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
10           if (r1 > 0)
11                   WRITE_ONCE(*y, 1);
12   }
13
14   P1(int *x, int *y)
15   {
16           int r2;
17
18           r2 = READ_ONCE(*y);
19           if (r2 > 0)
20                   WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
21   }
22
23   P2(int *x)
24   {
25           WRITE_ONCE(*x, 2);
26   }
27
28   exists (0:r1=2 /\ 1:r2=1 /\ x=2)

                                                                               v2025.12.18a
558 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Quick Quiz 15.42: Can’t you instead add an smp_mb() to P1() in Listing 15.32?

   The following list of rules summarizes the lessons of this section:

   1. Compilers do not understand control dependencies, so it is your job to make sure
      that the compiler cannot break your code.

   2. Control dependencies can order prior loads against later stores. However, they do
      not guarantee any other sort of ordering: Not prior loads against later loads, nor
      prior stores against later anything. If you need these other forms of ordering, use
      smp_rmb(), smp_wmb(), or, in the case of prior stores and later loads, smp_mb().

   3. If both legs of the “if” statement begin with identical stores to the same variable,
      then the control dependency will not order those stores. If ordering is needed,
      precede both of them with smp_mb() or use smp_store_release(). Please
      note that it is not sufficient to use barrier() at beginning of each leg of the “if”
      statement because, as shown by the example above, optimizing compilers can
      destroy the control dependency while respecting the letter of the barrier() law.

   4. Control dependencies require at least one run-time conditional between the prior
      load and the subsequent store, and this conditional must involve the prior load. If
      the compiler is able to optimize the conditional away, it will have also optimized
      away the ordering. Careful use of READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE() can help to
      preserve the needed conditional.

   5. Control dependencies require that the compiler avoid reordering the depen-
      dency into nonexistence. Careful use of READ_ONCE(), atomic_read(), or
      atomic64_read() can help to preserve your control dependency.

   6. Control dependencies apply only to the “then” and “else” of the “if” containing
      the control dependency, including any functions that these two clauses call.
      Control dependencies do not apply to code following the end of the “if” statement
      containing the control dependency.

   7. Control dependencies pair normally with other types of memory-ordering opera-
      tions.

   8. Control dependencies do not provide cumulativity. If you need cumulativity, use
      something that provides it, such as smp_store_release() or smp_mb().

   Again, many popular languages were designed with single-threaded use in mind.
Successful multithreaded use of these languages requires you to pay special attention to
your memory references and dependencies.

15.5      Higher-Level Primitives
                                        Method will teach you to win time.
                                                               Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

The answer to one of the quick quizzes in Section 12.3.1 demonstrated exponential
speedups due to verifying programs modeled at higher levels of abstraction. This section

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
15.5. HIGHER-LEVEL PRIMITIVES                                                           559

will look into how higher levels of abstraction can also provide a deeper understanding
of the synchronization primitives themselves. Section 15.5.1 takes a look at memory
allocation, Section 15.5.2 examines the surprisingly varied semantics of locking, and
Section 15.5.3 digs more deeply into RCU.

15.5.1    Memory Allocation
Section 6.4.3.2 touched upon memory allocation, and this section expands upon the
relevant memory-ordering issues.
    The key requirement is that any access executed on a given block of memory before
freeing that block must be ordered before any access executed after that same block is
reallocated. It would after all be a cruel and unusual memory-allocator bug if a store
preceding the free were to be reordered after another store following the reallocation!
However, it would also be cruel and unusual to require developers to use READ_ONCE()
and WRITE_ONCE() to access dynamically allocated memory. Full ordering must
therefore be provided for plain accesses, in spite of all the shared-variable shenanigans
called out in Section 4.3.4.1.
    Of course, each CPU sees its own accesses in order and the compiler always has fully
accounted for intra-CPU shenanigans, give or take the occasional compiler bug. These
facts are what enables the lockless fastpaths in memblock_alloc() and memblock_
free(), which are shown in Listings 6.10 and 6.11, respectively. However, this is also
why the developer is responsible for providing appropriate ordering (for example, by
using smp_store_release()) when publishing a pointer to a newly allocated block
of memory. After all, in the CPU-local case, the allocator has not necessarily provided
any cross-CPU ordering.
    This means that the allocator must provide ordering when rebalancing its per-
thread pools. This ordering is provided by the calls to spin_lock() and spin_
unlock() from memblock_alloc() and memblock_free(). For any block that
has migrated from one thread to another, the old thread will have executed spin_
unlock(&globalmem.mutex) after placing the block in the globalmem pool, and the
new thread will have executed spin_lock(&globalmem.mutex) before moving that
block to its per-thread pool. This spin_unlock() and spin_lock() ensures that both
the old and new threads see the old thread’s accesses as having happened before those
of the new thread.
Quick Quiz 15.43: But doesn’t PowerPC have weak unlock-lock ordering properties within the
Linux kernel, allowing a write before the unlock to be reordered with a read after the lock?

    Therefore, the ordering required by conventional uses of memory allocation can be
provided solely by non-fastpath locking, allowing the fastpath to remain synchronization-
free.

15.5.2    Locking
Locking is a well-known synchronization primitive with which the parallel-programming
community has had decades of experience. As such, locking’s semantics are quite
simple.
    That is, they are quite simple until you start trying to mathematically model them.
    The simple part is that any CPU or thread holding a given lock is guaranteed to
see any accesses executed by CPUs or threads while they were previously holding that
same lock. Similarly, any CPU or thread holding a given lock is guaranteed not to see

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
560 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.33: Prior Accesses Into Critical Section (Ordering?)
1    C Lock-before-into
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x, int *y, spinlock_t *sp)
6    {
7            int r1;
8
9            WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
10           spin_lock(sp);
11           r1 = READ_ONCE(*y);
12           spin_unlock(sp);
13   }
14
15   P1(int *x, int *y)
16   {
17           int r1;
18
19           WRITE_ONCE(*y, 1);
20           smp_mb();
21           r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
22   }
23
24   exists (0:r1=0 /\ 1:r1=0)

accesses that will be executed by other CPUs or threads while subsequently holding that
same lock. And what else is there?
   As it turns out, quite a bit:

     1. Are CPUs, threads, or compilers allowed to pull memory accesses into a given
        lock-based critical section?

     2. Will a CPU or thread holding a given lock also be guaranteed to see accesses
        executed by CPUs and threads before they last acquired that same lock, and vice
        versa?

     3. Suppose that a given CPU or thread executes one access (call it “A”), releases
        a lock, reacquires that same lock, then executes another access (call it “B”). Is
        some other CPU or thread not holding that lock guaranteed to see A and B in
        order?

     4. As above, but with the lock reacquisition carried out by some other CPU or
        thread?

     5. As above, but with the lock reacquisition being some other lock?

     6. What ordering guarantees are provided by spin_is_locked()?

   The reaction to some or even all of these questions might well be “Why would
anyone do that?” However, any complete mathematical definition of locking must
have answers to all of these questions. Therefore, the following sections address these
questions in the context of the Linux kernel.

15.5.2.1      Accesses Into Critical Sections?
Can memory accesses be reordered into lock-based critical sections?
   Within the context of the Linux-kernel memory model, the simple answer is “yes”.
This may be verified by running the litmus tests shown in Listings 15.33 and 15.34

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
15.5. HIGHER-LEVEL PRIMITIVES                                                          561

Listing 15.34: Subsequent Accesses Into Critical Section (Ordering?)
1    C Lock-after-into
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x, int *y, spinlock_t *sp)
6    {
7            int r1;
8
9            spin_lock(sp);
10           WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
11           spin_unlock(sp);
12           r1 = READ_ONCE(*y);
13   }
14
15   P1(int *x, int *y)
16   {
17           int r1;
18
19           WRITE_ONCE(*y, 1);
20           smp_mb();
21           r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
22   }
23
24   exists (0:r1=0 /\ 1:r1=0)

(C-Lock-before-into.litmus and C-Lock-after-into.litmus, respectively),
both of which will yield the Sometimes result. This result indicates that the exists
clause can be satisfied, that is, that the final value of both P0()’s and P1()’s r1 variable
can be zero. This means that neither spin_lock() nor spin_unlock() are required
to act as a full memory barrier.
    However, other environments might make other choices. For example, locking
implementations that run only on the x86 CPU family will have lock-acquisition
primitives that fully order the lock acquisition with any prior and any subsequent
accesses. Therefore, on such systems the ordering shown in Listing 15.33 comes for
free. There are x86 lock-release implementations that are weakly ordered, thus failing to
provide the ordering shown in Listing 15.34, but an implementation could nevertheless
choose to guarantee this ordering.
    For their part, weakly ordered systems might well choose to execute the memory-
barrier instructions required to guarantee both orderings, possibly simplifying code
making advanced use of combinations of locked and lockless accesses. However, as
noted earlier, LKMM chooses not to provide these additional orderings, in part to avoid
imposing performance penalties on the simpler and more prevalent locking use cases.
Instead, the smp_mb__after_spinlock() and smp_mb__after_unlock_lock()
primitives are provided for those more complex use cases, as discussed in Section 15.6.
    Thus far, this section has discussed only hardware reordering. Can the compiler
also reorder memory references into lock-based critical sections?
    The answer to this question in the context of the Linux kernel is a resounding
“No!” One reason for this otherwise inexplicable favoring of hardware reordering over
compiler optimizations is that the hardware will avoid reordering a page-faulting access
into a lock-based critical section. In contrast, compilers have no clue about page faults,
and would therefore happily reorder a page fault into a critical section, which could
crash the kernel. The compiler is also unable to reliably determine which accesses will
result in cache misses, so that compiler reordering into critical sections could also result
in excessive lock contention. Therefore, the Linux kernel prohibits the compiler (but
not the CPU) from moving accesses into lock-based critical sections.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
562 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.35: Accesses Outside of Critical Sections
1    C Lock-outside-across
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x, int *y, spinlock_t *sp)
6    {
7            int r1;
8
9            WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
10           spin_lock(sp);
11           r1 = READ_ONCE(*y);
12           spin_unlock(sp);
13   }
14
15   P1(int *x, int *y, spinlock_t *sp)
16   {
17           int r1;
18
19           spin_lock(sp);
20           WRITE_ONCE(*y, 1);
21           spin_unlock(sp);
22           r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
23   }
24
25   exists (0:r1=0 /\ 1:r1=0)

15.5.2.2      Accesses Outside of Critical Section?
If a given CPU or thread holds a given lock, it is guaranteed to see accesses executed
during all prior critical sections for that same lock. Similarly, such a CPU or thread
is guaranteed not to see accesses that will be executed during all subsequent critical
sections for that same lock.
     But what about accesses preceding prior critical sections and following subsequent
critical sections?
     This question can be answered for the Linux kernel by referring to Listing 15.35
(C-Lock-outside-across.litmus). Running this litmus test yields the Never result,
which means that accesses in code leading up to a prior critical section is also visible to
the current CPU or thread holding that same lock. Similarly, code that is placed after a
subsequent critical section is never visible to the current CPU or thread holding that
same lock.
     As a result, the Linux kernel cannot allow accesses to be moved across the entirety
of a given critical section. Other environments might well wish to allow such code
motion, but please be advised that doing so is likely to yield profoundly counter-intuitive
results.
     In short, the ordering provided by spin_lock() extends not only throughout the
critical section, but also indefinitely beyond the end of that critical section. Similarly, the
ordering provided by spin_unlock() extends not only throughout the critical section,
but also indefinitely beyond the beginning of that critical section.

15.5.2.3      Ordering for Non-Lock Holders?
Does a CPU or thread that is not holding a given lock see that lock’s critical sections as
being ordered?
    This question can be answered for the Linux kernel by referring to Listing 15.36
(C-Lock-across-unlock-lock-1.litmus), which shows an example where P(0)
places its write and read in two different critical sections for the same lock. Running
this litmus test shows that the exists can be satisfied, which means that the answer

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
15.5. HIGHER-LEVEL PRIMITIVES                                                                  563

Listing 15.36: Accesses Between Same-CPU Critical Sections (Ordering?)
1    C Lock-across-unlock-lock-1
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x, int *y, spinlock_t *sp)
6    {
7            int r1;
8
9            spin_lock(sp);
10           WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
11           spin_unlock(sp);
12           spin_lock(sp);
13           r1 = READ_ONCE(*y);
14           spin_unlock(sp);
15   }
16
17   P1(int *x, int *y, spinlock_t *sp)
18   {
19           int r1;
20
21           WRITE_ONCE(*y, 1);
22           smp_mb();
23           r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
24   }
25
26   exists (0:r1=0 /\ 1:r1=0)

is “no”, and that CPUs can reorder accesses across consecutive critical sections. In
other words, not only are spin_lock() and spin_unlock() weaker than a full barrier
when considered separately, they are also weaker than a full barrier when taken together.
    If the ordering of a given lock’s critical sections are to be observed, then either the
observer must hold that lock on the one hand or either smp_mb__after_spinlock()
or smp_mb__after_unlock_lock() must be executed just after the second lock
acquisition on the other.
    But what if the two critical sections run on different CPUs or threads?
    This question is answered for the Linux kernel by referring to Listing 15.37
(C-Lock-across-unlock-lock-2.litmus), in which the first lock acquisition is
executed by P0() and the second lock acquisition is executed by P1(). Note that P1()
must read x to reject executions in which P1() executes before P0() does. Running
this litmus test shows that the exists can be satisfied, which means that the answer is
“no”, and that CPUs can reorder accesses across consecutive critical sections, even if
each of those critical sections runs on a different CPU or thread.
 Quick Quiz 15.44: But if there are three critical sections, isn’t it true that CPUs not holding
 the lock will observe the accesses from the first and the third critical section as being ordered?

    As before, if the ordering of a given lock’s critical sections are to be observed,
then either the observer must hold that lock or either smp_mb__after_spinlock() or
smp_mb__after_unlock_lock() must be executed just after P1()’s lock acquisition.
    Given that ordering is not guaranteed when both critical sections are protected by
the same lock, there is no hope of any ordering guarantee when different locks are used.
However, readers are encouraged to construct the corresponding litmus test and see this
for themselves.
    This situation can seem counter-intuitive, but it is rare for code to care. This approach
also allows certain weakly ordered systems to implement locks more efficiently.

                                                                                                      v2025.12.18a
564 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.37: Accesses Between Different-CPU Critical Sections (Ordering?)
1    C Lock-across-unlock-lock-2
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x, spinlock_t *sp)
6    {
7            spin_lock(sp);
8            WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
9            spin_unlock(sp);
10   }
11
12   P1(int *x, int *y, spinlock_t *sp)
13   {
14           int r1;
15           int r2;
16
17           spin_lock(sp);
18           r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
19           r2 = READ_ONCE(*y);
20           spin_unlock(sp);
21   }
22
23   P2(int *x, int *y, spinlock_t *sp)
24   {
25           int r1;
26
27           WRITE_ONCE(*y, 1);
28           smp_mb();
29           r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
30   }
31
32   exists (1:r1=1 /\ 1:r2=0 /\ 2:r1=0)

15.5.2.4      Ordering for spin_is_locked()?

The Linux kernel’s spin_is_locked() primitive returns true if the specified lock
is held and false otherwise. Note that spin_is_locked() returns true when some
other CPU or thread holds the lock, not just when the current CPU or thread holds that
lock. This raises the question of what ordering guarantees spin_is_locked() might
provide.
    In the Linux kernel, the answer has varied over time. Initially, spin_is_locked()
was unordered, but a few interesting use cases motivated strong ordering. Later
discussions surrounding the Linux-kernel memory model concluded that spin_is_
locked() should be used only for debugging. Part of the reason for this is that
even a fully ordered spin_is_locked() might return true because some other CPU
or thread was just about to release the lock in question. In this case, there is little
that can be learned from that return value of true, which means that reliable use of
spin_is_locked() is surprisingly complex. Other approaches almost always work
better, for example, use of explicit shared variables or the spin_trylock() primitive.
    This situation resulted in the current state, namely that spin_is_locked() provides
no ordering guarantees, except that if it returns false, the current CPU or thread cannot
be holding the corresponding lock.

 Quick Quiz 15.45: But if spin_is_locked() returns false, don’t we also know that no
 other CPU or thread is holding the corresponding lock?

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
15.5. HIGHER-LEVEL PRIMITIVES                                                                                   565

                                                     If happens before ...

                       rcu_read_lock()                                           call_rcu()

                      rcu_read_unlock()

                                                                                      ... then happens before
                           ... then happens before

                                                                              rcu_read_lock()

                      callback invocation                                    rcu_read_unlock()

                                                     If happens before ...

                 Figure 15.21: RCU Grace-Period Ordering Guarantees

15.5.2.5    Why Mathematically Model Locking?
Given all these possible choices, why model locking in general? Why not simply model
a simple implementation?
    One reason is modeling performance, as shown in Table E.5 on page 858. Directly
modeling locking in general is orders of magnitude faster than emulating even a
trivial implementation. This should be no surprise, given the combinatorial explosion
experienced by present-day formal-verification tools with increases in the number of
memory accesses executed by the code being modeled. Splitting the modeling at API
boundaries can therefore result in combinatorial implosion.
    Another reason is that a trivial implementation might needlessly constrain either
real implementations or real use cases. In contrast, modeling a platonic lock allows the
widest variety of implementations while providing specific guidance to locks’ users.

15.5.3     RCU
As described in Section 9.5.2, the fundamental property of RCU grace periods is this
straightforward two-part guarantee: (1) If any part of a given RCU read-side critical
section precedes the beginning of a given grace period, then the entirety of that critical
section precedes the end of that grace period. (2) If any part of a given RCU read-side
critical section follows the end of a given grace period, then the entirety of that critical
section follows the beginning of that grace period. These guarantees are summarized
in Figure 15.21, where the grace period is denoted by the dashed arrow between
the call_rcu() invocation in the upper right and the corresponding RCU callback
invocation in the lower left.16
     In short, an RCU read-side critical section is guaranteed never to completely overlap
an RCU grace period, as demonstrated by Listing 15.38 (C-SB+o-rcusync-o+rl-o-
  16 For more detail, please see Figures 9.11–9.13 starting on page 238.

                                                                                                                      v2025.12.18a
566 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.38: RCU Fundamental Property
1    C C-SB+o-rcusync-o+rl-o-o-rul
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
8            synchronize_rcu();
9            uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10   }
11
12   P1(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
13   {
14           rcu_read_lock();
15           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
16           uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
17           rcu_read_unlock();
18   }
19
20   exists (1:r2=0 /\ 0:r2=0)

Listing 15.39: RCU Fundamental Property and Reordering
1    C C-SB+o-rcusync-o+i-rl-o-o-rul
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
8            synchronize_rcu();
9            uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10   }
11
12   P1(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
13   {
14           rcu_read_lock();
15           uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
16           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
17           rcu_read_unlock();
18   }
19
20   exists (1:r2=0 /\ 0:r2=0)

                                                            v2025.12.18a
15.5. HIGHER-LEVEL PRIMITIVES                                                                  567

o-rul.litmus). Either or neither of the r2 registers can have the final value of zero,
but at least one of them must be non-zero (that is, the cycle identified by the exists
clause is prohibited), courtesy of RCU’s fundamental grace-period guarantee, as can
be seen by running herd on this litmus test. Note that this guarantee is insensitive to
the ordering of the accesses within P1()’s critical section, so the litmus test shown in
Listing 15.3917 also forbids this same cycle.
    However, this definition is incomplete, as can be seen from the following list of
questions:18
   1. What ordering is provided by rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock(),
      independent of RCU grace periods?
   2. What ordering is provided by synchronize_rcu() and synchronize_rcu_
      expedited(), independent of RCU read-side critical sections?
   3. If the entirety of a given RCU read-side critical section precedes the end of a
      given RCU grace period, what about accesses preceding that critical section?
   4. If the entirety of a given RCU read-side critical section follows the beginning of a
      given RCU grace period, what about accesses following that critical section?
   5. What happens in situations involving more than one RCU read-side critical section
      and/or more than one RCU grace period?
   6. What happens when RCU is combined with other memory-ordering mechanisms?
    These questions are addressed in the following sections.

15.5.3.1     RCU Read-Side Ordering
On their own, RCU’s read-side primitives rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock()
provide no ordering whatsoever. In particular, despite their names, they do not act like
locks, as can be seen in Listing 15.40 (C-LB+rl-o-o-rul+rl-o-o-rul.litmus).
This litmus test’s cycle is allowed: Both instances of the r1 register can have final values
of 1.
    Nor do these primitives have barrier-like ordering properties, at least not unless
there is a grace period in the mix, as can be seen in Listing 15.41 (C-LB+o-rl-rul-
o+o-rl-rul-o.litmus). This litmus test’s cycle is also allowed. (Try it!)
    Of course, lack of ordering in both these litmus tests should be absolutely no surprise,
given that both rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock() are no-ops in the QSBR
implementation of RCU.

15.5.3.2     RCU Update-Side Ordering
In contrast with RCU readers, the RCU update-side functions synchronize_rcu()
and synchronize_rcu_expedited() provide memory ordering at least as strong as
smp_mb(),19 as can be seen by running herd on the litmus test shown in Listing 15.42.
This test’s cycle is prohibited, just as it would with smp_mb(). This should be no
surprise given the information presented in Table 15.3.
    17 Dependencies can of course limit the ability to reorder accesses within RCU read-side

critical sections.
    18 Several of which were introduced to Paul by Jade Alglave during early work on LKMM,

and a few more of which came from other LKMM participants [AMM+ 18].
    19 And also way more expensive!

                                                                                                     v2025.12.18a
568 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.40: RCU Readers Provide No Lock-Like Ordering
1    C C-LB+rl-o-o-rul+rl-o-o-rul
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
6    {
7            rcu_read_lock();
8            uintptr_t r1 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
9            WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 1);
10           rcu_read_unlock();
11   }
12
13   P1(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
14   {
15           rcu_read_lock();
16           uintptr_t r1 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
17           WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 1);
18           rcu_read_unlock();
19   }
20
21   exists (0:r1=1 /\ 1:r1=1)

Listing 15.41: RCU Readers Provide No Barrier-Like Ordering
1    C C-LB+o-rl-rul-o+o-rl-rul-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
6    {
7            uintptr_t r1 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
8            rcu_read_lock();
9            rcu_read_unlock();
10           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 1);
11   }
12
13   P1(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
14   {
15           uintptr_t r1 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
16           rcu_read_lock();
17           rcu_read_unlock();
18           WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 1);
19   }
20
21   exists (0:r1=1 /\ 1:r1=1)

Listing 15.42: RCU Updaters Provide Full Ordering
1    C C-SB+o-rcusync-o+o-rcusync-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
8            synchronize_rcu();
9            uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10   }
11
12   P1(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
13   {
14           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
15           synchronize_rcu();
16           uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
17   }
18
19   exists (1:r2=0 /\ 0:r2=0)

                                                              v2025.12.18a
15.5. HIGHER-LEVEL PRIMITIVES                                                         569

Listing 15.43: What Happens Before RCU Readers?
1    C C-SB+o-rcusync-o+o-rl-o-rul
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
8            synchronize_rcu();
9            uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10   }
11
12   P1(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
13   {
14           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
15           rcu_read_lock();
16           uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
17           rcu_read_unlock();
18   }
19
20   exists (1:r2=0 /\ 0:r2=0)

15.5.3.3      RCU Readers: Before and After
Before reading this section, it would be well to reflect on the distinction between
guarantees that are available and guarantees that maintainable software should rely
on. Keeping that firmly in mind, this section presents a few of the more exotic RCU
guarantees.
     Listing 15.43 (C-SB+o-rcusync-o+o-rl-o-rul.litmus) shows a litmus test
similar to that in Listing 15.38, but with the RCU reader’s first access preceding the
RCU read-side critical section, rather than the more conventional (and maintainable!)
approach of being contained within it. Perhaps surprisingly, running herd on this litmus
test gives the same result as for that in Listing 15.38: The cycle is forbidden.
     Why would this be the case?
     Because both of P1()’s accesses are volatile, as discussed in Section 4.3.4.2, the
compiler is not permitted to reorder them. This means that the code emitted for
P1()’s WRITE_ONCE() will precede that of P1()’s READ_ONCE(). Therefore, RCU
implementations that place memory-barrier instructions in rcu_read_lock() and
rcu_read_unlock() will preserve the ordering of P1()’s two accesses all the way
down to the hardware level. On the other hand, RCU implementations that rely on
interrupt-based state machines will also fully preserve this ordering relative to the grace
period due to the fact that interrupts take place at a precise location in the execution of
the interrupted code.
     This in turn means that if the WRITE_ONCE() follows the end of a given RCU grace
period, then the accesses within and following that RCU read-side critical section must
follow the beginning of that same grace period. Similarly, if the READ_ONCE() precedes
the beginning of the grace period, everything within and preceding that critical section
must precede the end of that same grace period.
     Listing 15.44 (C-SB+o-rcusync-o+rl-o-rul-o.litmus) is similar, but instead
looks at accesses after the RCU read-side critical section. This test’s cycle is also
forbidden, as can be checked with the herd tool. The reasoning is similar to that for
Listing 15.43, and is left as an exercise for the reader.
     Listing 15.45 (C-SB+o-rcusync-o+o-rl-rul-o.litmus) takes things one step
farther, moving P1()’s WRITE_ONCE() to precede the RCU read-side critical section
and moving P1()’s READ_ONCE() to follow it, resulting in an empty RCU read-side
critical section.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
570 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.44: What Happens After RCU Readers?
1    C C-SB+o-rcusync-o+rl-o-rul-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
8            synchronize_rcu();
9            uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10   }
11
12   P1(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
13   {
14           rcu_read_lock();
15           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
16           rcu_read_unlock();
17           uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
18   }
19
20   exists (1:r2=0 /\ 0:r2=0)

Listing 15.45: What Happens With Empty RCU Readers?
1    C C-SB+o-rcusync-o+o-rl-rul-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
8            synchronize_rcu();
9            uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10   }
11
12   P1(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
13   {
14           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
15           rcu_read_lock();
16           rcu_read_unlock();
17           uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
18   }
19
20   exists (1:r2=0 /\ 0:r2=0)

                                                            v2025.12.18a
15.5. HIGHER-LEVEL PRIMITIVES                                                               571

Listing 15.46: What Happens With No RCU Readers?
1    C C-SB+o-rcusync-o+o-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
8            synchronize_rcu();
9            uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10   }
11
12   P1(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
13   {
14           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
15           uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
16   }
17
18   exists (1:r2=0 /\ 0:r2=0)

     Perhaps surprisingly, despite the empty critical section, RCU nevertheless still
manages to forbid the cycle. This can again be checked using the herd tool. Furthermore,
the reasoning is once again similar to that for Listing 15.43. Recapping, if P1()’s
WRITE_ONCE() follows the end of a given grace period, then P1()’s RCU read-side
critical section—and everything following it—must follow the beginning of that same
grace period. Similarly, if P1()’s READ_ONCE() precedes the beginning of a given
grace period, then P1()’s RCU read-side critical section—and everything preceding
it—must precede the end of that same grace period. In both cases, the critical section’s
emptiness is irrelevant.
 Quick Quiz 15.46: Wait a minute! In QSBR implementations of RCU, no code is emitted
 for rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock(). This means that the RCU read-side critical
 section in Listing 15.45 isn’t just empty, it is completely nonexistent!!! So how can something
 that doesn’t exist at all possibly have any effect whatsoever on ordering???

     This situation leads to the question of what happens if rcu_read_lock() and rcu_
read_unlock() are omitted entirely, as shown in Listing 15.46 (C-SB+o-rcusync-
o+o-o.litmus). As can be checked with herd, this litmus test’s cycle is allowed, that
is, both instances of r2 can have final values of zero.
     This might seem strange in light of the fact that empty RCU read-side critical
sections can provide ordering. And it is true that QSBR implementations of RCU would
in fact forbid this outcome, due to the fact that there is no quiescent state anywhere
in P1()’s function body, so that P1() would run within an implicit RCU read-side
critical section. However, RCU also has non-QSBR implementations, which have no
implied RCU read-side critical section, and in turn no way for RCU to enforce ordering.
Therefore, this litmus test’s cycle is allowed.
 Quick Quiz 15.47: Can P1()’s accesses be reordered in the litmus tests shown in Listings 15.43,
 15.44, and 15.45 in the same way that they were reordered going from Listing 15.38 to
 Listing 15.39?

15.5.3.4      Multiple RCU Readers and Updaters
Because synchronize_rcu() has ordering semantics that are at least as strong as smp_
mb(), no matter how many processes there are in an SB litmus test (such as Listing 15.42),
placing synchronize_rcu() between each process’s accesses prohibits the cycle. In

                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
572 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

Listing 15.47: One RCU Grace Period and Two Readers
1    C C-SB+o-rcusync-o+rl-o-o-rul+rl-o-o-rul
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
8            synchronize_rcu();
9            uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10   }
11
12   P1(uintptr_t *x1, uintptr_t *x2)
13   {
14           rcu_read_lock();
15           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
16           uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x2);
17           rcu_read_unlock();
18   }
19
20   P2(uintptr_t *x2, uintptr_t *x0)
21   {
22           rcu_read_lock();
23           WRITE_ONCE(*x2, 2);
24           uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
25           rcu_read_unlock();
26   }
27
28   exists (2:r2=0 /\ 0:r2=0 /\ 1:r2=0)

addition, the cycle is prohibited in an SB test where one process uses synchronize_
rcu() and the other uses rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock(), as shown by
Listing 15.38. However, if both processes use rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_
unlock(), the cycle will be allowed, as shown by Listing 15.40.
    Is it possible to say anything general about which RCU-protected litmus tests will
be prohibited and which will be allowed? This section takes up that question.
    More specifically, what if the litmus test has one RCU grace period and two RCU
readers, as shown in Listing 15.47? The herd tool says that this cycle is allowed, but it
would be good to know why.20
    The key point is that even strongly ordered CPUs such as x86 can and will
reorder P1()’s and P2()’s WRITE_ONCE() and READ_ONCE(). With that reordering,
Figure 15.22 shows how the cycle forms:

     1. P0()’s read from x1 precedes P1()’s write, as depicted by the dashed arrow near
        the bottom of the diagram.
     2. Because P1()’s write follows the end of P0()’s grace period, P1()’s read from
        x2 cannot precede the beginning of P0()’s grace period.
     3. P1()’s read from x2 precedes P2()’s write.

     4. Because P2()’s write to x2 precedes the end of P0()’s grace period, it is
        completely legal for P2()’s read from x0 to precede the beginning of P0()’s
        grace period.
     5. Therefore, P2()’s read from x0 can precede P0()’s write, thus allowing the cycle
        to form.

    20 Especially given that Paul changed his mind several times about this particular litmus

test when working with Jade Alglave to generalize RCU ordering semantics.

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
15.5. HIGHER-LEVEL PRIMITIVES                                                      573

Listing 15.48: Two RCU Grace Periods and Two Readers
1    C C-SB+o-rcusync-o+o-rcusync-o+rl-o-o-rul+rl-o-o-rul
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
8            synchronize_rcu();
9            uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
10   }
11
12   P1(uintptr_t *x1, uintptr_t *x2)
13   {
14           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
15           synchronize_rcu();
16           uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x2);
17   }
18
19   P2(uintptr_t *x2, uintptr_t *x3)
20   {
21           rcu_read_lock();
22           WRITE_ONCE(*x2, 2);
23           uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x3);
24           rcu_read_unlock();
25   }
26
27   P3(uintptr_t *x0, uintptr_t *x3)
28   {
29           rcu_read_lock();
30           WRITE_ONCE(*x3, 2);
31           uintptr_t r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
32           rcu_read_unlock();
33   }
34
35   exists (3:r2=0 /\ 0:r2=0 /\ 1:r2=0 /\ 2:r2=0)

                         P0()                    P1()                 P2()

                                                             rcu_read_lock();

                                                             r2 = READ_ONCE(x0);
                WRITE_ONCE(x0, 2);

                synchronize_rcu();
                                       rcu_read_lock();

                                       r2 = READ_ONCE(x2);
                                                             WRITE_ONCE(x2, 2);

                                                             rcu_read_unlock();

               r2 = READ_ONCE(x1);
                                       WRITE_ONCE(x1, 2);

                                       rcu_read_unlock();

          Figure 15.22: Cycle for One RCU Grace Period and Two RCU Readers

                                                                                         v2025.12.18a
574 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

           P0()                        P1()                       P2()                        P3()

   WRITE_ONCE(x0, 2);

   synchronize_rcu();                                                                rcu_read_lock();

                                                                                     r2 = READ_ONCE(x0);

   r2 = READ_ONCE(x1);
                               WRITE_ONCE(x1, 2);

                               synchronize_rcu();        rcu_read_lock();

                                                         r2 = READ_ONCE(x3);
                                                                                    WRITE_ONCE(x3, 2);

                                                                                    rcu_read_unlock();

                              r2 = READ_ONCE(x2);
                                                         WRITE_ONCE(x2, 2);

                                                         rcu_read_unlock();

     Figure 15.23: No Cycle for Two RCU Grace Periods and Two RCU Readers

     But what happens when another grace period is added? This situation is shown
in Listing 15.48, an SB litmus test in which P0() and P1() have RCU grace periods
and P2() and P3() have RCU readers. Again, the CPUs can reorder the accesses
within RCU read-side critical sections, as shown in Figure 15.23. For this cycle to form,
P2()’s critical section must end after P1()’s grace period and P3()’s must end after the
beginning of that same grace period, which happens to also be after the end of P0()’s
grace period. Therefore, P3()’s critical section must start after the beginning of P0()’s
grace period, which in turn means that P3()’s read from x0 cannot possibly precede
P0()’s write. Therefore, the cycle is forbidden because RCU read-side critical sections
cannot span full RCU grace periods.
     However, a closer look at Figure 15.23 makes it clear that adding a third reader
would allow the cycle. This is because this third reader could end before the end of
P0()’s grace period, and thus start before the beginning of that same grace period. This
in turn suggests the general rule, which is: In these sorts of RCU-only litmus tests,
if there are at least as many RCU grace periods as there are RCU read-side critical
sections, the cycle is forbidden.21

15.5.3.5     RCU and Other Ordering Mechanisms
But what about litmus tests that combine RCU with other ordering mechanisms?
   The general rule is that it takes only one mechanism to forbid a cycle.
   For example, refer back to Listing 15.40. Applying the general rule from the
previous section, because this litmus test has two RCU read-side critical sections and
   21 Interestingly enough, Alan Stern proved that within the context of LKMM, the two-part

fundamental property of RCU expressed in Section 9.5.2 actually implies this seemingly more
general result, which is called the RCU axiom [AMM+ 18].

                                                                                                           v2025.12.18a
15.5. HIGHER-LEVEL PRIMITIVES                                                        575

                      P0()                    P1()                  P2()

              WRITE_ONCE(x0, 2);

              synchronize_rcu();                            rcu_read_lock();

                                                            r2 = READ_ONCE(x0);

                                     rcu_read_lock();
              r2 = READ_ONCE(x1);
                                    WRITE_ONCE(x1, 2);

                                     smp_mb();

                                     r2 = READ_ONCE(x2);

                                                            WRITE_ONCE(x2, 2);
                                     rcu_read_unlock();
                                                            rcu_read_unlock();

Figure 15.24: Cycle for One RCU Grace Period, Two RCU Readers, and Memory
    Barrier

no RCU grace periods, the cycle is allowed. But what if P0()’s WRITE_ONCE() is
replaced by an smp_store_release() and P1()’s READ_ONCE() is replaced by an
smp_load_acquire()?
    RCU would still allow the cycle, but the release-acquire pair would forbid it. Because
it only takes one mechanism to forbid a cycle, the release-acquire pair would prevail,
thus forbidding the cycle.
    For another example, refer back to Listing 15.47. Because this litmus test has two
RCU readers but only one grace period, its cycle is allowed. But suppose that an
smp_mb() was placed between P1()’s pair of accesses. In this new litmus test, because
of the addition of the smp_mb(), P2()’s as well as P1()’s critical sections would extend
beyond the end of P0()’s grace period, which in turn would prevent P2()’s read from
x0 from preceding P0()’s write, as depicted by the red dashed arrow in Figure 15.24. In
this case, RCU and the full memory barrier work together to forbid the cycle, with RCU
preserving ordering between P0() and both P1() and P2(), and with the smp_mb()
preserving ordering between P1() and P2().
Quick Quiz 15.48: What would happen if the smp_mb() was instead added between P2()’s
accesses in Listing 15.47?

   In short, where RCU’s semantics were once purely pragmatic, they are now fully
formalized [MW05, DMS+ 12a, GRY13, AMM+ 18].

15.5.4    Higher-Level Primitives: Discussion
It is quite beneficial to verify code in terms of a higher-level primitive instead of
in terms of the low-level memory accesses used in a particular implementation of
that primitive. First, this allows code using‘those primitives to be verified against an
abstract representation of those primitives, thus making that code less vulnerable to
implementation changes. Second, partitioning the verification at API boundaries results
in combinatorial implosion, greatly reducing the overhead of formal verification.

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
    576 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

                          Table 15.5: Summary of Memory Ordering

                                                                                             CPU Family

                                                                                                                       SPARC TSO
                                                                         Armv7-A/R

                                                                                                                                          z Systems
                                                                                                               POWER
                                                                                             Itanium
                                                                                     Armv8
                                                                 Alpha

                                                                                                        MIPS

                                                                                                                                   x86
                         Property

Memory Ordering     Loads Reordered After Loads or Stores?       Y       Y           Y       Y          Y      Y
                    Stores Reordered After Stores?               Y       Y           Y       Y          Y      Y
                    Stores Reordered After Loads?                Y       Y           Y       Y          Y      Y       Y           Y      Y
                    Atomic Instructions Reordered With
                                                                 Y       Y           Y                  Y      Y
                    Loads or Stores?
                    Dependent Loads Reordered?                   Y
                    Dependent Stores Reordered?
                    Non-Sequentially Consistent?                 Y       Y           Y       Y          Y      Y       Y           Y      Y
                    Non-Multicopy Atomic?                        Y       Y           Y       Y          Y      Y       Y           Y
                    Non-Other-Multicopy Atomic?                  Y       Y                   Y          Y      Y
                    Non-Cache Coherent?                                                      Y

Instructions        Load-Acquire/Store-Release?                  F       F           i       I          F      b
                    Atomic RMW Instruction Type?                 L       L           L       C          L      L       C           C      C
                    Incoherent Instruction Cache/Pipeline?       Y       Y           Y       Y          Y      Y       Y           Y      Y

                                                     Key:    Load-Acquire/Store-Release?
                                                               b: Lightweight memory barrier
                                                               F: Full memory barrier
                                                               i: Instruction with lightweight ordering
                                                               I: Instruction with heavyweight ordering
                                                             Atomic RMW Instruction Type?
                                                               C: Compare-and-exchange instruction
                                                               L: Load-linked/store-conditional instruction

       It is hoped that verifying against detailed semantics for higher-level primitives will
    greatly increase the effectiveness of static analysis and model checking.

    15.6       Hardware Specifics

                                             Rock beats paper!
                                                                                                       Derek Williams

    Each CPU family has its own peculiar approach to memory ordering, which can make
    portability a challenge, as you can see in Table 15.5.
        In fact, some software environments simply prohibit direct use of memory-ordering
    operations, restricting the programmer to mutual-exclusion primitives that incorporate
    them to the extent that they are required. Please note that this section is not intended to
    be a reference manual covering all (or even most) aspects of each CPU family, but rather

                                                                                                                                         v2025.12.18a
15.6. HARDWARE SPECIFICS                                                               577

a high-level overview providing a rough comparison. For full details, see the reference
manual for the CPU of interest.
    Getting back to Table 15.5, the first group of rows look at memory-ordering
properties and the second group looks at instruction properties. Please note that these
properties hold at the machine-instruction level. Compilers can and do reorder far
more aggressively than does hardware. Use marked accesses such as READ_ONCE()
and WRITE_ONCE() to constrain the compiler’s optimizations and prevent undesireable
reordering.
    The first three rows indicate whether a given CPU allows the four possible com-
binations of loads and stores to be reordered, as discussed in Section 15.2 and Sec-
tions 15.3.2.1–15.3.2.3. The next row (“Atomic Instructions Reordered With Loads or
Stores?”) indicates whether a given CPU allows loads and stores to be reordered with
atomic instructions.
    The fifth and sixth rows cover reordering and dependencies, which was covered in
Sections 15.3.3–15.3.5 and which is explained in more detail in Section 15.6.1. The
short version is that Alpha requires memory barriers for readers as well as updaters
of linked data structures, however, these memory barriers are provided by the Alpha
architecture-specific code in v4.15 and later Linux kernels.
    The next row, “Non-Sequentially Consistent”, indicates whether the CPU’s normal
load and store instructions are constrained by sequential consistency. Performance
considerations have dictated that no modern mainstream system is sequentially consistent.
    The next three rows cover multicopy atomicity, which was defined in Section 15.3.7.
The first is full-up (and rare) multicopy atomicity, the second is the weaker other-
multicopy atomicity, and the third is the weakest non-multicopy atomicity.
    The next row, “Non-Cache Coherent”, covers accesses from multiple threads to a
single variable, which was discussed in Section 15.3.6.
    The final three rows cover instruction-level choices and issues. The first row indicates
how each CPU implements load-acquire and store-release, the second row classifies
CPUs by atomic-instruction type, and the third and final row indicates whether a given
CPU has an incoherent instruction cache and pipeline. Such CPUs require special
instructions be executed for self-modifying code.
    The common “just say no” approach to memory-ordering operations can be eminently
reasonable where it applies, but there are environments, such as the Linux kernel, where
direct use of memory-ordering operations is required. Therefore, Linux provides a
carefully chosen least-common-denominator set of memory-ordering primitives, which
are as follows:
smp_mb() (full memory barrier) that orders both loads and stores. This means that
     loads and stores preceding the memory barrier will be committed to memory
     before any loads and stores following the memory barrier.
smp_rmb() (read memory barrier) that orders only loads.
smp_wmb() (write memory barrier) that orders only stores.
smp_mb__before_atomic() that forces ordering of accesses preceding the smp_mb__
     before_atomic() against accesses following a later RMW atomic operation.
     This is a noop on systems that fully order atomic RMW operations.
smp_mb__after_atomic() that forces ordering of accesses preceding an earlier RMW
     atomic operation against accesses following the smp_mb__after_atomic().
     This is also a noop on systems that fully order atomic RMW operations.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
578 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

smp_mb__after_spinlock() that forces ordering of accesses preceding a lock ac-
     quisition against accesses following the smp_mb__after_spinlock(). This is
     also a noop on systems that fully order lock acquisitions.
mmiowb() that forces ordering on MMIO writes that are guarded by global spinlocks,
     and is more thoroughly described in a 2016 LWN article on MMIO [MDR16].
The smp_mb(), smp_rmb(), and smp_wmb() primitives also force the compiler to
eschew any optimizations that would have the effect of reordering memory optimizations
across the barriers.
Quick Quiz 15.49: What happens to code between an atomic operation and an smp_mb__
after_atomic()?

     These primitives generate code only in SMP kernels, however, several have UP
versions (mb(), rmb(), and wmb(), respectively) that generate a memory barrier even
in UP kernels. The smp_ versions should be used in most cases. However, these
latter primitives are useful when writing drivers, because MMIO accesses must remain
ordered even in UP kernels. In absence of memory-ordering operations, both CPUs and
compilers would happily rearrange these accesses, which at best would make the device
act strangely, and could crash your kernel or even damage your hardware.
     So most kernel programmers need not worry about the memory-ordering peculiarities
of each and every CPU, as long as they stick to these interfaces and to the fully ordered
atomic operations.22 If you are working deep in a given CPU’s architecture-specific
code, of course, all bets are off.
     Furthermore, all of Linux’s locking primitives (spinlocks, reader-writer locks,
semaphores, RCU, . . .) include any needed ordering primitives. So if you are working
with code that uses these primitives properly, you need not worry about Linux’s
memory-ordering primitives.
     That said, deep knowledge of each CPU’s memory-consistency model can be very
helpful when debugging, to say nothing of when writing architecture-specific code or
synchronization primitives.
     Besides, they say that a little knowledge is a very dangerous thing. Just imagine
the damage you could do with a lot of knowledge! For those who wish to understand
more about individual CPUs’ memory consistency models, the next sections describe
those of a few popular and prominent CPUs. Although there is no substitute for actually
reading a given CPU’s documentation, these sections do give a good overview.

15.6.1     Alpha
It may seem strange to say much of anything about a CPU whose end of life has long
since passed, but Alpha is interesting because it is the only mainstream CPU that reorders
dependent loads, and has thus had outsized influence on concurrency APIs, including
within the Linux kernel. The need for core Linux-kernel code to accommodate Alpha
ended with version v4.15 of the Linux kernel, and all traces of this accommodation
were removed in v5.9 with the removal of the smp_read_barrier_depends() and
read_barrier_depends() APIs. This section is nevertheless retained in the Third
Edition because here in early 2023 there are still a few Linux kernel hackers still
working on pre-v4.15 versions of the Linux kernel. In addition, the modifications to

  22 For a full list, expand the patterns in Documentation/atomic_t.txt.

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
15.6. HARDWARE SPECIFICS                                                                        579

Listing 15.49: Insert and Lock-Free Search (No Ordering)
1    struct el *insert(long key, long data)
2    {
3            struct el *p;
4            p = kmalloc(sizeof(*p), GFP_ATOMIC);
5            spin_lock(&mutex);
6            p->next = head.next;
7            p->key = key;
8            p->data = data;
9            smp_store_release(&head.next, p);
10           spin_unlock(&mutex);
11   }
12
13   struct el *search(long searchkey)
14   {
15           struct el *p;
16           p = READ_ONCE_OLD(head.next);
17           while (p != &head) {
18                   /* Prior to v4.15, BUG ON ALPHA!!! */
19                   if (p->key == searchkey) {
20                           return (p);
21                   }
22                   p = READ_ONCE_OLD(p->next);
23           };
24           return (NULL);
25   }

READ_ONCE() that permitted these APIs to be removed have not necessarily propagated
to all userspace projects that might still support Alpha.
     The dependent-load difference between Alpha and the other CPUs is illustrated
by the code shown in Listing 15.49. This smp_store_release() guarantees that the
element initialization in lines 6–8 is executed before the element is added to the list on
line 9, so that the lock-free search will work correctly. That is, it makes this guarantee
on all CPUs except Alpha.
     Given the pre-v4.15 implementation of READ_ONCE(), indicated by READ_ONCE_
OLD() in the listing, Alpha actually allows the code on line 19 of Listing 15.49 to see
the old garbage values that were present before the initialization on lines 6–8.
     Figure 15.25 shows how this can happen on an aggressively parallel machine with
partitioned caches, so that alternating cache lines are processed by the different partitions
of the caches. For example, the load of head.next on line 16 of Listing 15.49 might
access cache bank 0, and the load of p->key on line 19 and of p->next on line 22
might access cache bank 1. On Alpha, the smp_store_release() will guarantee that
the cache invalidations performed by lines 6–8 of Listing 15.49 (for p->next, p->key,
and p->data) will reach the interconnect before that of line 9 (for head.next), but
makes absolutely no guarantee about the order of propagation through the reading
CPU’s cache banks. For example, it is possible that the reading CPU’s cache bank 1 is
very busy, but cache bank 0 is idle. This could result in the cache invalidations for the
new element (p->next, p->key, and p->data) being delayed, so that the reading CPU
loads the new value for head.next, but loads the old cached values for p->key and
p->next. Yes, this does mean that Alpha can in effect fetch the data pointed to before
it fetches the pointer itself, strange but true. See the documentation [Com01, Pug00]
called out earlier for more information, or if you think that I am just making all this
up.23 The benefit of this unusual approach to ordering is that Alpha can use simpler
cache hardware, which in turn permitted higher clock frequencies in Alpha’s heyday.
   23 Of course, the astute reader will have already recognized that Alpha is nowhere near as

mean and nasty as it could be, the (thankfully) mythical architecture in Appendix C.6.1 being
a case in point.

                                                                                                      v2025.12.18a
580 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

                p->data = key;
                smp_wmb();                 p = READ_ONCE_OLD(head.next);
                head.next = p;               BUG_ON(p && p->key != key);

                    Writing CPU Core               Reading CPU Core

                   Cache         Cache             Cache      Cache
                                                   Bank 0     Bank 1
                   Bank 0        Bank 1             (Idle)    (Busy)

                                             head.next            p->key
                                                                  p->data
                                                                  p->next

Figure 15.25: Why smp_read_barrier_depends() is Required in Pre-v4.15 Linux
    Kernels

    One could place an smp_rmb() primitive between the pointer fetch and dereference
in order to force Alpha to order the pointer fetch with the later dependent load. However,
this imposes unneeded overhead on systems (such as Arm, Itanium, PPC, and SPARC)
that respect address dependencies on the read side. A smp_read_barrier_depends()
primitive was therefore added to the Linux kernel to eliminate overhead on these systems,
but was removed in v5.9 of the Linux kernel in favor of augmenting Alpha’s definition
of READ_ONCE(). Thus, as of v5.9, core kernel code no longer needs to concern itself
with this aspect of DEC Alpha. However, it is better to use rcu_dereference() as
shown on lines 16 and 21 of Listing 15.50, which works safely and efficiently for all
recent kernel versions.
    It is also possible to implement a software mechanism that could be used in place
of smp_store_release() to force all reading CPUs to see the writing CPU’s writes
in order. This software barrier could be implemented by sending inter-processor
interrupts (IPIs) to all other CPUs. Upon receipt of such an IPI, a CPU would execute a
memory-barrier instruction, implementing a system-wide memory barrier similar to that
provided by the Linux kernel’s sys_membarrier() system call. Additional logic is
required to avoid deadlocks. Of course, CPUs that respect address dependencies would
define such a barrier to simply be smp_store_release(). However, this approach
was deemed by the Linux community to impose excessive overhead [McK01], and to
their point would be completely inappropriate for systems having aggressive real-time
response requirements.
    The Linux memory-barrier primitives took their names from the Alpha instructions,
so smp_mb() is mb, smp_rmb() is rmb, and smp_wmb() is wmb. Alpha is the only CPU
whose READ_ONCE() includes an smp_mb().

Quick Quiz 15.50: Why does Alpha’s READ_ONCE() include an mb() rather than rmb()?

Quick Quiz 15.51:     Isn’t DEC Alpha significant as having the weakest possible memory
ordering?

    For more on Alpha, see its reference manual [Cor02].

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
15.6. HARDWARE SPECIFICS                                                            581

Listing 15.50: Safe Insert and Lock-Free Search
1    struct el *insert(long key, long data)
2    {
3            struct el *p;
4            p = kmalloc(sizeof(*p), GFP_ATOMIC);
5            spin_lock(&mutex);
6            p->next = head.next;
7            p->key = key;
8            p->data = data;
9            smp_store_release(&head.next, p);
10           spin_unlock(&mutex);
11   }
12
13   struct el *search(long searchkey)
14   {
15           struct el *p;
16           p = rcu_dereference(head.next);
17           while (p != &head) {
18                   if (p->key == searchkey) {
19                           return (p);
20                   }
21                   p = rcu_dereference(p->next);
22           };
23           return (NULL);
24   }

15.6.2       Armv7-A/R
The Arm family of CPUs is popular in deep embedded applications, particularly for
power-constrained microcontrollers. Its memory model is similar to that of POWER (see
Section 15.6.6), but Arm uses a different set of memory-barrier instructions [ARM10]:

DMB (data memory barrier) causes the specified type of operations to appear to have
     completed before any subsequent operations of the same type. The “type” of
     operations can be all operations or can be restricted to only writes (similar to
     the Alpha wmb and the POWER eieio instructions). In addition, Arm allows
     cache coherence to have one of three scopes: Single processor, a subset of the
     processors (“inner”) and global (“outer”).

DSB (data synchronization barrier) causes the specified type of operations to actually
     complete before any subsequent operations (of any type) are executed. The “type”
     of operations is the same as that of DMB. The DSB instruction was called DWB
     (drain write buffer or data write barrier, your choice) in early versions of the Arm
     architecture.

ISB (instruction synchronization barrier) flushes the CPU pipeline, so that all instruc-
     tions following the ISB are fetched only after the ISB completes. For example, if
     you are writing a self-modifying program (such as a JIT), you should execute an
     ISB between generating the code and executing it.

    None of these instructions exactly match the semantics of Linux’s rmb() primitive,
which must therefore be implemented as a full DMB. The DMB and DSB instructions
have a recursive definition of accesses ordered before and after the barrier, which has
an effect similar to that of POWER’s cumulativity, both of which are stronger than
LKMM’s cumulativity described in Section 15.3.7.1.
    Arm also implements control dependencies, so that if a conditional branch depends
on a load, then any store executed after that conditional branch will be ordered after
the load. However, loads following the conditional branch will not be guaranteed to be

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
582 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

                             LDLAR

                         Figure 15.26: Half Memory Barrier

ordered unless there is an ISB instruction between the branch and the load. Consider
the following example:

1   r1 = x;
2   if (r1 == 0)
3           nop();
4   y = 1;
5   r2 = z;
6   ISB();
7   r3 = z;

    In this example, load-store control dependency ordering causes the load from x on
line 1 to be ordered before the store to y on line 4. However, Arm does not respect
load-load control dependencies, so that the load on line 1 might well happen after the
load on line 5. On the other hand, the combination of the conditional branch on line 2
and the ISB instruction on line 6 ensures that the load on line 7 happens after the load
on line 1. Note that inserting an additional ISB instruction somewhere between lines 2
and 5 would enforce ordering between lines 1 and 5.

15.6.3       Armv8
Arm’s Armv8 CPU family [ARM17] includes 64-bit capabilities, in contrast to their
32-bit-only CPU described in Section 15.6.2. Armv8’s memory model closely resembles
its Armv7 counterpart, but adds load-acquire (LDLARB, LDLARH, and LDLAR) and store-
release (STLLRB, STLLRH, and STLLR) instructions. These instructions act as “half
memory barriers”, so that Armv8 CPUs can reorder previous accesses with a later LDLAR
instruction, but are prohibited from reordering an earlier LDLAR instruction with later
accesses, as fancifully depicted in Figure 15.26. Similarly, Armv8 CPUs can reorder an
earlier STLLR instruction with a subsequent access, but are prohibited from reordering
previous accesses with a later STLLR instruction. As one might expect, this means that
these instructions directly support the C11 notion of load-acquire and store-release.
    However, Armv8 goes well beyond the C11 memory model by mandating that
the combination of a store-release and load-acquire act as a full barrier under certain

                                                                                           v2025.12.18a
15.6. HARDWARE SPECIFICS                                                                583

circumstances. For example, in Armv8, given a store followed by a store-release
followed a load-acquire followed by a load, all to different variables and all from a single
CPU, all CPUs would agree that the initial store preceded the final load. Interestingly
enough, most TSO architectures (including x86 and the mainframe) do not make this
guarantee, as the two loads could be reordered before the two stores.
    Armv8 is one of only two architectures that needs the smp_mb__after_spinlock()
primitive to be a full barrier, due to its relatively weak lock-acquisition implementation
in the Linux kernel.
    Armv8 also has the distinction of being the first CPU whose vendor publicly defined
its memory ordering with an executable formal model [ARM17].

15.6.4     Itanium
Itanium offers a weak consistency model, so that in absence of explicit memory-
barrier instructions or dependencies, Itanium is within its rights to arbitrarily reorder
memory references [Int02a]. Itanium has a memory-fence instruction named mf,
but also has “half-memory fence” modifiers to loads, stores, and to some of its
atomic instructions [Int02b]. The acq modifier prevents subsequent memory-reference
instructions from being reordered before the acq, but permits prior memory-reference
instructions to be reordered after the acq, similar to the Armv8 load-acquire instructions.
Similarly, the rel modifier prevents prior memory-reference instructions from being
reordered after the rel, but allows subsequent memory-reference instructions to be
reordered before the rel.
    These half-memory fences are useful for critical sections, since it is safe to push
operations into a critical section, but can be fatal to allow them to bleed out. However, as
one of the few CPUs with this property, Itanium at one time defined Linux’s semantics
of memory ordering associated with lock acquisition and release.24 Oddly enough,
actual Itanium hardware is rumored to implement both load-acquire and store-release
instructions as full barriers. Nevertheless, Itanium was the first mainstream CPU
to introduce the concept (if not the reality) of load-acquire and store-release into its
instruction set.
Quick Quiz 15.52: Given that hardware can have a half memory barrier, why don’t locking
primitives allow the compiler to move memory-reference instructions into lock-based critical
sections?

    The Itanium mf instruction is used for the smp_rmb(), smp_mb(), and smp_wmb()
primitives in the Linux kernel. Despite persistent rumors to the contrary, the “mf”
mnemonic stands for “memory fence”.
    Itanium also offers a global total order for release operations, including the mf
instruction. This provides the notion of transitivity, where if a given code fragment sees
a given access as having happened, any later code fragment will also see that earlier
access as having happened. Assuming, that is, that all the code fragments involved
correctly use memory barriers.
    Finally, Itanium is the only architecture supporting the Linux kernel that can reorder
normal loads to the same variable. The Linux kernel avoids this issue because READ_
ONCE() emits a volatile load, which is compiled as a ld,acq instruction, which
forces ordering of all READ_ONCE() invocations by a given CPU, including those to the
same variable.

  24 PowerPC is now the architecture with this dubious privilege.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
584 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

15.6.5     MIPS
The MIPS memory model [Wav16, page 479] appears to resemble that of Arm, Itanium,
and POWER, being weakly ordered by default, but respecting dependencies. MIPS
has a wide variety of memory-barrier instructions, but ties them not to hardware
considerations, but rather to the use cases provided by the Linux kernel and the C++11
standard [Smi19] in a manner similar to the Armv8 additions:

SYNC
       Full barrier for a number of hardware operations in addition to memory references,
       which is used to implement the v4.13 Linux kernel’s smp_mb() for OCTEON
       systems.

SYNC_WMB
     Write memory barrier, which can be used on OCTEON systems to implement the
     smp_wmb() primitive in the v4.13 Linux kernel via the syncw mnemonic. Other
     systems use plain sync.

SYNC_MB
     Full memory barrier, but only for memory operations. This may be used to
     implement the C++ atomic_thread_fence(memory_order_seq_cst).

SYNC_ACQUIRE
     Acquire memory barrier, which could be used to implement C++’s atomic_
     thread_fence(memory_order_acquire). In theory, it could also be used
     to implement the v4.13 Linux-kernel smp_load_acquire() primitive, but in
     practice sync is used instead.

SYNC_RELEASE
     Release memory barrier, which may be used to implement C++’s atomic_
     thread_fence(memory_order_release). In theory, it could also be used
     to implement the v4.13 Linux-kernel smp_store_release() primitive, but in
     practice sync is used instead.

SYNC_RMB
     Read memory barrier, which could in theory be used to implement the smp_
     rmb() primitive in the Linux kernel, except that current MIPS implementations
     supported by the v4.13 Linux kernel do not need an explicit instruction to force
     ordering. Therefore, smp_rmb() instead simply constrains the compiler.

SYNCI
     Instruction-cache synchronization, which is used in conjunction with other
     instructions to allow self-modifying code, such as that produced by just-in-time
     (JIT) compilers.

     Informal discussions with MIPS architects indicates that MIPS has a definition of
transitivity or cumulativity similar to that of Arm and POWER. However, it appears
that different MIPS implementations can have different memory-ordering properties, so
it is important to consult the documentation for the specific MIPS implementation you
are using.

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
15.6. HARDWARE SPECIFICS                                                           585

15.6.6    POWER / PowerPC
The POWER and PowerPC CPU families have a wide variety of memory-barrier
instructions [IBM94, LHF05]:

sync causes all preceding operations to appear to have completed before any subsequent
     operations are started. This instruction is therefore quite expensive.

lwsync (lightweight sync) orders loads with respect to subsequent loads and stores, and
     also orders stores. However, it does not order stores with respect to subsequent
     loads. The lwsync instruction may be used to implement load-acquire and
     store-release operations. Interestingly enough, the lwsync instruction enforces
     the same within-CPU ordering as does x86, z Systems, and coincidentally, SPARC
     TSO. However, placing the lwsync instruction between each pair of memory-
     reference instructions will not result in x86, z Systems, or SPARC TSO memory
     ordering. On these other systems, if a pair of CPUs independently execute
     stores to different variables, all other CPUs will agree on the order of these
     stores. Not so on PowerPC, even with an lwsync instruction between each pair
     of memory-reference instructions, because PowerPC is non-multicopy atomic.

eieio (enforce in-order execution of I/O, in case you were wondering) causes all
     preceding cacheable stores to appear to have completed before all subsequent
     stores. However, stores to cacheable memory are ordered separately from stores
     to non-cacheable memory, which means that eieio will not force an MMIO store
     to precede a spinlock release. This instruction may well be unique in having a
     five-vowel mnemonic.

isync forces all preceding instructions to appear to have completed before any sub-
     sequent instructions start execution. This means that the preceding instructions
     must have progressed far enough that any traps they might generate have either
     happened or are guaranteed not to happen, and that any side-effects of these
     instructions (for example, page-table changes) are seen by the subsequent in-
     structions. However, it does not force all memory references to be ordered, only
     the actual execution of the instruction itself. Thus, the loads might return old
     still-cached values and the isync instruction does not force values previously
     stored to be flushed from the store buffers.

    Unfortunately, none of these instructions line up exactly with Linux’s wmb()
primitive, which requires all stores to be ordered, but does not require the other
high-overhead actions of the sync instruction. The rmb() primitive doesn’t have a
matching light-weight instruction either. But there is no choice: ppc64 versions of
wmb(), rmb(), and mb() are defined to be the heavyweight sync instruction. However,
Linux’s smp_wmb() primitive is never used for MMIO (since a driver must carefully
order MMIOs in UP as well as SMP kernels, after all), so it is defined to be the lighter
weight eieio or lwsync instruction [MDR16]. The smp_mb() primitive is also defined
to be the sync instruction, while smp_rmb() is defined to be the lighter-weight lwsync
instruction.
    POWER features “cumulativity”, which can be used to obtain transitivity. When
used properly, any code seeing the results of an earlier code fragment will also see the
accesses that this earlier code fragment itself saw. Much more detail is available from
McKenney and Silvera [MS09].

                                                                                           v2025.12.18a
586 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

    POWER respects control dependencies in much the same way that Arm does,
with the exception that the POWER isync instruction is substituted for the Arm ISB
instruction.
    Like Armv8, POWER requires smp_mb__after_spinlock() to be a full memory
barrier. In addition, POWER is the only architecture requiring smp_mb__after_
unlock_lock() to be a full memory barrier. In both cases, this is because of the
weak ordering properties of POWER’s locking primitives, due to the use of the lwsync
instruction to provide ordering for both acquisition and release.
    Many members of the POWER architecture have incoherent instruction caches,
so that a store to memory will not necessarily be reflected in the instruction cache.
Thankfully, few people write self-modifying code these days, but JITs and compilers
do it all the time. Furthermore, recompiling a recently run program looks just like
self-modifying code from the CPU’s viewpoint. The icbi instruction (instruction cache
block invalidate) invalidates a specified cache line from the instruction cache, and may
be used in these situations.

15.6.7    SPARC TSO
Although SPARC’s TSO (total-store order) is used by both Linux and Solaris, the
architecture also defines PSO (partial store order) and RMO (relaxed-memory order).
Any program that runs in RMO will also run in either PSO or TSO, and similarly, a
program that runs in PSO will also run in TSO. Moving a shared-memory parallel
program in the other direction may require careful insertion of memory barriers.
    Although SPARC’s PSO and RMO modes are not used much these days, they did
give rise to a very flexible memory-barrier instruction [SPA94] that permits fine-grained
control of ordering:

StoreStore orders preceding stores before subsequent stores. (This option is used by
     the Linux smp_wmb() primitive.)

LoadStore orders preceding loads before subsequent stores.

StoreLoad orders preceding stores before subsequent loads.

LoadLoad orders preceding loads before subsequent loads. (This option is used by the
     Linux smp_rmb() primitive.)

Sync fully completes all preceding operations before starting any subsequent operations.

MemIssue completes preceding memory operations before subsequent memory opera-
     tions, important for some instances of memory-mapped I/O.

Lookaside does the same as MemIssue, but only applies to preceding stores and
     subsequent loads, and even then only for stores and loads that access the same
     memory location.

    So, why is “membar #MemIssue” needed? Because a “membar #StoreLoad”
could permit a subsequent load to get its value from a store buffer, which would be
disastrous if the write was to an MMIO register that induced side effects on the value
to be read. In contrast, “membar #MemIssue” would wait until the store buffers were
flushed before permitting the loads to execute, thereby ensuring that the load actually
gets its value from the MMIO register. Drivers could instead use “membar #Sync”,

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
15.6. HARDWARE SPECIFICS                                                                587

but the lighter-weight “membar #MemIssue” is preferred in cases where the additional
function of the more-expensive “membar #Sync” are not required.
    The “membar #Lookaside” is a lighter-weight version of “membar #MemIssue”,
which is useful when writing to a given MMIO register affects the value that will next
be read from that register. However, the heavier-weight “membar #MemIssue” must
be used when a write to a given MMIO register affects the value that will next be read
from some other MMIO register.
    SPARC requires a flush instruction be used between the time that the instruction
stream is modified and the time that any of these instructions are executed [SPA94].
This is needed to flush any prior value for that location from the SPARC’s instruction
cache. Note that flush takes an address, and will flush only that address from the
instruction cache. On SMP systems, all CPUs’ caches are flushed, but there is no
convenient way to determine when the off-CPU flushes complete, though there is a
reference to an implementation note.
    But again, the Linux kernel runs SPARC in TSO mode, so all of the above membar
variants are strictly of historical interest. In particular, the smp_mb() primitive only
needs to use #StoreLoad because the other three reorderings are prohibited by TSO.

15.6.8      x86
Historically, the x86 CPUs provided “process ordering” so that all CPUs agreed on the
order of a given CPU’s writes to memory. This allowed the smp_wmb() primitive to
be a no-op for the CPU [Int04b]. Of course, a compiler directive was also required to
prevent optimizations that would reorder across the smp_wmb() primitive. In ancient
times, certain x86 CPUs gave no ordering guarantees for loads, so the smp_mb() and
smp_rmb() primitives expanded to lock;addl. This atomic instruction acts as a
barrier to both loads and stores.
    But those were ancient times. More recently, Intel has published a memory model
for x86 [Int07]. It turns out that Intel’s modern CPUs enforce tighter ordering than
was claimed in the previous specifications, so this model simply mandates this modern
behavior. Even more recently, Intel published an updated memory model for x86 [Int11,
Section 8.2], which mandates a total global order for stores, although individual CPUs
are still permitted to see their own stores as having happened earlier than this total
global order would indicate. This exception to the total ordering is needed to allow
important hardware optimizations involving store buffers. In addition, x86 provides
other-multicopy atomicity, for example, so that if CPU 0 sees a store by CPU 1, then
CPU 0 is guaranteed to see all stores that CPU 1 saw prior to its store. Software may
use atomic operations to override these hardware optimizations, which is one reason
that atomic operations tend to be more expensive than their non-atomic counterparts.
    It is also important to note that atomic instructions operating on a given memory
location should all be of the same size [Int16, Section 8.1.2.2]. For example, if you write
a program where one CPU atomically increments a byte while another CPU executes a
4-byte atomic increment on that same location, you are on your own.
    Some SSE instructions are weakly ordered (clflush and non-temporal move
instructions [Int04a]). Code that uses these non-temporal move instructions can use
mfence for mb(), lfence for rmb(), and sfence for wmb().25 A few older variants

   25 smp_mb(), smp_rmb(), and smp_wmb() don’t suffice for ordering non-temporal move

instructions since Linux v4.15.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
588 CHAPTER 15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING

of the x86 CPU have a mode bit that enables out-of-order stores, and for these CPUs,
smp_wmb() must also be defined to be lock;addl.
    A 2017 kernel commit by Michael S. Tsirkin replaced mfence with lock;addl
in smp_mb(), achieving a 60 percent performance boost [Tsi17]. The change used a
4-byte negative offset from SP to avoid slowness due to false data dependencies, instead
of directly accessing memory pointed to by SP. clflush users still need to use mfence
for ordering. Therefore, they were converted to use mb(), which uses mfence as before,
instead of smp_mb().
    Although newer x86 implementations accommodate self-modifying code without
any special instructions, to be fully compatible with past and potential future x86
implementations, a given CPU must execute a jump instruction or a serializing instruction
(e.g., cpuid) between modifying the code and executing it [Int11, Section 8.1.3].

15.6.9     z Systems
The z Systems machines make up the IBM mainframe family, previously known as
the 360, 370, 390 and zSeries [Int04c]. Parallelism came late to z Systems, but
given that these mainframes first shipped in the mid 1960s, this is not saying much.
The “bcr 15,0” instruction is used for the Linux smp_mb() primitives, but compiler
constraints suffices for both the smp_rmb() and smp_wmb() primitives. It also has
strong memory-ordering semantics, as shown in Table 15.5. In particular, all CPUs will
agree on the order of unrelated stores from different CPUs, that is, the z Systems CPU
family is fully multicopy atomic, and is the only commercially available system with
this property.
    As with most CPUs, the z Systems architecture does not guarantee a cache-
coherent instruction stream, hence, self-modifying code must execute a serializing
instruction between updating the instructions and executing them. That said, many actual
z Systems machines do in fact accommodate self-modifying code without serializing
instructions. The z Systems instruction set provides a large set of serializing instructions,
including compare-and-swap, some types of branches (for example, the aforementioned
“bcr 15,0” instruction), and test-and-set.

15.6.10      Hardware Specifics: Discussion
There is considerable variation among these CPU families, and this section only scratched
the surface of a few families that are either heavily used or historically significant. Those
wishing more detail are invited to consult the reference manuals.
    However, perhaps the biggest benefit of the Linux-kernel memory model is that you
can ignore these details when writing architecture-independent Linux-kernel code.

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
