                                        Creating a perfect API is like committing the perfect
                                        crime. There are at least fifty things that can go
                                        wrong, and if you are a genius, you might be able to
                                        anticipate twenty-five of them.
                                             With apologies to any Kathleen Turner fans who
                                                                         might still be alive.
Chapter 16

Ease of Use

16.1      What is Easy?

                                        When someone says “I want a programming
                                        language in which I need only say what I wish done,”
                                        give them a lollipop.
                                                                       Alan J. Perlis, updated

If you are tempted to look down on ease-of-use requirements, please consider that an
ease-of-use bug in Linux-kernel RCU resulted in an exploitable Linux-kernel security
bug in a use of RCU [McK19a]. It is therefore clearly important that even in-kernel
APIs be easy to use.
    Unfortunately, “easy” is a relative term. For example, many people would consider
a 15-hour airplane flight to be a bit of an ordeal—unless they stopped to consider
alternative modes of transportation, especially swimming. This means that creating an
easy-to-use API requires that you understand your intended users well enough to know
what is easy for them. Which might or might not have anything to do with what is easy
for you.
    The following question illustrates this point: “Given a randomly chosen person
among everyone alive today, what one change would improve that person’s life?”
    There is no single change that would be guaranteed to help everyone’s life. After all,
there is an extremely wide range of people, with a correspondingly wide range of needs,
wants, desires, and aspirations. A starving person might need food, but additional food
might well hasten the death of a morbidly obese person. The high level of excitement so
fervently desired by many young people might well be fatal to someone recovering from
a heart attack. Information critical to the success of one person might contribute to the
failure of someone suffering from information overload. In short, if you are working on
a software project that is intended to help people you know nothing about, you should
not be surprised when those people find fault with your project.
    If you really want to help a given group of people, there is simply no substitute for
working closely with them over an extended period of time, as in years. Nevertheless,
there are some simple things that you can do to increase the odds of your users being
happy with your software, and some of these things are covered in the next section.

590                                                            CHAPTER 16. EASE OF USE

16.2      Rusty Scale for API Design
                                             Finding the appropriate measurement is thus not a
                                             mathematical exercise. It is a risk-taking judgment.
                                                                                    Peter Drucker

This section is adapted from portions of Rusty Russell’s 2003 Ottawa Linux Symposium
keynote address [Rus03, Slides 39–57]. Rusty’s key point is that the goal should not
be merely to make an API easy to use, but rather to make the API hard to misuse.
To that end, Rusty proposed his “Rusty Scale” in decreasing order of this important
hard-to-misuse property.
    The following list attempts to generalize the Rusty Scale beyond the Linux kernel:

   1. It is impossible to get wrong. Although this is the standard to which all API
      designers should strive, only the mythical dwim()1 command manages to come
      close.
   2. The compiler or linker won’t let you get it wrong.

   3. The compiler or linker will warn you if you get it wrong. BUILD_BUG_ON() is
      your users’ friend.
   4. The simplest use is the correct one.
   5. The name tells you how to use it. But names can be two-edged swords. Although
      rcu_read_lock() is plain enough for someone converting code from reader-
      writer locking, it might cause some consternation for someone converting code
      from reference counting.
   6. Do it right or it will always break at runtime. WARN_ON_ONCE() is your users’
      friend.
   7. Follow common convention and you will get it right. The malloc() library
      function is a good example. Although it is easy to get memory allocation wrong,
      a great many projects do manage to get it right, at least most of the time. Using
      malloc() in conjunction with Valgrind [The11] moves malloc() almost up to
      the “do it right or it will always break at runtime” point on the scale.
   8. Read the documentation and you will get it right.

   9. Read the implementation and you will get it right.
 10. Read the right mailing-list archive and you will get it right.
 11. Read the right mailing-list archive and you will get it wrong.

 12. Read the implementation and you will get it wrong. The original non-CONFIG_
     PREEMPT implementation of rcu_read_lock() [McK07a] is an infamous ex-
     ample of this point on the scale.

   1 The dwim() function is an acronym that expands to “do what I mean”.

16.3. SHAVING THE MANDELBROT SET                                                          591

 13. Read the documentation and you will get it wrong. For example, the DEC Alpha
     wmb instruction’s documentation [Cor02] fooled a number of developers into
     thinking that this instruction had much stronger memory-order semantics than it
     actually does. Later documentation clarified this point [Com01, Pug00], moving
     the wmb instruction up to the “read the documentation and you will get it right”
     point on the scale.
 14. Follow common convention and you will get it wrong. The printf() statement
     is an example of this point on the scale because developers almost always fail to
     check printf()’s error return.

 15. Do it right and it will break at runtime.
 16. The name tells you how not to use it.
 17. The obvious use is wrong. The Linux kernel smp_mb() function is an example
     of this point on the scale. Many developers assume that this function has much
     stronger ordering semantics than it actually possesses. Chapter 15 contains the
     information needed to avoid this mistake, as does the Linux-kernel source tree’s
     Documentation and tools/memory-model directories.
 18. The compiler or linker will warn you if you get it right.
 19. The compiler or linker won’t let you get it right.

 20. It is impossible to get right. The gets() function is a famous example of this point
     on the scale. In fact, gets() can perhaps best be described as an unconditional
     buffer-overflow security hole.

16.3       Shaving the Mandelbrot Set
                                       Simplicity does not precede complexity,
                                       but follows it.
                                                                                 Alan J. Perlis

The set of useful programs resembles the Mandelbrot set (shown in Figure 16.1) in
that it does not have a clear-cut smooth boundary—if it did, the halting problem would
be solvable. But we need APIs that real people can use, not ones that require a Ph.D.
dissertation be completed for each and every potential use. So, we “shave the Mandelbrot
set”,2 restricting the use of the API to an easily described subset of the full set of
potential uses.
    Such shaving may seem counterproductive. After all, if an algorithm works, why
shouldn’t it be used?
    To see why at least some shaving is absolutely necessary, consider a locking design
that avoids deadlock, but in perhaps the worst possible way. This design uses a circular
doubly linked list, which contains one element for each thread in the system along with
a header element. When a new thread is spawned, the parent thread must insert a new
element into this list, which requires some sort of synchronization.

   2 Due to Josh Triplett.

592                                                           CHAPTER 16. EASE OF USE

                  Figure 16.1: Mandelbrot Set (Courtesy of Wikipedia)

     One way to protect the list is to use a global lock. However, this might be a bottleneck
if threads were being created and deleted frequently.3 Another approach would be to
use a hash table and to lock the individual hash buckets, but this can perform poorly
when scanning the list in order.
     A third approach is to lock the individual list elements, and to require the locks for
both the predecessor and successor to be held during the insertion. Since both locks
must be acquired, we need to decide which order to acquire them in. Two conventional
approaches would be to acquire the locks in address order, or to acquire them in the
order that they appear in the list, so that the header is always acquired first when it is
one of the two elements being locked. However, both of these methods require special
checks and branches.
     The to-be-shaven solution is to unconditionally acquire the locks in list order. But
what about deadlock?
     Deadlock cannot occur.
     To see this, number the elements in the list starting with zero for the header up to
𝑁 for the last element in the list (the one preceding the header, given that the list is
circular). Similarly, number the threads from zero to 𝑁 − 1. If each thread attempts to
lock some consecutive pair of elements, at least one of the threads is guaranteed to be
able to acquire both locks.
     Why?
     Because there are not enough threads to reach all the way around the list. Suppose
thread 0 acquires element 0’s lock. To be blocked, some other thread must have already
acquired element 1’s lock, so let us assume that thread 1 has done so. Similarly, for
thread 1 to be blocked, some other thread must have acquired element 2’s lock, and so
on, up through thread 𝑁 − 1, who acquires element 𝑁 − 1’s lock. For thread 𝑁 − 1 to be
blocked, some other thread must have acquired element 𝑁’s lock. But there are no more
threads, and so thread 𝑁 − 1 cannot be blocked. Therefore, deadlock cannot occur.
     So why should we prohibit use of this delightful little algorithm?
     The fact is that if you really want to use it, we cannot stop you. We can, however,
recommend against such code being included in any project that we care about.
     But, before you use this algorithm, please think through the following Quick Quiz.
 Quick Quiz 16.1: Can a similar algorithm be used when deleting elements?

   3 Those of you with strong operating-system backgrounds, please suspend disbelief.

Those unable to suspend disbelief are encouraged to provide better examples.

16.3. SHAVING THE MANDELBROT SET                                                        593

                       Figure 16.2: Shaving the Mandelbrot Set

     The fact is that this algorithm is extremely specialized (it only works on certain
sized lists), and also quite fragile. Any bug that accidentally failed to add a node to the
list could result in deadlock. In fact, simply adding the node a bit too late could result in
deadlock, as could increasing the number of threads.
     In addition, the other algorithms described above are “good and sufficient”. For
example, simply acquiring the locks in address order is fairly simple and quick, while
allowing the use of lists of any size. Just be careful of the special cases presented by
empty lists and lists containing only one element!
Quick Quiz 16.2: Yetch! What ever possessed someone to come up with an algorithm that
deserves to be shaved as much as this one does???

    In summary, we do not use algorithms simply because they happen to work. We
instead restrict ourselves to algorithms that are useful enough to make it worthwhile
learning about them. The more difficult and complex the algorithm, the more generally
useful it must be in order for the pain of learning it and fixing its bugs to be worthwhile.
Quick Quiz 16.3: Give an exception to this rule.

    Exceptions aside, we must continue to shave the software “Mandelbrot set” so that
our programs remain maintainable, as shown in Figure 16.2.

594   CHAPTER 16. EASE OF USE

