                                          Prediction is very difficult, especially about the
                                          future.
                                                                                      Niels Bohr

Chapter 17

Conflicting Visions of the Future

This chapter presents some conflicting visions of the future of parallel programming. It
is not clear which of these will come to pass, in fact, it is not clear that any of them will.
They are nevertheless important because each vision has its devoted adherents, and if
enough people believe in something fervently enough, you will need to deal with that
thing’s existence in the form of its influence on the thoughts, words, and deeds of its
adherents. Besides which, one or more of these visions will actually come to pass. But
most are bogus. Tell which is which and you’ll be rich [Spi77]!
    Therefore, the following sections give an overview of transactional memory, hardware
transactional memory, formal verification in regression testing, and parallel functional
programming. But first, a cautionary tale on prognostication taken from the early 2000s.

17.1 The Future of CPU Technology Ain’t What it Used
     to Be
                                          A great future behind him.
                                                                                  David Maraniss

Years past always seem so simple and innocent when viewed through the lens of many
years of experience. And the early 2000s were for the most part innocent of the
impending failure of Moore’s Law to continue delivering the then-traditional increases
in CPU clock frequency. Oh, there were the occasional warnings about the limits
of technology, but such warnings had been sounded for decades. With that in mind,
consider the following scenarios:

   1. Uniprocessor Über Alles (Figure 17.1),
   2. Multithreaded Mania (Figure 17.2),
   3. More of the Same (Figure 17.3), and
   4. Crash Dummies Slamming into the Memory Wall (Figure 17.4).
   5. Astounding Accelerators (Figure 17.5).

    Each of these scenarios is covered in the following sections.

      Figure 17.1: Uniprocessor Über Alles

        Figure 17.2: Multithreaded Mania

17.1. THE FUTURE OF CPU TECHNOLOGY AIN’T WHAT IT USED TO BE 597

                      Figure 17.3: More of the Same

        Figure 17.4: Crash Dummies Slamming into the Memory Wall

                        Figure 17.5: Astounding Accelerators

17.1.1    Uniprocessor Über Alles
As was said in 2004 [McK04]:

      In this scenario, the combination of Moore’s-Law increases in CPU clock
      rate and continued progress in horizontally scaled computing render SMP
      systems irrelevant. This scenario is therefore dubbed “Uniprocessor Über
      Alles”, literally, uniprocessors above all else.
      These uniprocessor systems would be subject only to instruction overhead,
      since memory barriers, cache thrashing, and contention do not affect single-
      CPU systems. In this scenario, RCU is useful only for niche applications,
      such as interacting with NMIs. It is not clear that an operating system
      lacking RCU would see the need to adopt it, although operating systems
      that already implement RCU might continue to do so.
      However, recent progress with multithreaded CPUs seems to indicate that
      this scenario is quite unlikely.

    Unlikely indeed! But the larger software community was reluctant to accept the
fact that they would need to embrace parallelism, and so it was some time before this
community concluded that the “free lunch” of Moore’s-Law-induced CPU core-clock
frequency increases was well and truly finished. Never forget: Belief is an emotion, not
necessarily the result of a rational technical thought process!

17.1. THE FUTURE OF CPU TECHNOLOGY AIN’T WHAT IT USED TO BE 599

17.1.2    Multithreaded Mania
Also from 2004 [McK04]:

      A less-extreme variant of Uniprocessor Über Alles features uniprocessors
      with hardware multithreading, and in fact multithreaded CPUs are now
      standard for many desktop and laptop computer systems. The most
      aggressively multithreaded CPUs share all levels of cache hierarchy, thereby
      eliminating CPU-to-CPU memory latency, in turn greatly reducing the
      performance penalty for traditional synchronization mechanisms. However,
      a multithreaded CPU would still incur overhead due to contention and
      to pipeline stalls caused by memory barriers. Furthermore, because all
      hardware threads share all levels of cache, the cache available to a given
      hardware thread is a fraction of what it would be on an equivalent single-
      threaded CPU, which can degrade performance for applications with large
      cache footprints. There is also some possibility that the restricted amount
      of cache available will cause RCU-based algorithms to incur performance
      penalties due to their grace-period-induced additional memory consumption.
      Investigating this possibility is future work.
      However, in order to avoid such performance degradation, a number of
      multithreaded CPUs and multi-CPU chips partition at least some of the
      levels of cache on a per-hardware-thread basis. This increases the amount
      of cache available to each hardware thread, but re-introduces memory
      latency for cachelines that are passed from one hardware thread to another.

    And we all know how this story has played out, with multiple multi-threaded cores
on a single die plugged into a single socket, with varying degrees of optimization for
lower numbers of active threads per core. The question then becomes whether or not
future shared-memory systems will always fit into a single socket.

17.1.3    More of the Same
Again from 2004 [McK04]:

      The More-of-the-Same scenario assumes that the memory-latency ratios
      will remain roughly where they are today.
      This scenario actually represents a change, since to have more of the same,
      interconnect performance must begin keeping up with the Moore’s-Law
      increases in core CPU performance. In this scenario, overhead due to
      pipeline stalls, memory latency, and contention remains significant, and
      RCU retains the high level of applicability that it enjoys today.

     And the change has been the ever-increasing levels of integration that Moore’s Law
is still providing. But longer term, which will it be? More CPUs per die? Or more I/O,
cache, and memory?
     Servers seem to be choosing the former, while embedded systems on a chip (SoCs)
continue choosing the latter.

17.1.4    Crash Dummies Slamming into the Memory Wall
And one more quote from 2004 [McK04]:

                                                       10000

              Instructions per Memory Reference Time
                                                       1000

                                                         100

                                                             10

                                                             1

                                                         0.1
                                                                  82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02
                                                                                Year

  Figure 17.6: Instructions per Local Memory Reference for Sequent Computers

                                                        1

                                                                  spinlock
              Breakeven Update Fraction

                                                                                         RCU

                                                       0.1
                                                             1             10          100      1000
                                                                         Memory-Latency Ratio

                    Figure 17.7: Breakevens vs. 𝑟, 𝜆 Large, Four CPUs

17.1. THE FUTURE OF CPU TECHNOLOGY AIN’T WHAT IT USED TO BE 601

                                                 1

                                                          spinlock

                 Breakeven Update Fraction
                                                0.1

                                                                        drw
                                               0.01

                                              0.001             RCU

                                             0.0001
                                                      1      10         100       1000
                                                           Memory-Latency Ratio

                    Figure 17.8: Breakevens vs. 𝑟, 𝜆 Small, Four CPUs

      If the memory-latency trends shown in Figure 17.6 continue, then memory
      latency will continue to grow relative to instruction-execution overhead.
      Systems such as Linux that have significant use of RCU will find additional
      use of RCU to be profitable, as shown in Figure 17.7. As can be seen
      in this figure, if RCU is heavily used, increasing memory-latency ratios
      give RCU an increasing advantage over other synchronization mechanisms.
      In contrast, systems with minor use of RCU will require increasingly
      high degrees of read intensity for use of RCU to pay off, as shown in
      Figure 17.8. As can be seen in this figure, if RCU is lightly used, increasing
      memory-latency ratios put RCU at an increasing disadvantage compared to
      other synchronization mechanisms. Since Linux has been observed with
      over 1,600 callbacks per grace period under heavy load [SM04b], it seems
      safe to say that Linux falls into the former category.

    On the one hand, this passage failed to anticipate the cache-warmth issues that
RCU can suffer from in workloads with significant update intensity, in part because it
seemed unlikely that RCU would really be used for such workloads. In the event, the
SLAB_TYPESAFE_BY_RCU has been pressed into service in a number of instances where
these cache-warmth issues would otherwise be problematic, as has sequence locking.
On the other hand, this passage also failed to anticipate that RCU would be used to
reduce scheduling latency or for security.
    Much of the data generated for this book was collected on an eight-socket system
with 28 cores per socket and two hardware threads per core, for a total of 448 hardware
threads. The idle-system memory latencies are less than one microsecond, which are
no worse than those of similar-sized systems of the year 2004. Some claim that these
latencies approach a microsecond only because of the x86 CPU family’s relatively
strong memory ordering, but it may be some time before that particular argument is
settled.

17.1.5      Astounding Accelerators
The potential of hardware accelerators was not quite as clear in 2004 as it is in 2021, so
this section has no quote. However, the November 2020 Top 500 list [MDSS20] features
a great many accelerators, so one could argue that this section is a view of the present
rather than of the future. The same could be said of most of the preceding sections.
    Hardware accelerators are being put to many other uses, including encryption,
compression, and machine learning.
    In short, beware of prognostications, including those in the remainder of this chapter.

17.2       Transactional Memory
                                                Everything should be as simple as it can be, but not
                                                simpler.
                                                            Albert Einstein, by way of Louis Zukofsky

The idea of using transactions outside of databases goes back many decades [Lom77,
Kni86, HM93], with the key difference between database and non-database transactions
being that non-database transactions drop the “D” in the “ACID”1 properties defining
database transactions. The idea of supporting memory-based transactions, or “transac-
tional memory” (TM), in hardware is more recent [HM93], but unfortunately, support
for such transactions in commodity hardware was not immediately forthcoming, despite
other somewhat similar proposals being put forward [SSHT93]. Not long after, Shavit
and Touitou proposed a software-only implementation of transactional memory (STM)
that was capable of running on commodity hardware, give or take memory-ordering
issues [ST95]. This proposal languished for many years, perhaps due to the fact that the
research community’s attention was absorbed by non-blocking synchronization (see
Section 14.2).
    But by the turn of the century, TM started receiving more attention [MT01,
RG01], and by the middle of the decade, the level of interest can only be termed
“incandescent” [Her05, Gro07], with only a few voices of caution [BLM05, MMW07].
    The basic idea behind TM is to execute a section of code atomically, so that other
threads see no intermediate state. As such, the semantics of TM could be implemented
by simply replacing each transaction with a recursively acquirable global lock acquisition
and release, albeit with abysmal performance and scalability. Much of the complexity
inherent in TM implementations, whether hardware or software, is efficiently detecting
when concurrent transactions can safely run in parallel. Because this detection is done
dynamically, conflicting transactions can be aborted or “rolled back”, and in some
implementations, this failure mode is visible to the programmer.
    Because transaction roll-back is increasingly unlikely as transaction size decreases,
TM might become quite attractive for small memory-based operations, such as linked-list
manipulations used for stacks, queues, hash tables, and search trees. However, it is
currently much more difficult to make the case for large transactions, particularly those
containing non-memory operations such as I/O and process creation. The following
sections look at current challenges to the grand vision of “Transactional Memory
Everywhere” [McK09b]. Section 17.2.1 examines the challenges faced interacting
with the outside world, Section 17.2.2 looks at interactions with process modification
   1 Atomicity, consistency, isolation, and durability.

primitives, Section 17.2.3 explores interactions with other synchronization primitives,
and finally Section 17.2.6 closes with some discussion.

17.2.1     Outside World
In the wise words of Donald Knuth:

      Many computer users feel that input and output are not actually part of
      “real programming,” they are merely things that (unfortunately) must be
      done in order to get information in and out of the machine.

     Whether or not we believe that input and output are “real programming”, the fact
is that software absolutely must deal with the outside world. This section therefore
critiques transactional memory’s outside-world capabilities, focusing on I/O operations,
time delays, and persistent storage.
     And these interactions with the outside world are the rock upon which the claims
of unconditional TM composability are shattered. Yes, you can compose transactions,
but only as long as there are no intervening TM-unfriendly operations. Just as you can
compose lock-based critical sections, but only as long as doing so does not introduce
deadlocks.
     In the end, it is unclear whether TM really provides better composability than does
locking in real-world code.

17.2.1.1   I/O Operations
One can execute I/O operations within a lock-based critical section, while holding a
hazard pointer, within a sequence-locking read-side critical section, and from within
a userspace-RCU read-side critical section, and even all at the same time, if need be.
What happens when you attempt to execute an I/O operation from within a transaction?
    The underlying problem is that transactions may be rolled back, for example, due
to conflicts. Roughly speaking, this requires that all operations within any given
transaction be revocable, so that executing the operation twice has the same effect as
executing it once. Unfortunately, I/O is in general the prototypical irrevocable operation,
making it difficult to include general I/O operations in transactions. In fact, general
I/O is irrevocable: Once you have pushed the proverbial button launching the nuclear
warheads, there is no turning back.
    Here are some options for handling of I/O within transactions:

   1. Restrict I/O within transactions to buffered I/O with in-memory buffers. These
      buffers may then be included in the transaction in the same way that any other
      memory location might be included. This seems to be the mechanism of choice,
      and it does work well in many common cases of situations such as stream I/O
      and mass-storage I/O. However, special handling is required in cases where
      multiple record-oriented output streams are merged onto a single file from
      multiple processes, as might be done using the “a+” option to fopen() or the
      O_APPEND flag to open(). In addition, as will be seen in the next section,
      common networking operations cannot be handled via buffering.

   2. Prohibit I/O within transactions, so that any attempt to execute an I/O operation
      aborts the enclosing transaction (and perhaps multiple nested transactions). This
      approach seems to be the conventional TM approach for unbuffered I/O, but

        requires that TM interoperate with other synchronization primitives tolerating
        I/O.
     3. Prohibit I/O within transactions, but enlist the compiler’s aid in enforcing this
        prohibition.
     4. Permit only one special irrevocable transaction [SMS08] to proceed at any given
        time, thus allowing irrevocable transactions to contain I/O operations.2 This works
        in general, but severely limits the scalability and performance of I/O operations.
        Given that scalability and performance is a first-class goal of parallelism, this
        approach’s generality seems a bit self-limiting. Worse yet, use of irrevocability to
        tolerate I/O operations seems to greatly restrict use of manual transaction-abort
        operations.3 Finally, if there is an irrevocable transaction manipulating a given
        data item, any other transaction manipulating that same data item cannot have
        non-blocking semantics.
     5. Create new hardware and protocols such that I/O operations can be pulled into
        the transactional substrate. In the case of input operations, the hardware would
        need to correctly predict the result of the operation, and to abort the transaction if
        the prediction failed.

    I/O operations are a well-known weakness of TM, and it is not clear that the problem
of supporting I/O in transactions has a reasonable general solution, at least if “reasonable”
is to include usable performance and scalability. Nevertheless, continued time and
attention to this problem will likely produce additional progress.

17.2.1.2      RPC Operations
One can execute RPCs within a lock-based critical section, while holding a hazard pointer,
within a sequence-locking read-side critical section, and from within a userspace-RCU
read-side critical section, and even all at the same time, if need be. What happens when
you attempt to execute an RPC from within a transaction?
     If both the RPC request and its response are to be contained within the transaction,
and if some part of the transaction depends on the result returned by the response, then
it is not possible to use the memory-buffer tricks that can be used in the case of buffered
I/O. Any attempt to take this buffering approach would deadlock the transaction, as the
request could not be transmitted until the transaction was guaranteed to succeed, but the
transaction’s success might not be knowable until after the response is received, as is
the case in the following example:

1   begin_trans();
2   rpc_request();
3   i = rpc_response();
4   a[i]++;
5   end_trans();

    The transaction’s memory footprint cannot be determined until after the RPC
response is received, and until the transaction’s memory footprint can be determined, it
is impossible to determine whether the transaction can be allowed to commit. The only
     2 In earlier literature, irrevocable transactions are termed inevitable transactions.
     3 This difficulty was pointed out by Michael Factor. To see the problem, think through

what TM should do in response to an attempt to abort a transaction after it has executed an
irrevocable operation.

action consistent with transactional semantics is therefore to unconditionally abort the
transaction, which is, to say the least, unhelpful.
    Here are some options available to TM:

   1. Prohibit RPC within transactions, so that any attempt to execute an RPC operation
      aborts the enclosing transaction (and perhaps multiple nested transactions).
      Alternatively, enlist the compiler to enforce RPC-free transactions. This approach
      does work, but will require TM to interact with other synchronization primitives.
   2. Permit only one special irrevocable transaction [SMS08] to proceed at any
      given time, thus allowing irrevocable transactions to contain RPC operations.
      This works in general, but severely limits the scalability and performance of
      RPC operations. Given that scalability and performance is a first-class goal of
      parallelism, this approach’s generality seems a bit self-limiting. Furthermore, use
      of irrevocable transactions to permit RPC operations restricts manual transaction-
      abort operations once the RPC operation has started. Finally, if there is an
      irrevocable transaction manipulating a given data item, any other transaction
      manipulating that same data item must have blocking semantics.
   3. Identify special cases where the success of the transaction may be determined
      before the RPC response is received, and automatically convert these to irrevocable
      transactions immediately before sending the RPC request. Of course, if several
      concurrent transactions attempt RPC calls in this manner, it might be necessary
      to roll all but one of them back, with consequent degradation of performance and
      scalability. This approach nevertheless might be valuable given long-running
      transactions ending with an RPC. This approach must still restrict manual
      transaction-abort operations.
   4. Identify special cases where the RPC response may be moved out of the transaction,
      and then proceed using techniques similar to those used for buffered I/O.
   5. Extend the transactional substrate to include the RPC server as well as its
      client. This is in theory possible, as has been demonstrated by distributed
      databases. However, it is unclear whether the requisite performance and scalability
      requirements can be met by distributed-database techniques, given that memory-
      based TM has no slow disk drives behind which to hide such latencies. Of course,
      given the advent of solid-state disks, it is also quite possible that databases will
      need to redesign their approach to latency hiding.

    As noted in the prior section, I/O is a known weakness of TM, and RPC is simply
an especially problematic case of I/O.

17.2.1.3   Time Delays
An important special case of interaction with extra-transactional accesses involves
explicit time delays within a transaction. Of course, the idea of a time delay within a
transaction flies in the face of TM’s atomicity property, but this sort of thing is arguably
what weak atomicity is all about. Furthermore, correct interaction with memory-mapped
I/O sometimes requires carefully controlled timing, and applications often use time
delays for varied purposes. Finally, one can execute time delays within a lock-based
critical section, while holding a hazard pointer, within a sequence-locking read-side
critical section, and from within a userspace-RCU read-side critical section, and even all

at the same time, if need be. Doing so might not be wise from a contention or scalability
viewpoint, but then again, doing so does not raise any fundamental conceptual issues.
     So, what can TM do about time delays within transactions?

   1. Ignore time delays within transactions. This has an appearance of elegance, but
      like too many other “elegant” solutions, fails to survive first contact with legacy
      code. Such code, which might well have important time delays in critical sections,
      would fail upon being transactionalized.
   2. Abort transactions upon encountering a time-delay operation. This is attractive,
      but it is unfortunately not always possible to automatically detect a time-delay
      operation. Is that tight loop carrying out a critical computation, or is it simply
      waiting for time to elapse?
   3. Enlist the compiler to prohibit time delays within transactions.
   4. Let the time delays execute normally. Unfortunately, some TM implementations
      publish modifications only at commit time, which could defeat the purpose of the
      time delay.

    It is not clear that there is a single correct answer. TM implementations featuring
weak atomicity that publish changes immediately within the transaction (rolling these
changes back upon abort) might be reasonably well served by the last alternative. Even
in this case, the code (or possibly even hardware) at the other end of the transaction may
require a substantial redesign to tolerate aborted transactions. This need for redesign
would make it more difficult to apply transactional memory to legacy code.

17.2.1.4   Persistence
There are many different types of locking primitives. One interesting distinction is
persistence, in other words, whether the lock can exist independently of the address
space of the process using the lock.
   Non-persistent locks include pthread_mutex_lock(), pthread_rwlock_rdlock(),
and most kernel-level locking primitives. If the memory locations instantiating a
non-persistent lock’s data structures disappear, so does the lock. For typical use of
pthread_mutex_lock(), this means that when the process exits, all of its locks vanish.
This property can be exploited in order to trivialize lock cleanup at program shutdown
time, but makes it more difficult for unrelated applications to share locks, as such sharing
requires the applications to share memory.
Quick Quiz 17.1: But suppose that an application exits while holding a pthread_mutex_
lock() that happens to be located in a file-mapped region of memory?

    Persistent locks help avoid the need to share memory among unrelated applications.
Persistent locking APIs include the flock family, lockf(), System V semaphores, or
the O_CREAT flag to open(). These persistent APIs can be used to protect large-scale
operations spanning runs of multiple applications, and, in the case of O_CREAT even
surviving operating-system reboot. If need be, locks can even span multiple computer
systems via distributed lock managers and distributed filesystems—and persist across
reboots of any or all of those computer systems.
    Persistent locks can be used by any application, including applications written using
multiple languages and software environments. In fact, a persistent lock might well be
acquired by an application written in C and released by an application written in Python.

     How could a similar persistent functionality be provided for TM?

     1. Restrict persistent transactions to special-purpose environments designed to
        support them, for example, SQL. This clearly works, given the decades-long
        history of database systems, but does not provide the same degree of flexibility
        provided by persistent locks.
     2. Use snapshot facilities provided by some storage devices and/or filesystems.
        Unfortunately, this does not handle network communication, nor does it handle
        I/O to devices that do not provide snapshot capabilities, for example, memory
        sticks.
     3. Build a time machine.
     4. Avoid the problem entirely by using existing persistent facilities, presumably
        avoiding such use within transactions.

    Of course, the fact that it is called transactional memory should give us pause, as
the name itself conflicts with the concept of a persistent transaction. It is nevertheless
worthwhile to consider this possibility as an important test case probing the inherent
limitations of transactional memory.

17.2.2       Process Modification
Processes are not eternal: They are created and destroyed, their memory mappings are
modified, they are linked to dynamic libraries, and they are debugged. These sections
look at how transactional memory can handle an ever-changing execution environment.

17.2.2.1     Multithreaded Transactions
It is perfectly legal to create processes and threads while holding a lock or, for that
matter, while holding a hazard pointer, within a sequence-locking read-side critical
section, and from within a userspace-RCU read-side critical section, and even all at the
same time, if need be. Not only is it legal, but it is quite simple, as can be seen from the
following code fragment:
1   pthread_mutex_lock(...);
2   for (i = 0; i < ncpus; i++)
3           pthread_create(&tid[i], ...);
4   for (i = 0; i < ncpus; i++)
5           pthread_join(tid[i], ...);
6   pthread_mutex_unlock(...);

    This pseudo-code fragment uses pthread_create() to spawn one thread per CPU,
then uses pthread_join() to wait for each to complete, all under the protection of
pthread_mutex_lock(). The effect is to execute a lock-based critical section in
parallel, and one could obtain a similar effect using fork() and wait(). Of course,
the critical section would need to be quite large to justify the thread-spawning overhead,
but there are many examples of large critical sections in production software.
    What might TM do about thread spawning within a transaction?

     1. Declare pthread_create() to be illegal within transactions, preferably by
        aborting the transaction. Alternatively, enlist the compiler to enforce pthread_
        create()-free transactions.

   2. Permit pthread_create() to be executed within a transaction, but only the
      parent thread will be considered to be part of the transaction. This approach
      seems to be reasonably compatible with existing and posited TM implementations,
      but seems to be a trap for the unwary. This approach raises further questions,
      such as how to handle conflicting child-thread accesses.

   3. Convert the pthread_create()s to function calls. This approach is also an
      attractive nuisance, as it does not handle the not-uncommon cases where the child
      threads communicate with one another. In addition, it does not permit concurrent
      execution of the body of the transaction.

   4. Extend the transaction to cover the parent and all child threads. This approach
      raises interesting questions about the nature of conflicting accesses, given that
      the parent and children are presumably permitted to conflict with each other,
      but not with other threads. It also raises interesting questions as to what should
      happen if the parent thread does not wait for its children before committing the
      transaction. Even more interesting, what happens if the parent conditionally
      executes pthread_join() based on the values of variables participating in the
      transaction? The answers to these questions are reasonably straightforward in the
      case of locking. The answers for TM are left as an exercise for the reader.

     Given that parallel execution of transactions is commonplace in the database world,
it is perhaps surprising that current TM proposals do not provide for it. On the other
hand, the example above is a fairly sophisticated use of locking that is not normally
found in simple textbook examples, so perhaps its omission is to be expected. That
said, some researchers are using transactions to autoparallelize code [RKM+ 10], and
there are rumors that other TM researchers are investigating fork/join parallelism within
transactions, so perhaps this topic will soon be addressed more thoroughly.

17.2.2.2   The exec() System Call
One can execute an exec() system call within a lock-based critical section, while
holding a hazard pointer, within a sequence-locking read-side critical section, and from
within a userspace-RCU read-side critical section, and even all at the same time, if need
be. The exact semantics depends on the type of primitive.
    In the case of non-persistent primitives (including pthread_mutex_lock(),
pthread_rwlock_rdlock(), and userspace RCU), if the exec() succeeds, the whole
address space vanishes, along with any locks being held. Of course, if the exec() fails,
the address space still lives, so any associated locks would also still live. A bit strange
perhaps, but well defined.
    On the other hand, persistent primitives (including the flock family, lockf(),
System V semaphores, and the O_CREAT flag to open()) would survive regardless of
whether the exec() succeeded or failed, so that the exec()ed program might well
release them.
Quick Quiz 17.2: What about non-persistent primitives represented by data structures in
mmap() regions of memory? What happens when there is an exec() within a critical section
of such a primitive?

    What happens when you attempt to execute an exec() system call from within a
transaction?

   1. Disallow exec() within transactions, so that the enclosing transactions abort
      upon encountering the exec(). This is well defined, but clearly requires non-TM
      synchronization primitives for use in conjunction with exec().
   2. Disallow exec() within transactions, with the compiler enforcing this prohibition.
      There is a draft specification for TM in C++ that takes this approach, allowing
      functions to be decorated with the transaction_safe and transaction_
      unsafe attributes.4 This approach has some advantages over aborting the
      transaction at runtime, but again requires non-TM synchronization primitives for
      use in conjunction with exec(). One disadvantage is the need to decorate a great
      many library functions with transaction_safe and transaction_unsafe
      attributes.
   3. Treat the transaction in a manner similar to non-persistent locking primitives, so
      that the transaction survives if exec() fails, and silently commits if the exec()
      succeeds. The case where only some of the variables affected by the transaction
      reside in mmap()ed memory (and thus could survive a successful exec() system
      call) is left as an exercise for the reader.
   4. Abort the transaction (and the exec() system call) if the exec() system call
      would have succeeded, but allow the transaction to continue if the exec() system
      call would fail. This is in some sense the “correct” approach, but it would require
      considerable work for a rather unsatisfying result.

    The exec() system call is perhaps the strangest example of an obstacle to universal
TM applicability, as it is not completely clear what approach makes sense, and some
might argue that this is merely a reflection of the perils of real-life interaction with
exec(). That said, the two options prohibiting exec() within transactions are perhaps
the most logical of the group.
    Similar issues surround the exit() and kill() system calls, as well as a longjmp()
or an exception that would exit the transaction. (Where did the longjmp() or exception
come from?)

17.2.2.3    Dynamic Linking and Loading
Lock-based critical section, code holding a hazard pointer, sequence-locking read-side
critical sections, and userspace-RCU read-side critical sections can (separately or in
combination) legitimately contain code that invokes dynamically linked and loaded
functions, including C/C++ shared libraries and Java class libraries. Of course, the
code contained in these libraries is by definition unknowable at compile time. So, what
happens if a dynamically loaded function is invoked within a transaction?
    This question has two parts: (a) How do you dynamically link and load a function
within a transaction and (b) What do you do about the unknowable nature of the
code within this function? To be fair, item (b) poses some challenges for locking and
userspace-RCU as well, at least in theory. For example, the dynamically linked function
might introduce a deadlock for locking or might (erroneously) introduce a quiescent state
into a userspace-RCU read-side critical section. The difference is that while the class of
operations permitted in locking and userspace-RCU critical sections is well-understood,

    4 Thanks to Mark Moir for pointing me at this spec, and to Michael Wong for having

pointed me at an earlier revision some time back.

there appears to still be considerable uncertainty in the case of TM. In fact, different
implementations of TM seem to have different restrictions.
    So what can TM do about dynamically linked and loaded library functions? Options
for part (a), the actual loading of the code, include the following:

   1. Treat the dynamic linking and loading in a manner similar to a page fault, so that
      the function is loaded and linked, possibly aborting the transaction in the process.
      If the transaction is aborted, the retry will find the function already present, and
      the transaction can thus be expected to proceed normally.
   2. Disallow dynamic linking and loading of functions from within transactions.

    Options for part (b), the inability to detect TM-unfriendly operations in a not-yet-
loaded function, possibilities include the following:

   1. Just execute the code: If there are any TM-unfriendly operations in the function,
      simply abort the transaction. Unfortunately, this approach makes it impossible
      for the compiler to determine whether a given group of transactions may be
      safely composed. One way to permit composability regardless is irrevocable
      transactions, however, current implementations permit only a single irrevocable
      transaction to proceed at any given time, which can severely limit performance
      and scalability. Irrevocable transactions also to restrict use of manual transaction-
      abort operations. Finally, if there is an irrevocable transaction manipulating a
      given data item, any other transaction manipulating that same data item cannot
      have non-blocking semantics.
   2. Decorate the function declarations indicating which functions are TM-friendly.
      These decorations can then be enforced by the compiler’s type system. Of
      course, for many languages, this requires language extensions to be proposed,
      standardized, and implemented, with the corresponding time delays, and also
      with the corresponding decoration of a great many otherwise uninvolved library
      functions. That said, the standardization effort is already in progress [ATS09,
      ATSG12].
   3. As above, disallow dynamic linking and loading of functions from within
      transactions.

    I/O operations are of course a known weakness of TM, and dynamic linking and
loading can be thought of as yet another special case of I/O. Nevertheless, the proponents
of TM must either solve this problem, or resign themselves to a world where TM is but
one tool of several in the parallel programmer’s toolbox. (To be fair, a number of TM
proponents have long since resigned themselves to a world containing more than just
TM.)

17.2.2.4   Memory-Mapping Operations
It is perfectly legal to execute memory-mapping operations (including mmap(), shmat(),
and munmap() [Gro01]) within a lock-based critical section, while holding a hazard
pointer, within a sequence-locking read-side critical section, and from within a userspace-
RCU read-side critical section, and even all at the same time, if need be. What happens
when you attempt to execute such an operation from within a transaction? More to the
point, what happens if the memory region being remapped contains some variables

participating in the current thread’s transaction? And what if this memory region
contains variables participating in some other thread’s transaction?
    It should not be necessary to consider cases where the TM system’s metadata is
remapped, given that most locking primitives do not define the outcome of remapping
their lock variables.
    Here are some TM memory-mapping options:

   1. Memory remapping is illegal within a transaction, and will result in all enclosing
      transactions being aborted. This does simplify things somewhat, but also requires
      that TM interoperate with synchronization primitives that do tolerate remapping
      from within their critical sections.
   2. Memory remapping is illegal within a transaction, and the compiler is enlisted to
      enforce this prohibition.

   3. Memory mapping is legal within a transaction, but aborts all other transactions
      having variables in the region mapped over.
   4. Memory mapping is legal within a transaction, but the mapping operation will
      fail if the region being mapped overlaps with the current transaction’s footprint.

   5. All memory-mapping operations, whether within or outside a transaction, check
      the region being mapped against the memory footprint of all transactions in the
      system. If there is overlap, then the memory-mapping operation fails.
   6. The effect of memory-mapping operations that overlap the memory footprint of
      any transaction in the system is determined by the TM conflict manager, which
      might dynamically determine whether to fail the memory-mapping operation or
      abort any conflicting transactions.

   It is interesting to note that munmap() leaves the relevant region of memory
unmapped, which could have additional interesting implications.5

17.2.2.5   Debugging
The usual debugging operations such as breakpoints work normally within lock-based
critical sections and from usespace-RCU read-side critical sections. However, in initial
transactional-memory hardware implementations [DLMN09] an exception within a
transaction will abort that transaction, which in turn means that breakpoints abort all
enclosing transactions.
     So how can transactions be debugged?

   1. Use software emulation techniques within transactions containing breakpoints.
      Of course, it might be necessary to emulate all transactions any time a breakpoint
      is set within the scope of any transaction. If the runtime system is unable to
      determine whether or not a given breakpoint is within the scope of a transaction,
      then it might be necessary to emulate all transactions just to be on the safe side.
      However, this approach might impose significant overhead, which might in turn
      obscure the bug being pursued.

   5 This difference between mapping and unmapping was noted by Josh Triplett.

   2. Use only hardware TM implementations that are capable of handling breakpoint
      exceptions. Unfortunately, as of this writing (March 2021), all such implementa-
      tions are research prototypes.

   3. Use only software TM implementations, which are (very roughly speaking) more
      tolerant of exceptions than are the simpler of the hardware TM implementations.
      Of course, software TM tends to have higher overhead than hardware TM, so this
      approach may not be acceptable in all situations.

   4. Program more carefully, so as to avoid having bugs in the transactions in the first
      place. As soon as you figure out how to do this, please do let everyone know the
      secret!

    There is some reason to believe that transactional memory will deliver productivity
improvements compared to other synchronization mechanisms, but it does seem quite
possible that these improvements could easily be lost if traditional debugging techniques
cannot be applied to transactions. This seems especially true if transactional memory is
to be used by novices on large transactions. In contrast, macho “top-gun” programmers
might be able to dispense with such debugging aids, especially for small transactions.
    Therefore, if transactional memory is to deliver on its productivity promises to
novice programmers, the debugging problem does need to be solved.

17.2.3     Synchronization
If transactional memory someday proves that it can be everything to everyone, it will
not need to interact with any other synchronization mechanism. Until then, it will need
to work with synchronization mechanisms that can do what it cannot, or that work more
naturally in a given situation. The following sections outline the current challenges in
this area.

17.2.3.1   Locking

It is commonplace to acquire locks while holding other locks, which works quite well,
at least as long as the usual well-known software-engineering techniques are employed
to avoid deadlock. It is not unusual to acquire locks from within RCU read-side critical
sections, which eases deadlock concerns because RCU read-side primitives cannot
participate in lock-based deadlock cycles. It is also possible to acquire locks while
holding hazard pointers and within sequence-lock read-side critical sections. But what
happens when you attempt to acquire a lock from within a transaction?
     In theory, the answer is trivial: Simply manipulate the data structure representing
the lock as part of the transaction, and everything works out perfectly. In practice, a
number of non-obvious complications [VGS08] can arise, depending on implementation
details of the TM system. These complications can be resolved, but at the cost of a 45 %
increase in overhead for locks acquired outside of transactions and a 300 % increase in
overhead for locks acquired within transactions. Although these overheads might be
acceptable for transactional programs containing small amounts of locking, they are
often completely unacceptable for production-quality lock-based programs wishing to
use the occasional transaction.
     Here are some options available to TM:

   1. Use only locking-friendly TM implementations [DSS06]. Unfortunately, the
      locking-unfriendly implementations have some attractive properties, including
      low overhead for successful transactions and the ability to accommodate extremely
      large transactions.
   2. Use TM only “in the small” when introducing TM to lock-based programs, thereby
      accommodating the limitations of locking-friendly TM implementations.
   3. Set aside locking-based legacy systems entirely, re-implementing everything
      in terms of transactions. This approach has no shortage of advocates, but this
      requires that all the issues described in this series be resolved. During the time
      it takes to resolve these issues, competing synchronization mechanisms will of
      course also have the opportunity to improve.
   4. Use TM strictly as an optimization in lock-based systems, as was done by
      the TxLinux [RHP+ 07] group and by a great many transactional lock elision
      projects [PD11, Kle14, FIMR16, PMDY20]. This approach seems sound, but
      leaves the locking design constraints (such as the need to avoid deadlock) firmly
      in place.
   5. Strive to reduce the overhead imposed on locking primitives.

    The fact that there could possibly be a problem interfacing TM and locking came as a
surprise to many, which underscores the need to try out new mechanisms and primitives
in real-world production software. Fortunately, the advent of open source means that a
huge quantity of such software is now freely available to everyone, including researchers.

17.2.3.2   Reader-Writer Locking
It is commonplace to read-acquire reader-writer locks while holding other locks, which
just works, at least as long as the usual well-known software-engineering techniques
are employed to avoid deadlock. Read-acquiring reader-writer locks from within RCU
read-side critical sections also works, and doing so eases deadlock concerns because
RCU read-side primitives cannot participate in lock-based deadlock cycles. It is also
possible to acquire locks while holding hazard pointers and within sequence-lock
read-side critical sections. But what happens when you attempt to read-acquire a
reader-writer lock from within a transaction?
     Unfortunately, the straightforward approach to read-acquiring the traditional counter-
based reader-writer lock within a transaction defeats the purpose of the reader-writer
lock. To see this, consider a pair of transactions concurrently attempting to read-acquire
the same reader-writer lock. Because read-acquisition involves modifying the reader-
writer lock’s data structures, a conflict will result, which will roll back one of the two
transactions. This behavior is completely inconsistent with the reader-writer lock’s goal
of allowing concurrent readers.
     Here are some options available to TM:

   1. Use per-CPU or per-thread reader-writer locking [HW92], which allows a given
      CPU (or thread, respectively) to manipulate only local data when read-acquiring
      the lock. This would avoid the conflict between the two transactions concurrently
      read-acquiring the lock, permitting both to proceed, as intended. Unfortunately,
      (1) the write-acquisition overhead of per-CPU/thread locking can be extremely
      high, (2) the memory overhead of per-CPU/thread locking can be prohibitive, and

      (3) this transformation is available only when you have access to the source code
      in question. Other more-recent scalable reader-writer locks [LLO09] might avoid
      some or all of these problems.

   2. Use TM only “in the small” when introducing TM to lock-based programs, thereby
      avoiding read-acquiring reader-writer locks from within transactions.

   3. Set aside locking-based legacy systems entirely, re-implementing everything
      in terms of transactions. This approach has no shortage of advocates, but this
      requires that all the issues described in this series be resolved. During the time
      it takes to resolve these issues, competing synchronization mechanisms will of
      course also have the opportunity to improve.

   4. Use TM strictly as an optimization in lock-based systems, as was done by the
      TxLinux [RHP+ 07] group, and as has been done by more recent work using TM
      to elide reader-writer locks [FIMR16]. This approach seems sound, at least on
      POWER8 CPUs [LGW+ 15], but leaves the locking design constraints (such as
      the need to avoid deadlock) firmly in place.

  Of course, there might well be other non-obvious issues surrounding combining
TM with reader-writer locking, as there in fact were with exclusive locking.

17.2.3.3   Deferred Reclamation
This section focuses mainly on RCU. Similar issues and possible resolutions arise when
combining TM with other deferred-reclamation mechanisms such as reference counters
and hazard pointers. In the text below, known differences are specifically called out.
    Reference counting, hazard pointers, and RCU are all heavily used, as noted in
Sections 9.5.5 and 9.6.3. This means that any TM implementation that chooses not
to surmount each and every challenge called out in this section needs to interoperate
cleanly and efficiently with all of these synchronization mechanisms.
    The TxLinux group from the University of Texas at Austin appears to be the group to
take on the challenge of RCU/TM interoperability [RHP+ 07]. Because they applied TM
to the Linux 2.6 kernel, which uses RCU, they had no choice but to integrate TM and
RCU, with TM taking the place of locking for RCU updates. Unfortunately, although
the paper does state that the RCU implementation’s locks (e.g., rcu_ctrlblk.lock)
were converted to transactions, it is silent about what was done with those locks used by
RCU-based updates (for example, dcache_lock).
    More recently, Dimitrios Siakavaras et al. have applied HTM and RCU to search
trees [SNGK17, SBN+ 20], Christina Giannoula et al. have used HTM and RCU to
color graphs [GGK18], and SeongJae Park et al. have used HTM and RCU to optimize
high-contention locking on NUMA systems [PMDY20].
    It is important to note that RCU permits readers and updaters to run concurrently,
further permitting RCU readers to access data that is in the act of being updated. Of
course, this property of RCU, whatever its performance, scalability, and real-time-
response benefits might be, flies in the face of the underlying atomicity properties of
TM, although the POWER8 CPU family’s suspended-transaction facility [LGW+ 15]
makes it an exception to this rule.
    So how should TM-based updates interact with concurrent RCU readers? Some
possibilities are as follows:

  1. RCU readers abort concurrent conflicting TM updates. This is in fact the approach
     taken by the TxLinux project. This approach does preserve RCU semantics, and
     also preserves RCU’s read-side performance, scalability, and real-time-response
     properties, but it does have the unfortunate side-effect of unnecessarily aborting
     conflicting updates. In the worst case, a long sequence of RCU readers could
     potentially starve all updaters, which could in theory result in system hangs.
     In addition, not all TM implementations offer the strong atomicity required to
     implement this approach, and for good reasons.

  2. RCU readers that run concurrently with conflicting TM updates get old (pre-
     transaction) values from any conflicting RCU loads. This preserves RCU semantics
     and performance, and also prevents RCU-update starvation. However, not all TM
     implementations can provide timely access to old values of variables that have
     been tentatively updated by an in-flight transaction. In particular, log-based TM
     implementations that maintain old values in the log (thus providing excellent TM
     commit performance) are not likely to be happy with this approach. Perhaps the
     rcu_dereference() primitive can be leveraged to permit RCU to access the
     old values within a greater range of TM implementations, though performance
     might still be an issue. Nevertheless, there are popular TM implementations that
     have been integrated with RCU in this manner [PW07, HW11, HW14].

  3. If an RCU reader executes an access that conflicts with an in-flight transaction,
     then that RCU access is delayed until the conflicting transaction either commits
     or aborts. This approach preserves RCU semantics, but not RCU’s performance
     or real-time response, particularly in presence of long-running transactions.
     In addition, not all TM implementations are capable of delaying conflicting
     accesses. Nevertheless, this approach seems eminently reasonable for hardware
     TM implementations that support only small transactions.

  4. RCU readers are converted to transactions. This approach pretty much guarantees
     that RCU is compatible with any TM implementation, but it also imposes TM’s
     rollbacks on RCU read-side critical sections, destroying RCU’s real-time response
     guarantees, and also degrading RCU’s read-side performance. Furthermore, this
     approach is infeasible in cases where any of the RCU read-side critical sections
     contains operations that the TM implementation in question is incapable of
     handling. This approach is more difficult to apply to hazard pointers and reference
     counters, which do not have a sharply defined notion of a reader as a section of
     code.

  5. Many update-side uses of RCU modify a single pointer to publish a new data
     structure. In some of these cases, RCU can safely be permitted to see a transactional
     pointer update that is subsequently rolled back, as long as the transaction respects
     memory ordering and as long as the roll-back process uses call_rcu() to free up
     the corresponding structure. Unfortunately, not all TM implementations respect
     memory barriers within a transaction. Apparently, the thought is that because
     transactions are supposed to be atomic, the ordering of the accesses within the
     transaction is not supposed to matter.

  6. Prohibit use of TM in RCU updates. This is guaranteed to work, but restricts use
     of TM.

    It seems likely that additional approaches will be uncovered, especially given the
advent of user-level RCU and hazard-pointer implementations.6 It is interesting to note
that many of the better performing and scaling STM implementations make use of
RCU-like techniques internally [Fra04, FH07, GYW+ 19, KMK+ 19].
 Quick Quiz 17.3: MV-RLU looks pretty good! Doesn’t it beat RCU hands down?

17.2.3.4    Extra-Transactional Accesses
Within a lock-based critical section, it is perfectly legal to manipulate variables that are
concurrently accessed or even modified outside that lock’s critical section, with one
common example being statistical counters. The same thing is possible within RCU
read-side critical sections, and is in fact the common case.
    Given mechanisms such as the so-called “dirty reads” that are prevalent in production
database systems, it is not surprising that extra-transactional accesses have received seri-
ous attention from the proponents of TM, with the concept of weak atomicity [BLM06]
being but one case in point.
    Here are some extra-transactional options:

   1. Conflicts due to extra-transactional accesses always abort transactions. This is
      strong atomicity.
   2. Conflicts due to extra-transactional accesses are ignored, so only conflicts among
      transactions can abort transactions. This is weak atomicity.
   3. Transactions are permitted to carry out non-transactional operations in special
      cases, such as when allocating memory or interacting with lock-based critical
      sections.
   4. Produce hardware extensions that permit some operations (for example, addition)
      to be carried out concurrently on a single variable by multiple transactions.
   5. Introduce weak semantics to transactional memory. One approach is the combina-
      tion with RCU described in Section 17.2.3.3, while Gramoli and Guerraoui survey
      a number of other weak-transaction approaches [GG14], for example, restricted
      partitioning of large “elastic” transactions into smaller transactions, thus reducing
      conflict probabilities (albeit with tepid performance and scalability). Perhaps
      further experience will show that some uses of extra-transactional accesses can
      be replaced by weak transactions.

    It appears that transactions were conceived in a vacuum, with no interaction required
with any other synchronization mechanism. If so, it is no surprise that much confusion
and complexity arises when combining transactions with non-transactional accesses.
But unless transactions are to be confined to small updates to isolated data structures, or
alternatively to be confined to new programs that do not interact with the huge body of
existing parallel code, then transactions absolutely must be so combined if they are to
have large-scale practical impact in the near term.

   6 Kudos to the TxLinux group, Maged Michael, and Josh Triplett for coming up with a

number of the above alternatives.

17.2.4     Other Transactions
Because transactions are to appear atomic with respect to each other, something must
be done when multiple transactions attempt to access the same variable at the same
time. If all the transactions are reading that variable and none of them are updating it,
then that something can be “nothing”, but otherwise the transactions must be at least
partially serialized. This serialization is often achieved by aborting and rolling back
some subset of those transactions.
    How to choose which to abort and roll back?
    There has been much work on this question. The answer is “use a contention
manager”, but that simply shifts this question to “what should a contention manager
do?” A full exposition on contention managers is beyond the scope of this section. This
section will therefore limit itself to a few seminal papers in this area.
    Herlihy et al. [HLMS03] have writing transactions unconditionally abort reading
transactions, which has the virtue of simplicity, but which can result in reader starvation.
This paper also introduces the concept of early release, which can allow a long traversal
to proceed concurrently with small updates. From this viewpoint, one might characterize
RCU readers as “instant release”, but this is a property that causes RCU readers to
behave in a decidedly non-STM manner.
    Hammond et al. [HCW+ 04] advise using small transactions, which does reduce
contention-manager complexity, but which also fails to deliver on the full STM promise
of automated concurrency. This paper also introduced annotations to identify different
types of transactions.
    Scherer and Scott [SS05] describe a number of STM contention-management
strategies. This paper defined “visible” and “invisible” readers for extra-transactional
accesses, and discuss a number of contention-management strategies, including:

   1. Exponential backoff, which they conclude required manual tuning.

   2. Preferentially abort transactions that have done the least work, where the work
      of an aborted prior attempt to complete a transactions is counted for the next
      retry of that transaction. This has nice fairness properties, but can cause huge
      transactions to hog the system for an extended time.

   3. Preferentially abort transactions that have done the least work, but also credit a
      given transaction with the work done by any other transactions blocked waiting
      for that transaction to complete. This adds a form of priority inheritance to the
      mix.

   4. Track how many times a given transaction has been aborted by another transaction
      as another way to promote some notion of fairness.

   5. Use transaction-start timestamps in order to preferentially abort transactions that
      started most recently.

   6. Use transaction-start timestamps, but also add an indication of when a given trans-
      action last ran to prevent preempted transactions from aborting other transactions
      running in higher-priority processes.

   This 2005 paper thus gave an early indication of the complexity inherent in contention
management.

    Porter and Witchel [PW07, RRW08] considered loosening STM consistency re-
quirements in order to simplify contention management. They noted RCU as a case in
which an update will cause concurrent reads to access old versions of the data.
    Contention management is also an issue in HTM, and will be discussed in Sec-
tions 17.3.2.2 and 17.3.2.3.
Quick Quiz 17.4:     Why not get with the times and apply machine learning to contention
management?

17.2.5     Case Study: Sequence Locking
Sequence locking, described in Section 9.4, is sometimes thought of as a trivial form of
STM. The sequence-locking read-side critical section is normally restricted to doing
loads, and it is retried whenever there is a conflict with a sequence-locking updater.
Crucially, sequence-locking read-side critical section do not conflict with each other. It
is therefore instructive to consider how sequence locking handles the STM challenges
called out in the preceding sections.
     Sequence locking handles interactions with the outside world (Section 17.2.1) by
simply executing the TM-unfriendly operation on each pass through its read-side critical
section. For example, if the critical section doing an I/O write is retried three times,
it will execute that I/O write four times, once for the original pass through the critical
section and once each for the three retries.
     Doing I/O operations within a sequence-locking read-side critical section might
seem a bit unconventional. It nevertheless makes a good deal of sense to do an I/O write
(Section 17.2.1.1) to a log for historical, debugging, or auditing purposes. An RPC
operation (Section 17.2.1.2) might gather needed data. A time delay (Section 17.2.1.3)
might serve valuable debugging purposes such as exercising the retry code path. Even
persistent operations (Section 17.2.1.4) are potentially useful, for example, to carry out
cross-application mutual exclusion. Alternatively, just as with STM, users of sequence
locking may choose to buffer I/O and execute it just after the end of the read-side critical
section.
     Sequence locking handles process modifications (Section 17.2.2) in the same way, by
simply executing the process-modification operation on each pass through its read-side
critical section.
     Creating processes and threads within a critical section (Section 17.2.2.1) operates
normally, though care should be taken in order to prevent an often-retried critical section
from becoming a “fork bomb”. The exec() system call (Section 17.2.2.2) has perfectly
reasonable (if rather drastic) semantics. Calls to functions within dynamic libraries
(Section 17.2.2.3), such as Linux-kernel loadable modules, work just as well as do calls
to built-in functions. Of course, if such a call were cause a module to load, this might
result in a high retry probability on the first pass through the critical section. Remapping
memory (Section 17.2.2.4) behaves intuitively, as least assuming that neither the code
making up the critical section nor the sequence lock itself are remapped. Note that
these same restrictions also apply to normal locks. Debuggers (Section 17.2.2.5) work
normally within sequence-locking read-side critical sections, just as they do within the
critical sections for normal locks.
     Synchronization primitives (Section 17.2.3) can be used freely within sequence-
locking read-side critical sections. Locking (Section 17.2.3.1), reader-writer locking
(Section 17.2.3.2), deferred reclamation (Section 17.2.3.3), and extra-transactional

accesses (Section 17.2.3.4) may all be used within sequence-locking read-side critical
sections, and all give the expected results.
     Sequence locking uses a trivial contention manager (Section 17.2.4). Sequence-
locking readers are always rolled back in case of a concurrent updater (as do Herlihy et
al. [HLMS03]), sequence-locking updaters typically delegate their contention manage-
ment to some form of mutual exclusion, and sequence-locking readers never conflict,
and thus never need their non-existent contention to be managed. This rough-and-ready
approach means that sequence-locking updaters can starve readers, and users of sequence
locking must therefore take care to avoid frequent updates.
     In short, sequence locking handles these STM challenges quite well. This might be
one reason that sequence locking is heavily used in production. However, a key enabler
of sequence locking is the pushing of a number of these challenges back onto the user.
This approach is reasonable because sequence locking has no ambitions to be the one
synchronization mechanism to rule them all. So perhaps the greatest impediment to
widespread STM adoption is its proponents’ overweening desire for full generality.

17.2.6    Discussion
The obstacles to universal TM adoption lead to the following conclusions:

   1. One interesting property of TM is the fact that transactions are subject to rollback
      and retry. This property underlies TM’s difficulties with irreversible operations,
      including unbuffered I/O, RPCs, memory-mapping operations, time delays, and
      the exec() system call. This property also has the unfortunate consequence of
      introducing all the complexities inherent in the possibility of failure, often in a
      developer-visible manner.

   2. Another interesting property of TM, noted by Shpeisman et al. [SATG+ 09], is
      that TM intertwines the synchronization with the data it protects. This property
      underlies TM’s issues with I/O, memory-mapping operations, extra-transactional
      accesses, and debugging breakpoints. In contrast, conventional synchronization
      primitives, including locking and RCU, maintain a clear separation between the
      synchronization primitives and the data that they protect.

   3. One of the stated goals of many workers in the TM area is to ease parallelization
      of large sequential programs. As such, individual transactions are commonly
      expected to execute serially, which might do much to explain TM’s issues with
      multithreaded transactions.

Quick Quiz 17.5: Given things like spin_trylock(), how does it make any sense at all to
claim that TM introduces the concept of failure???

    What should TM researchers and developers do about all of this?
    One approach is to focus on TM in the small, focusing on small transactions where
hardware assist potentially provides substantial advantages over other synchronization
primitives and on small programs where there is some evidence for increased productivity
for a combined TM-locking approach [PAT11]. Sun took the small-transaction approach
with its Rock research CPU [DLMN09]. Some TM researchers seem to agree with these
two small-is-beautiful approaches [SSHT93], others have much higher hopes for TM,
and yet others hint that high TM aspirations might be TM’s worst enemy [Att10, Section
6]. It is nonetheless quite possible that TM will be able to take on larger problems, and

                                 Figure 17.9: The STM Vision

this section has listed a few of the issues that must be resolved if TM is to achieve this
lofty goal.
    Of course, everyone involved should treat this as a learning experience. It would seem
that TM researchers have great deal to learn from practitioners who have successfully
built large software systems using traditional synchronization primitives.
    And vice versa.
 Quick Quiz 17.6: What is to learn? Why not just use TM for memory-based data structures
 and locking for those rare cases featuring the many silly corner cases listed in this silly section???

    But for the moment, the current state of STM can best be summarized with a series
of cartoons. First, Figure 17.9 shows the STM vision. As always, the reality is a bit
more nuanced, as fancifully depicted by Figures 17.10, 17.11, and 17.12.7 Less fanciful
STM retrospectives are also available [Duf10a, Duf10b].
    Alternatively, one might argue that sequence locking constitutes a restricted form of
STM that is heavily used in practice, as discussed in Section 17.2.5.
    Whether or not sequence locking is considered to be the standard bearer for STM in
actual practice, some commercially available hardware supports restricted variants of
HTM, which are addressed in the following section.

     7 Recent academic work-in-progress has investigated lock-based STM systems for real-

time use [And19, NA18], albeit without any performance results, and with some indications
that real-time hybrid STM/HTM systems must choose between fast common-case performance
and worst-case forward-progress guarantees [AKK+ 14, SBV10].

               Figure 17.10: The STM Reality: Conflicts

         Figure 17.11: The STM Reality: Irrevocable Operations

                 Figure 17.12: The STM Reality: Realtime Response

17.3      Hardware Transactional Memory

                                         Make sure your report system is reasonably clean
                                         and efficient before you automate. Otherwise, your
                                         new computer will just speed up the mess.
                                                                            Robert Townsend

As of 2021, hardware transactional memory (HTM) has been available for many years
on several types of commercially available commodity computer systems [YHLR13,
Mer11, JSG12, Hay20]. This section makes an attempt to identify HTM’s place in the
parallel programmer’s toolbox.
     From a conceptual viewpoint, HTM uses processor caches and speculative execution
to make a designated group of statements (a “transaction”) take effect atomically from
the viewpoint of any other transactions running on other processors. This transaction
is initiated by a begin-transaction machine instruction and completed by a commit-
transaction machine instruction. There is typically also an abort-transaction machine
instruction, which squashes the speculation (as if the begin-transaction instruction
and all following instructions had not executed) and commences execution at a failure
handler. The location of the failure handler is typically specified by the begin-transaction
instruction, either as an explicit failure-handler address or via a condition code set by
the instruction itself. Each transaction executes atomically with respect to all other
transactions.
     HTM has a number of important benefits, including automatic dynamic partitioning
of data structures, reducing synchronization-primitive cache misses, and supporting a
fair number of practical applications.
     However, it always pays to read the fine print, and HTM is no exception. A major
point of this section is determining under what conditions HTM’s benefits outweigh
the complications hidden in its fine print. To this end, Section 17.3.1 describes HTM’s

benefits and Section 17.3.2 describes its weaknesses. This is the same approach used in
earlier papers [MMW07, MMTW10] and also in the previous section.8
    Section 17.3.3 then describes HTM’s weaknesses with respect to the combination of
synchronization primitives used in the Linux kernel (and in many user-space applications).
Section 17.3.4 looks at where HTM might best fit into the parallel programmer’s toolbox,
and Section 17.3.5 lists some events that might greatly increase HTM’s scope and
appeal. Finally, Section 17.3.6 presents concluding remarks.

17.3.1      HTM Benefits WRT Locking
The primary benefits of HTM are (1) its avoidance of the cache misses that are often
incurred by other synchronization primitives, (2) its ability to dynamically partition
data structures, and (3) the fact that it has a fair number of practical applications. I
break from TM tradition by not listing ease of use separately for two reasons. First,
ease of use should stem from HTM’s primary benefits, which this section focuses
on. Second, there has been considerable controversy surrounding attempts to test for
raw programming talent [Bor06, DBA09, PBCE20] and even around the use of small
programming exercises in job interviews [Bra07]. This indicates that we really do not
have a firm grasp on what makes programming easy or hard. Therefore, the remainder
of this section focuses on the three benefits listed above.

17.3.1.1    Avoiding Synchronization Cache Misses
Most synchronization mechanisms are based on data structures that are operated on by
atomic instructions. Because these atomic instructions normally operate by first causing
the relevant cache line to be owned by the CPU that they are running on, a subsequent
execution of the same instance of that synchronization primitive on some other CPU
will result in a cache miss. These communications cache misses severely degrade both
the performance and scalability of conventional synchronization mechanisms [ABD+ 97,
Section 4.2.3].
    In contrast, HTM synchronizes by using the CPU’s cache, avoiding the need for a
separate synchronization data structure and resultant cache misses. HTM’s advantage is
greatest in cases where a lock data structure is placed in a separate cache line, in which
case, converting a given critical section to an HTM transaction can reduce that critical
section’s overhead by a full cache miss. These savings can be quite significant for the
common case of short critical sections, at least for those situations where the elided
lock does not share a cache line with an oft-written variable protected by that lock.
 Quick Quiz 17.7: Why would it matter that oft-written variables shared the cache line with
 the lock variable?

17.3.1.2    Dynamic Partitioning of Data Structures
A major obstacle to the use of some conventional synchronization mechanisms is the
need to statically partition data structures. There are a number of data structures that are
trivially partitionable, with the most prominent example being hash tables, where each
hash chain constitutes a partition. Allocating a lock for each hash chain then trivially

   8 I gratefully acknowledge many stimulating discussions with the other authors, Maged

Michael, Josh Triplett, and Jonathan Walpole, as well as with Andi Kleen.

parallelizes the hash table for operations confined to a given chain.9 Partitioning is
similarly trivial for arrays, radix trees, skiplists, and several other data structures.
    However, partitioning for many types of trees and graphs is quite difficult, and the
results are often quite complex [Ell80]. Although it is possible to use two-phased locking
and hashed arrays of locks to partition general data structures, other techniques have
proven preferable [Mil06], as will be discussed in Section 17.3.3. Given its avoidance
of synchronization cache misses, HTM is therefore a very real possibility for large
non-partitionable data structures, at least assuming relatively small updates.
 Quick Quiz 17.8:        Why are relatively small updates important to HTM performance and
 scalability?

17.3.1.3     Practical Value
Some evidence of HTM’s practical value has been demonstrated in a number of
hardware platforms, including Sun Rock [DLMN09], Azul Vega [Cli09], IBM Blue
Gene/Q [Mer11], Intel Haswell TSX [RD12], and IBM System z [JSG12].
   Expected practical benefits include:

   1. Lock elision for in-memory data access and update [MT01, RG02].
   2. Concurrent access and small random updates to large non-partitionable data
      structures.

    However, HTM also has some very real shortcomings, which will be discussed in
the next section.

17.3.2       HTM Weaknesses WRT Locking
The concept of HTM is quite simple: A group of accesses and updates to memory
occurs atomically. However, as is the case with many simple ideas, complications arise
when you apply it to real systems in the real world. These complications are as follows:

   1. Transaction-size limitations.
   2. Conflict handling.
   3. Aborts and rollbacks.

   4. Lack of forward-progress guarantees.
   5. Irrevocable operations.
   6. Semantic differences.

   Each of these complications is covered in the following sections, followed by a
summary.

    9 And it is also easy to extend this scheme to operations accessing multiple hash chains

by having such operations acquire the locks for all relevant chains in hash order.

17.3.2.1   Transaction-Size Limitations

The transaction-size limitations of current HTM implementations stem from the use
of the processor caches to hold the data affected by the transaction. Although this
allows a given CPU to make the transaction appear atomic to other CPUs by executing
the transaction within the confines of its cache, it also means that any transaction that
does not fit cannot commit. Furthermore, events that change execution context, such as
interrupts, system calls, exceptions, traps, and context switches either must abort any
ongoing transaction on the CPU in question or must further restrict transaction size due
to the cache footprint of the other execution context.
    Of course, modern CPUs tend to have large caches, and the data required for many
transactions would fit easily in a one-megabyte cache. Unfortunately, with caches, sheer
size is not all that matters. The problem is that most caches can be thought of hash
tables implemented in hardware. However, hardware caches do not chain their buckets
(which are normally called sets), but rather provide a fixed number of cachelines per set.
The number of elements provided for each set in a given cache is termed that cache’s
associativity.
    Although cache associativity varies, the eight-way associativity of the level-0 cache
on the laptop I am typing this on is not unusual. What this means is that if a given
transaction needed to touch nine cache lines, and if all nine cache lines mapped to
the same set, then that transaction cannot possibly complete, never mind how many
megabytes of additional space might be available in that cache. Yes, given randomly
selected data elements in a given data structure, the probability of that transaction being
able to commit is quite high, but there can be no guarantee [McK11c].
    There has been some research work to alleviate this limitation. Fully associative
victim caches would alleviate the associativity constraints, but there are currently
stringent performance and energy-efficiency constraints on the sizes of victim caches.
That said, HTM victim caches for unmodified cache lines can be quite small, as they
need to retain only the address: The data itself can be written to memory or shadowed by
other caches, while the address itself is sufficient to detect a conflicting write [RD12].
    Unbounded-transactional-memory (UTM) schemes [AAKL06, MBM+ 06] use
DRAM as an extremely large victim cache, but integrating such schemes into a
production-quality cache-coherence mechanism is still an unsolved problem. In
addition, use of DRAM as a victim cache may have unfortunate performance and
energy-efficiency consequences, particularly if the victim cache is to be fully associative.
Finally, the “unbounded” aspect of UTM assumes that all of DRAM could be used
as a victim cache, while in reality the large but still fixed amount of DRAM assigned
to a given CPU would limit the size of that CPU’s transactions. Other schemes use a
combination of hardware and software transactional memory [KCH+ 06] and one could
imagine using STM as a fallback mechanism for HTM.
    However, to the best of my knowledge, with the exception of abbreviating repre-
sentation of TM read sets, currently available systems do not implement any of these
research ideas, and perhaps for good reason.

17.3.2.2   Conflict Handling

The first complication is the possibility of conflicts. For example, suppose that
transactions A and B are defined as follows:

  Transaction A           Transaction B

  x = 1;                  y = 2;
  y = 3;                  x = 4;

    Suppose that each transaction executes concurrently on its own processor. If
transaction A stores to x at the same time that transaction B stores to y, neither
transaction can progress. To see this, suppose that transaction A executes its store
to y. Then transaction A will be interleaved within transaction B, in violation of the
requirement that transactions execute atomically with respect to each other. Allowing
transaction B to execute its store to x similarly violates the atomic-execution requirement.
This situation is termed a conflict, which happens whenever two concurrent transactions
access the same variable where at least one of the accesses is a store. The system is
therefore obligated to abort one or both of the transactions in order to allow execution
to progress. The choice of exactly which transaction to abort is an interesting topic that
will very likely retain the ability to generate Ph.D. dissertations for some time to come,
see for example [ATC+ 11].10 For the purposes of this section, we can assume that the
system makes a random choice.
    Another complication is conflict detection, which is comparatively straightforward,
at least in the simplest case. When a processor is executing a transaction, it marks
every cache line touched by that transaction. If the processor’s cache receives a request
involving a cache line that has been marked as touched by the current transaction, a
potential conflict has occurred. More sophisticated systems might try to order the
current processors’ transaction to precede that of the processor sending the request, and
optimizing this process will likely also retain the ability to generate Ph.D. dissertations
for quite some time. However this section assumes a very simple conflict-detection
strategy.
    However, for HTM to work effectively, the probability of conflict must be quite
low, which in turn requires that the data structures be organized so as to maintain
a sufficiently low probability of conflict. For example, a red-black tree with simple
insertion, deletion, and search operations fits this description, but a red-black tree that
maintains an accurate count of the number of elements in the tree does not.11 For
another example, a red-black tree that enumerates all elements in the tree in a single
transaction will have high conflict probabilities, degrading performance and scalability.
As a result, many serial programs will require some restructuring before HTM can
work effectively. In some cases, practitioners will prefer to take the extra steps (in the
red-black-tree case, perhaps switching to a partitionable data structure such as a radix
tree or a hash table), and just use locking, particularly until such time as HTM is readily
available on all relevant architectures [Cli09].
 Quick Quiz 17.9: How could a red-black tree possibly efficiently enumerate all elements of
 the tree regardless of choice of synchronization mechanism???

   Furthermore, the potential for conflicting accesses among concurrent transactions
can result in failure. Handling such failure is discussed in the next section.

   10 Liu’s and Spear’s paper entitled “Toxic Transactions” [LS11] is particularly instructive.
   11 The need to update the count would result in additions to and deletions from the tree

conflicting with each other, resulting in strong non-commutativity [AGH+ 11a, AGH+ 11b,
McK11b].

17.3.2.3     Aborts and Rollbacks
Because any transaction might be aborted at any time, it is important that transactions
contain no statements that cannot be rolled back. This means that transactions cannot
do I/O, system calls, or debugging breakpoints (no single stepping in the debugger
for HTM transactions!!!). Instead, transactions must confine themselves to accessing
normal cached memory. Furthermore, on some systems, interrupts, exceptions, traps,
TLB misses, and other events will also abort transactions. Given the number of bugs
that have resulted from improper handling of error conditions, it is fair to ask what
impact aborts and rollbacks have on ease of use.
 Quick Quiz 17.10: But why can’t a debugger emulate single stepping by setting breakpoints
 at successive lines of the transaction, relying on the retry to retrace the steps of the earlier
 instances of the transaction?

    Of course, aborts and rollbacks raise the question of whether HTM can be useful
for hard real-time systems. Do the performance benefits of HTM outweigh the costs
of the aborts and rollbacks, and if so under what conditions? Can transactions use
priority boosting? Or should transactions for high-priority threads instead preferentially
abort those of low-priority threads? If so, how is the hardware efficiently informed of
priorities? The literature on real-time use of HTM is quite sparse, perhaps because
there are more than enough problems in making HTM work well in non-real-time
environments.
    Because current HTM implementations might deterministically abort a given
transaction, software must provide fallback code. This fallback code must use some
other form of synchronization, for example, locking. If a lock-based fallback is ever
used, then all the limitations of locking, including the possibility of deadlock, reappear.
One can of course hope that the fallback isn’t used often, which might allow simpler
and less deadlock-prone locking designs to be used. But this raises the question of how
the system transitions from using the lock-based fallbacks back to transactions.12 One
approach is to use a test-and-test-and-set discipline [MT02], so that everyone holds off
until the lock is released, allowing the system to start from a clean slate in transactional
mode at that point. However, this could result in quite a bit of spinning, which might
not be wise if the lock holder has blocked or been preempted. Another approach is to
allow transactions to proceed in parallel with a thread holding a lock [MT02], but this
raises difficulties in maintaining atomicity, especially if the reason that the thread is
holding the lock is because the corresponding transaction would not fit into cache.
    Finally, dealing with the possibility of aborts and rollbacks seems to put an additional
burden on the developer, who must correctly handle all combinations of possible error
conditions.
    It is clear that users of HTM must put considerable validation effort into testing both
the fallback code paths and transition from fallback code back to transactional code.
Nor is there any reason to believe that the validation requirements of HTM hardware
are any less daunting.

17.3.2.4     Lack of Forward-Progress Guarantees
Even though transaction size, conflicts, and aborts/rollbacks can all cause transactions
to abort, one might hope that sufficiently small and short-duration transactions could be

   12 The possibility of an application getting stuck in fallback mode has been termed the

“lemming effect”, a term that Dave Dice has been credited with coining.

guaranteed to eventually succeed. This would permit a transaction to be unconditionally
retried, in the same way that compare-and-swap (CAS) and load-linked/store-conditional
(LL/SC) operations are unconditionally retried in code that uses these instructions to
implement atomic operations.
    Unfortunately, other than low-clock-rate academic research prototypes [SBV10],
currently available HTM implementations refuse to make any sort of forward-progress
guarantee. As noted earlier, HTM therefore cannot be used to avoid deadlock on
those systems. Hopefully future implementations of HTM will provide some sort of
forward-progress guarantees. Until that time, HTM must be used with extreme caution
in real-time applications.
    The one exception to this gloomy picture as of 2021 is the IBM mainframe, which
provides constrained transactions [JSG12]. The constraints are quite severe, and are
presented in Section 17.3.5.1. It will be interesting to see if HTM forward-progress
guarantees migrate from the mainframe to commodity CPU families.

17.3.2.5   Irrevocable Operations
Another consequence of aborts and rollbacks is that HTM transactions cannot accom-
modate irrevocable operations. Current HTM implementations typically enforce this
limitation by requiring that all of the accesses in the transaction be to cacheable memory
(thus prohibiting MMIO accesses) and aborting transactions on interrupts, traps, and
exceptions (thus prohibiting system calls).
      Note that buffered I/O can be accommodated by HTM transactions as long as the
buffer fill/flush operations occur extra-transactionally. The reason that this works is that
adding data to and removing data from the buffer is revocable: Only the actual buffer
fill/flush operations are irrevocable. Of course, this buffered-I/O approach has the effect
of including the I/O in the transaction’s footprint, increasing the size of the transaction
and thus increasing the probability of failure.

17.3.2.6   Semantic Differences
Although HTM can in many cases be used as a drop-in replacement for locking (hence
the name transactional lock elision (TLE) [DHL+ 08]), there are subtle differences
in semantics. A particularly nasty example involving coordinated lock-based critical
sections that results in deadlock or livelock when executed transactionally was given by
Blundell [BLM06], but a much simpler example is the empty critical section.
    In a lock-based program, an empty critical section will guarantee that all processes
that had previously been holding that lock have now released it. This idiom was used
by the 2.4 Linux kernel’s networking stack to coordinate changes in configuration.
But if this empty critical section is translated to a transaction, the result is a no-op.
The guarantee that all prior critical sections have terminated is lost. In other words,
transactional lock elision preserves the data-protection semantics of locking, but loses
locking’s time-based messaging semantics.
Quick Quiz 17.11: But why would anyone need an empty lock-based critical section???

Quick Quiz 17.12: Can’t transactional lock elision trivially handle locking’s time-based
messaging semantics by simply choosing not to elide empty lock-based critical sections?

Quick Quiz 17.13: Given modern hardware [MOZ09], how can anyone possibly expect
parallel software relying on timing to work?

Listing 17.1: Exploiting Priority Boosting
1    void boostee(void)
2    {
3            int i = 0;
4
5           acquire_lock(&boost_lock[i]);
6           for (;;) {
7                   acquire_lock(&boost_lock[!i]);
8                   release_lock(&boost_lock[i]);
9                   i = i ^ 1;
10                  do_something();
11          }
12   }
13
14   void booster(void)
15   {
16           int i = 0;
17
18          for (;;) {
19                  usleep(500); /* sleep 0.5 ms. */
20                  acquire_lock(&boost_lock[i]);
21                  release_lock(&boost_lock[i]);
22                  i = i ^ 1;
23          }
24   }

     One important semantic difference between locking and transactions is the priority
boosting that is used to avoid priority inversion in lock-based real-time programs. One
way in which priority inversion can occur is when a low-priority thread holding a lock
is preempted by a medium-priority CPU-bound thread. If there is at least one such
medium-priority thread per CPU, the low-priority thread will never get a chance to run.
If a high-priority thread now attempts to acquire the lock, it will block. It cannot acquire
the lock until the low-priority thread releases it, the low-priority thread cannot release
the lock until it gets a chance to run, and it cannot get a chance to run until one of the
medium-priority threads gives up its CPU. Therefore, the medium-priority threads are
in effect blocking the high-priority process, which is the rationale for the name “priority
inversion.”
     One way to avoid priority inversion is priority inheritance, in which a high-priority
thread blocked on a lock temporarily donates its priority to the lock’s holder, which is
also called priority boosting. However, priority boosting can be used for things other
than avoiding priority inversion, as shown in Listing 17.1. Lines 1–12 of this listing
show a low-priority process that must nevertheless run every millisecond or so, while
lines 14–24 of this same listing show a high-priority process that uses priority boosting
to ensure that boostee() runs periodically as needed.
     The boostee() function arranges this by always holding one of the two boost_
lock[] locks, so that lines 20–21 of booster() can boost priority as needed.
 Quick Quiz 17.14: But the boostee() function in Listing 17.1 alternatively acquires its locks
 in reverse order! Won’t this result in deadlock?

     This arrangement requires that boostee() acquire its first lock on line 5 before the
system becomes busy, but this is easily arranged, even on modern hardware.
     Unfortunately, this arrangement can break down in presence of transactional lock
elision. The boostee() function’s overlapping critical sections become one infinite
transaction, which will sooner or later abort, for example, on the first time that the
thread running the boostee() function is preempted. At this point, boostee() will
fall back to locking, but given its low priority and that the quiet initialization period is

now complete (which after all is why boostee() was preempted), this thread might
never again get a chance to run.
    And if the boostee() thread is not holding the lock, then the booster() thread’s
empty critical section on lines 20 and 21 of Listing 17.1 will become an empty transaction
that has no effect, so that boostee() never runs. This example illustrates some of the
subtle consequences of transactional memory’s rollback-and-retry semantics.
    Given that experience will likely uncover additional subtle semantic differences,
application of HTM-based lock elision to large programs should be undertaken with
caution. That said, where it does apply, HTM-based lock elision can eliminate the
cache misses associated with the lock variable, which has resulted in tens of percent
performance increases in large real-world software systems as of early 2015. We can
therefore expect to see substantial use of this technique on hardware providing reliable
support for it.
 Quick Quiz 17.15: So a bunch of people set out to supplant locking, and they mostly end up
 just optimizing locking???

17.3.2.7     Summary
Although it seems likely that HTM will have compelling use cases, current imple-
mentations have serious transaction-size limitations, conflict-handling complications,
abort-and-rollback issues, and semantic differences that will require careful handling.
HTM’s current situation relative to locking is summarized in Table 17.1. As can be seen,
although the current state of HTM alleviates some serious shortcomings of locking,13
it does so by introducing a significant number of shortcomings of its own. These
shortcomings are acknowledged by leaders in the TM community [MS12].14
    In addition, this is not the whole story. Locking is not normally used by itself, but is
instead typically augmented by other synchronization mechanisms, including reference
counting, atomic operations, non-blocking data structures, hazard pointers [Mic04a,
HLM02], and RCU [MS98a, MAK+ 01, HMBW07, McK12b]. The next section looks
at how such augmentation changes the equation.

17.3.3       HTM Weaknesses WRT Locking When Augmented
Practitioners have long used reference counting, atomic operations, non-blocking data
structures, hazard pointers, and RCU to avoid some of the shortcomings of locking.
For example, deadlock can be avoided in many cases by using reference counts,
hazard pointers, or RCU to protect data structures, particularly for read-only critical
sections [Mic04a, HLM02, DMS+ 12a, GMTW08, HMBW07]. These approaches also
reduce the need to partition data structures, as was seen in Chapter 10. RCU further
provides contention-free bounded wait-free read-side primitives [MS98a, DMS+ 12a],

   13 In fairness, it is important to emphasize that locking’s shortcomings do have well-known

and heavily used engineering solutions, including deadlock detectors [Cor06a], a wealth of
data structures that have been adapted to locking, and a long history of augmentation, as
discussed in Section 17.3.3. In addition, if locking really were as horrible as a quick skim of
many academic papers might reasonably lead one to believe, where did all the large lock-based
parallel programs (both FOSS and proprietary) come from, anyway?
   14 In addition, in early 2011, I was invited to deliver a critique of some of the assumptions

underlying transactional memory [McK11e]. The audience was surprisingly non-hostile,
though perhaps they were taking it easy on me due to the fact that I was heavily jet-lagged
while giving the presentation.

                 Table 17.1: Comparison of Locking and HTM ( Advantage , Disadvantage , Strong
                      Disadvantage )

                                             Locking                                       Hardware Transactional Memory
Basic Idea            Allow only one thread at a time to access a given           Cause a given operation over a set of objects to
                      set of objects.                                             execute atomically.
Scope                 Handles all operations.                                     Handles revocable operations.
                                                                                  Irrevocable operations force fallback (typically to
                                                                                  locking).
Composability         Limited by deadlock.                                        Limited by irrevocable operations, transaction size,
                                                                                  and deadlock (assuming lock-based fallback code).
Scalability & Per-    Data must be partitionable to avoid lock contention.        Data must be partitionable to avoid conflicts.
formance
                      Partioning must typically be fixed at design time.          Dynamic adjustment of partitioning carried out
                                                                                  automatically down to cacheline boundaries.
                                                                                  Partitioning required for fallbacks (less important
                                                                                  for rare fallbacks).
                      Locking primitives typically result in expensive            Transactions begin/end instructions typically do
                      cache misses and memory-barrier instructions.               not result in cache misses, but do have memory-
                                                                                  ordering and overhead consequences.
                      Contention effects are focused on acquisition and           Contention aborts conflicting transactions, even if
                      release, so that the critical section runs at full speed.   they have been running for a long time.
                      Privatization operations are simple, intuitive, per-        Privatized data contributes to transaction size.
                      formant, and scalable.
Hardware Support      Commodity hardware suffices.                                New hardware required (and is starting to become
                                                                                  available).
                      Performance is insensitive to cache-geometry de-            Performance depends critically on cache geometry.
                      tails.
Software Support      APIs exist, large body of code and experience,              APIs emerging, little experience outside of DBMS,
                      debuggers operate naturally.                                breakpoints mid-transaction can be problematic.
Interaction With      Long experience of successful interaction.                  Just beginning investigation of interaction.
Other Mechanisms
Practical Apps        Yes.                                                        Yes.
Wide Applicability    Yes.                                                        Jury still out.

                 Table 17.2: Comparison of Locking (Augmented by RCU or Hazard Pointers) and
                     HTM ( Advantage , Disadvantage , Strong Disadvantage )

                         Locking with Userspace RCU or Hazard Pointers                          Hardware Transactional Memory
Basic Idea             Allow only one thread at a time to access a given set         Cause a given operation over a set of objects to execute
                       of objects.                                                   atomically.
Scope                  Handles all operations.                                       Handles revocable operations.
                                                                                     Irrevocable operations force fallback (typically to lock-
                                                                                     ing).
Composability          Readers limited only by grace-period-wait operations.         Limited by irrevocable operations, transaction size,
                                                                                     and deadlock. (Assuming lock-based fallback code.)
                       Updaters limited by deadlock. Readers reduce dead-
                       lock.
Scalability & Per-     Data must be partitionable to avoid lock contention           Data must be partitionable to avoid conflicts.
formance               among updaters.
                       Partitioning not needed for readers.
                       Partitioning for updaters must typically be fixed at          Dynamic adjustment of partitioning carried out auto-
                       design time.                                                  matically down to cacheline boundaries.
                       Partitioning not needed for readers.                          Partitioning required for fallbacks (less important for
                                                                                     rare fallbacks).
                       Updater locking primitives typically result in expensive      Transactions begin/end instructions typically do not
                       cache misses and memory-barrier instructions.                 result in cache misses, but do have memory-ordering
                                                                                     and overhead consequences.
                       Update-side contention effects are focused on acquisi-        Contention aborts conflicting transactions, even if they
                       tion and release, so that the critical section runs at full   have been running for a long time.
                       speed.
                       Readers do not contend with updaters or with each
                       other.
                       Read-side primitives are typically bounded wait-free          Read-only transactions subject to conflicts and roll-
                       with low overhead. (Lock-free with low overhead for           backs. No forward-progress guarantees other than
                       hazard pointers.)                                             those supplied by fallback code.
                       Privatization operations are simple, intuitive, perfor-       Privatized data contributes to transaction size.
                       mant, and scalable when data is visible only to updaters.
                       Privatization operations are expensive (though still
                       intuitive and scalable) for reader-visible data.
Hardware Support       Commodity hardware suffices.                                  New hardware required (and is starting to become
                                                                                     available).
                       Performance is insensitive to cache-geometry details.         Performance depends critically on cache geometry.
Software Support       APIs exist, large body of code and experience, debug-         APIs emerging, little experience outside of DBMS,
                       gers operate naturally.                                       breakpoints mid-transaction can be problematic.
Interaction With       Long experience of successful interaction.                    Just beginning investigation of interaction.
Other Mechanisms
Practical Apps         Yes.                                                          Yes.
Wide Applicability     Yes.                                                          Jury still out.

while hazard pointers provides lock-free read-side primitives [Mic02, HLM02, Mic04a].
Adding these considerations to Table 17.1 results in the updated comparison between
augmented locking and HTM shown in Table 17.2. A summary of the differences
between the two tables is as follows:

   1. Use of non-blocking read-side mechanisms alleviates deadlock issues.
   2. Read-side mechanisms such as hazard pointers and RCU can operate efficiently
      on non-partitionable data.
   3. Hazard pointers and RCU do not contend with each other or with updaters,
      allowing excellent performance and scalability for read-mostly workloads.
   4. Hazard pointers and RCU provide forward-progress guarantees (lock freedom
      and bounded wait-freedom, respectively).

   5. Privatization operations for hazard pointers and RCU are straightforward.

    For those with good eyesight, Table 17.3 combines Tables 17.1 and 17.2.
 Quick Quiz 17.16: Tables 17.1 and 17.2 state that hardware is only starting to become
 available. But hasn’t HTM hardware support been widely available for almost a full decade?

    Of course, it is also possible to augment HTM, as discussed in the next section.

17.3.4       Where Does HTM Best Fit In?
Although it will likely be some time before HTM’s area of applicability can be as crisply
delineated as that shown for RCU in Figure 9.33 on page 284, that is no reason not to
start moving in that direction.
    HTM seems best suited to update-heavy workloads involving relatively small changes
to disparate portions of relatively large in-memory data structures running on large
multiprocessors, as this meets the size restrictions of current HTM implementations
while minimizing the probability of conflicts and attendant aborts and rollbacks. This
scenario is also one that is relatively difficult to handle given current synchronization
primitives.
    Use of locking in conjunction with HTM seems likely to overcome HTM’s difficulties
with irrevocable operations, while use of RCU or hazard pointers might alleviate HTM’s
transaction-size limitations for read-only operations that traverse large fractions of the
data structure [PMDY20]. Current HTM implementations unconditionally abort an
update transaction that conflicts with an RCU or hazard-pointer reader, but perhaps future
HTM implementations will interoperate more smoothly with these synchronization
mechanisms. In the meantime, the probability of an update conflicting with a large RCU
or hazard-pointer read-side critical section should be much smaller than the probability
of conflicting with the equivalent read-only transaction.15 Nevertheless, it is quite
possible that a steady stream of RCU or hazard-pointer readers might starve updaters
due to a corresponding steady stream of conflicts. This vulnerability could be eliminated

   15 It is quite ironic that strictly transactional mechanisms are appearing in shared-memory

systems at just about the time that NoSQL databases are relaxing the traditional database-
application reliance on strict transactions. Nevertheless, HTM has in fact realized the
ease-of-use promise of TM, albeit for black-hat attacks on the Linux kernel’s address-space
randomization defense mechanism [JLK16a, JLK16b].

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         v2025.12.18a
                                                             Table 17.3: Comparison of Locking (Plain and Augmented) and HTM ( Advantage , Disadvantage , Strong Disadvantage )
                                                                                            Locking                              Locking with Userspace RCU or Hazard Pointers                          Hardware Transactional Memory
                                                Basic Idea           Allow only one thread at a time to access a given set     Allow only one thread at a time to access a given set         Cause a given operation over a set of objects to execute
                                                                     of objects.                                               of objects.                                                   atomically.
                                                Scope                Handles all operations.                                   Handles all operations.                                       Handles revocable operations.
CHAPTER 17. CONFLICTING VISIONS OF THE FUTURE

                                                                                                                                                                                             Irrevocable operations force fallback (typically to lock-
                                                                                                                                                                                             ing).
                                                Composability        Limited by deadlock.                                      Readers limited only by grace-period-wait operations.         Limited by irrevocable operations, transaction size,
                                                                                                                                                                                             and deadlock. (Assuming lock-based fallback code.)
                                                                                                                               Updaters limited by deadlock. Readers reduce dead-
                                                                                                                               lock.
                                                Scalability & Per-   Data must be partitionable to avoid lock contention.      Data must be partitionable to avoid lock contention           Data must be partitionable to avoid conflicts.
                                                formance                                                                       among updaters.
                                                                                                                               Partitioning not needed for readers.
                                                                     Partitioning must typically be fixed at design time.      Partitioning for updaters must typically be fixed at          Dynamic adjustment of partitioning carried out auto-
                                                                                                                               design time.                                                  matically down to cacheline boundaries.
                                                                                                                               Partitioning not needed for readers.                          Partitioning required for fallbacks (less important for
                                                                                                                                                                                             rare fallbacks).
                                                                     Locking primitives typically result in expensive cache    Updater locking primitives typically result in expensive      Transactions begin/end instructions typically do not
                                                                     misses and memory-barrier instructions.                   cache misses and memory-barrier instructions.                 result in cache misses, but do have memory-ordering
                                                                                                                                                                                             and overhead consequences.
                                                                     Contention effects are focused on acquisition and re-     Update-side contention effects are focused on acquisi-        Contention aborts conflicting transactions, even if they
                                                                     lease, so that the critical section runs at full speed.   tion and release, so that the critical section runs at full   have been running for a long time.
                                                                                                                               speed.
                                                                                                                               Readers do not contend with updaters or with each
                                                                                                                               other.
                                                                                                                               Read-side primitives are typically bounded wait-free          Read-only transactions subject to conflicts and roll-
                                                                                                                               with low overhead. (Lock-free with low overhead for           backs. No forward-progress guarantees other than
                                                                                                                               hazard pointers.)                                             those supplied by fallback code.
                                                                     Privatization operations are simple, intuitive, perfor-   Privatization operations are simple, intuitive, perfor-       Privatized data contributes to transaction size.
                                                                     mant, and scalable.                                       mant, and scalable when data is visible only to updaters.
                                                                                                                               Privatization operations are expensive (though still
                                                                                                                               intuitive and scalable) for reader-visible data.
                                                Hardware Support     Commodity hardware suffices.                              Commodity hardware suffices.                                  New hardware required (and is starting to become
                                                                                                                                                                                             available).
                                                                     Performance is insensitive to cache-geometry details.     Performance is insensitive to cache-geometry details.         Performance depends critically on cache geometry.
634

                                                Software Support     APIs exist, large body of code and experience, debug-     APIs exist, large body of code and experience, debug-         APIs emerging, little experience outside of DBMS,
                                                                     gers operate naturally.                                   gers operate naturally.                                       breakpoints mid-transaction can be problematic.
                                                Interaction With     Long experience of successful interaction.                Long experience of successful interaction.                    Just beginning investigation of interaction.
                                                Other Mechanisms
                                                Practical Apps       Yes.                                                      Yes.                                                          Yes.
                                                Wide Applicability   Yes.                                                      Yes.                                                          Jury still out.

(at significant hardware cost and complexity) by giving extra-transactional reads the
pre-transaction copy of the memory location being loaded.
     The fact that HTM transactions must have fallbacks might in some cases force static
partitionability of data structures back onto HTM. This limitation might be alleviated
if future HTM implementations provide forward-progress guarantees, which might
eliminate the need for fallback code in some cases, which in turn might allow HTM to
be used efficiently in situations with higher conflict probabilities.
     In short, although HTM is likely to have important uses and applications, it is
another tool in the parallel programmer’s toolbox, not a replacement for the toolbox in
its entirety.

17.3.5     Potential Game Changers
Game changers that could greatly increase the need for HTM include the following:

   1. Forward-progress guarantees.
   2. Transaction-size increases.
   3. Improved debugging support.
   4. Weak atomicity.

    These are expanded upon in the following sections.

17.3.5.1   Forward-Progress Guarantees
As was discussed in Section 17.3.2.4, current HTM implementations lack forward-
progress guarantees, which requires that fallback software is available to handle HTM
failures. Of course, it is easy to demand guarantees, but not always easy to provide them.
In the case of HTM, obstacles to guarantees can include cache size and associativity,
TLB size and associativity, transaction duration and interrupt frequency, and scheduler
implementation.
     Cache size and associativity was discussed in Section 17.3.2.1, along with some
research intended to work around current limitations. However, HTM forward-progress
guarantees would come with size limits, large though these limits might one day be. So
why don’t current HTM implementations provide forward-progress guarantees for small
transactions, for example, limited to the associativity of the cache? One potential reason
might be the need to deal with hardware failure. For example, a failing cache SRAM
cell might be handled by deactivating the failing cell, thus reducing the associativity of
the cache and therefore also the maximum size of transactions that can be guaranteed
forward progress. Given that this would simply decrease the guaranteed transaction
size, it seems likely that other reasons are at work. Perhaps providing forward progress
guarantees on production-quality hardware is more difficult than one might think, an
entirely plausible explanation given the difficulty of making forward-progress guarantees
in software. Moving a problem from software to hardware does not necessarily make it
easier to solve [JSG12].
     Given a physically tagged and indexed cache, it is not enough for the transaction to
fit in the cache. Its address translations must also fit in the TLB. Any forward-progress
guarantees must therefore also take TLB size and associativity into account.
     Given that interrupts, traps, and exceptions abort transactions in current HTM
implementations, it is necessary that the execution duration of a given transaction

be shorter than the expected interval between interrupts. No matter how little data
a given transaction touches, if it runs too long, it will be aborted. Therefore, any
forward-progress guarantees must be conditioned not only on transaction size, but also
on transaction duration.
     Forward-progress guarantees depend critically on the ability to determine which of
several conflicting transactions should be aborted. It is all too easy to imagine an endless
series of transactions, each aborting an earlier transaction only to itself be aborted by a
later transactions, so that none of the transactions actually commit. The complexity of
conflict handling is evidenced by the large number of HTM conflict-resolution policies
that have been proposed [ATC+ 11, LS11]. Additional complications are introduced
by extra-transactional accesses, as noted by Blundell [BLM06]. It is easy to blame
the extra-transactional accesses for all of these problems, but the folly of this line of
thinking is easily demonstrated by placing each of the extra-transactional accesses into
its own single-access transaction. It is the pattern of accesses that is the issue, not
whether or not they happen to be enclosed in a transaction.
     Finally, any forward-progress guarantees for transactions also depend on the sched-
uler, which must let the thread executing the transaction run long enough to successfully
commit.
     So there are significant obstacles to HTM vendors offering forward-progress
guarantees. However, the impact of any of them doing so would be enormous. It would
mean that HTM transactions would no longer need software fallbacks, which would
mean that HTM could finally deliver on the TM promise of deadlock elimination.
     However, in late 2012, the IBM Mainframe announced an HTM implementation
that includes constrained transactions in addition to the usual best-effort HTM im-
plementation [JSG12]. A constrained transaction starts with the tbeginc instruction
instead of the tbegin instruction that is used for best-effort transactions. Constrained
transactions are guaranteed to always complete (eventually), so if a transaction aborts,
rather than branching to a fallback path (as is done for best-effort transactions), the
hardware instead restarts the transaction at the tbeginc instruction.
     The Mainframe architects needed to take extreme measures to deliver on this
forward-progress guarantee. If a given constrained transaction repeatedly fails, the CPU
might disable branch prediction, force in-order execution, and even disable pipelining.
If the repeated failures are due to high contention, the CPU might disable speculative
fetches, introduce random delays, and even serialize execution of the conflicting CPUs.
“Interesting” forward-progress scenarios involve as few as two CPUs or as many as one
hundred CPUs. Perhaps these extreme measures provide some insight as to why other
CPUs have thus far refrained from offering constrained transactions.
     As the name implies, constrained transactions are in fact severely constrained:

   1. The maximum data footprint is four blocks of memory, where each block can be
      no larger than 32 bytes.

   2. The maximum code footprint is 256 bytes.

   3. If a given 4K page contains a constrained transaction’s code, then that page may
      not contain that transaction’s data.

   4. The maximum number of assembly instructions that may be executed is 32.

   5. Backwards branches are forbidden.

    Nevertheless, these constraints support a number of important data structures,
including linked lists, stacks, queues, and arrays. Constrained HTM therefore seems
likely to become an important tool in the parallel programmer’s toolbox.
    Note that these forward-progress guarantees need not be absolute. For example,
suppose that a use of HTM uses a global lock as fallback. Assuming that the fallback
mechanism has been carefully designed to avoid the “lemming effect” discussed in
Section 17.3.2.3, then if HTM rollbacks are sufficiently infrequent, the global lock will
not be a bottleneck. That said, the larger the system, the longer the critical sections,
and the longer the time required to recover from the “lemming effect”, the more rare
“sufficiently infrequent” needs to be.

17.3.5.2   Transaction-Size Increases
Forward-progress guarantees are important, but as we saw, they will be conditional
guarantees based on transaction size and duration. There has been some progress,
for example, some commercially available HTM implementations use approximation
techniques to support extremely large HTM read sets [RD12]. For another example,
POWER8 HTM supports suspended transations, which avoid adding irrelevant accesses
to the suspended transation’s read and write sets [LGW+ 15]. This capability has been
used to produce a high performance reader-writer lock [FIMR16].
    It is important to note that even small-sized guarantees will be quite useful. For
example, a guarantee of two cache lines is sufficient for a stack, queue, or dequeue.
However, larger data structures require larger guarantees, for example, traversing a tree
in order requires a guarantee equal to the number of nodes in the tree. Therefore, even
modest increases in the size of the guarantee also increases the usefulness of HTM,
thereby increasing the need for CPUs to either provide it or provide good-and-sufficient
workarounds.

17.3.5.3   Improved Debugging Support
Another inhibitor to transaction size is the need to debug the transactions. The problem
with current mechanisms is that a single-step exception aborts the enclosing transaction.
There are a number of workarounds for this issue, including emulating the processor
(slow!), substituting STM for HTM (slow and slightly different semantics!), playback
techniques using repeated retries to emulate forward progress (strange failure modes!),
and full support of debugging HTM transactions (complex!).
    Should one of the HTM vendors produce an HTM system that allows straightforward
use of classical debugging techniques within transactions, including breakpoints, single
stepping, and print statements, this will make HTM much more compelling. Some
transactional-memory researchers started to recognize this problem in 2013, with at
least one proposal involving hardware-assisted debugging facilities [GKP13]. Of course,
this proposal depends on readily available hardware gaining such facilities [Hay20,
Int20b]. Worse yet, some cutting-edge debugging facilities are incompatible with
HTM [OHOC20].

17.3.5.4   Weak Atomicity
Given that HTM is likely to face some sort of size limitations for the foreseeable future,
it will be necessary for HTM to interoperate smoothly with other mechanisms. HTM’s
interoperability with read-mostly mechanisms such as hazard pointers and RCU would

be improved if extra-transactional reads did not unconditionally abort transactions with
conflicting writes—instead, the read could simply be provided with the pre-transaction
value. In this way, hazard pointers and RCU could be used to allow HTM to handle
larger data structures and to reduce conflict probabilities.
     This is not necessarily simple, however. The most straightforward way of imple-
menting this requires an additional state in each cache line and on the bus, which is a
non-trivial added expense. The benefit that goes along with this expense is permitting
large-footprint readers without the risk of starving updaters due to continual conflicts.
An alternative approach, applied to great effect to binary search trees by Siakavaras et
al. [SNGK17], is to use RCU for read-only traversals and HTM only for the actual updates
themselves. This combination outperformed other transactional-memory techniques
by up to 220 %, a speedup similar to that observed by Howard and Walpole [HW11]
when they combined RCU with STM. In both cases, the weak atomicity is implemented
in software rather than in hardware. It would nevertheless be interesting to see what
additional speedups could be obtained by implementing weak atomicity in both hardware
and software.

17.3.6    Conclusions
Although current HTM implementations have delivered real performance benefits
in some situations, they also have significant shortcomings. The most significant
shortcomings appear to be limited transaction sizes, the need for conflict handling, the
need for aborts and rollbacks, the lack of forward-progress guarantees, the inability to
handle irrevocable operations, and subtle semantic differences from locking. There are
also reasons for lingering concerns surrounding HTM-implementation reliability [JSG12,
Was14, Int20a, Int21, Lar21, Int20c].
    Some of these shortcomings might be alleviated in future implementations, but it
appears that there will continue to be a strong need to make HTM work well with the many
other types of synchronization mechanisms, as noted earlier [MMW07, MMTW10].
Although there has been some work using HTM with RCU [SNGK17, SBN+ 20, GGK18,
PMDY20], there has been little evidence of progress towards HTM work better with
RCU and with other deferred-reclamation mechanisms.
    In short, current HTM implementations appear to be welcome and useful additions
to the parallel programmer’s toolbox, and much interesting and challenging work is
required to make use of them. However, they cannot be considered to be a magic wand
with which to wave away all parallel-programming problems.
Quick Quiz 17.17: But given continued work, isn’t it inevitable that HTM will eventually
deliver on the full TM vision?

17.4      Formal Regression Testing?

                                        Theory without experiments: Have we gone too far?
                                                                    Michael Mitzenmacher

Formal verification has long proven useful in a number of production environ-
ments [LBD+ 04, BBC+ 10, Coo18, SAE+ 18, DFLO19]. However, it is an open question
as to whether hard-core formal verification will ever be included in the automated

regression-test suites used for continuous integration within complex concurrent code-
bases, such as the Linux kernel. Although there is already a proof of concept for
Linux-kernel SRCU [Roy17], this test is for a small portion of one of the simplest RCU
implementations, and has proven difficult to keep it current with the ever-changing
Linux kernel. It is therefore worth asking what would be required to incorporate formal
verification as first-class members of the Linux kernel’s regression tests.
    The following list is a good start [McK15a, slide 34]:

   1. Any required translation must be automated.

   2. The environment (including memory ordering) must be correctly handled.

   3. The memory and CPU overhead must be acceptably modest.

   4. Specific information leading to the location of the bug must be provided.

   5. Information beyond the source code and inputs must be modest in scope.

   6. The bugs located must be relevant to the code’s users.

    This list builds on, but is somewhat more modest than, Richard Bornat’s dictum:
“Formal-verification researchers should verify the code that developers write, in the
language they write it in, running in the environment that it runs in, as they write it.”
The following sections discuss each of the above requirements, followed by a section
presenting a scorecard of how well a few tools stack up against these requirements.
 Quick Quiz 17.18: This list is ridiculously utopian! Why not stick to the current state of the
 formal-verification art?

17.4.1     Automatic Translation
Although Promela and spin are invaluable design aids, if you need to formally
regression-test your C-language program, you must hand-translate to Promela each time
you would like to re-verify your code. If your code happens to be in the Linux kernel,
which releases every 60–90 days, you will need to hand-translate from four to six times
each year. Over time, human error will creep in, which means that the verification won’t
match the source code, rendering the verification useless. Repeated verification clearly
requires either that the formal-verification tooling input your code directly, or that there
be bug-free automatic translation of your code to the form required for verification.
    PPCMEM and herd can in theory directly input assembly language and C++ code,
but these tools work only on very small litmus tests, which normally means that you
must extract the core of your mechanism—by hand. As with Promela and spin, both
PPCMEM and herd are extremely useful, but they are not well-suited for regression
suites.
    In contrast, cbmc and Nidhugg can input C programs of reasonable (though still
quite limited) size, and if their capabilities continue to grow, could well become
excellent additions to regression suites. The Coverity static-analysis tool also inputs
C programs, and of very large size, including the Linux kernel. Of course, Coverity’s
static analysis is quite simple compared to that of cbmc and Nidhugg. On the other
hand, Coverity had an all-encompassing definition of “C program” that posed special
challenges [BBC+ 10]. Amazon Web Services uses a variety of formal-verification tools,
including cbmc, and applies some of these tools to regression testing [Coo18]. Google

uses a number of relatively simple static analysis tools directly on large Java code bases,
which are arguably less diverse than C code bases [SAE+ 18]. Facebook uses more
aggressive forms of formal verification against its code bases, including analysis of
concurrency [DFLO19, O’H19], though not yet on the Linux kernel. Finally, Microsoft
has long used static analysis on its code bases [LBD+ 04].
    Given this list, it is clearly possible to create sophisticated formal-verification tools
that directly consume production-quality source code.
    However, one shortcoming of taking C code as input is that it assumes that the
compiler is correct. An alternative approach is to take the binary produced by the C
compiler as input, thereby accounting for any relevant compiler bugs. This approach
has been used in a number of verification efforts, perhaps most notably by the seL4
project [SM13].
Quick Quiz 17.19: Given the groundbreaking nature of the various verifiers used in the seL4
project, why doesn’t this chapter cover them in more depth?

    However, verifying directly from either the source or binary both have the advantage
of eliminating human translation errors, which is critically important for reliable
regression testing.
    This is not to say that tools with special-purpose languages are useless. On the
contrary, they can be quite helpful for design-time verification, as was discussed in
Chapter 12. However, such tools are not particularly helpful for automated regression
testing, which is in fact the topic of this section.

17.4.2     Environment
It is critically important that formal-verification tools correctly model their environment.
One all-too-common omission is the memory model, where a great many formal-
verification tools, including Promela/spin, are restricted to sequential consistency. The
QRCU experience related in Section 12.1.4.6 is an important cautionary tale.
     Promela and spin assume sequential consistency, which is not a good match for
modern computer systems, as was seen in Chapter 15. In contrast, one of the great
strengths of PPCMEM and herd is their detailed modeling of various CPU families
memory models, including x86, Arm, Power, and, in the case of herd, a Linux-kernel
memory model [AMM+ 18], which was accepted into Linux-kernel version v4.17.
     The cbmc and Nidhugg tools provide some ability to select memory models, but
do not provide the variety that PPCMEM and herd do. However, it is likely that the
larger-scale tools will adopt a greater variety of memory models as time goes on.
     In the longer term, it would be helpful for formal-verification tools to include
I/O [MDR16], but it may be some time before this comes to pass.
     Nevertheless, tools that fail to match the environment can still be useful. For
example, a great many concurrency bugs would still be bugs on a mythical sequentially
consistent system, and these bugs could be located by a tool that over-approximates
the system’s memory model with sequential consistency. Nevertheless, these tools
will fail to find bugs involving missing memory-ordering directives, as noted in the
aforementioned cautionary tale of Section 12.1.4.6.

17.4.3     Overhead
Almost all hard-core formal-verification tools are exponential in nature, which might
seem discouraging until you consider that many of the most interesting software

Listing 17.2: Emulating Locking with cmpxchg_acquire()
1    C C-SB+l-o-o-u+l-o-o-u-C
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *sl, int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            int r2;
8            int r1;
9
10           r2 = cmpxchg_acquire(sl, 0, 1);
11           WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 1);
12           r1 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
13           smp_store_release(sl, 0);
14   }
15
16   P1(int *sl, int *x0, int *x1)
17   {
18           int r2;
19           int r1;
20
21           r2 = cmpxchg_acquire(sl, 0, 1);
22           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 1);
23           r1 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
24           smp_store_release(sl, 0);
25   }
26
27   filter (0:r2=0 /\ 1:r2=0)
28   exists (0:r1=0 /\ 1:r1=0)

questions are in fact undecidable. However, there are differences in degree, even among
exponentials.
    PPCMEM by design is unoptimized, in order to provide greater assurance that the
memory models of interest are accurately represented. The herd tool optimizes more
aggressively, as described in Section 12.3, and is thus orders of magnitude faster than
PPCMEM. Nevertheless, both PPCMEM and herd target very small litmus tests rather
than larger bodies of code.
    In contrast, Promela/spin, cbmc, and Nidhugg are designed for (somewhat)
larger bodies of code. Promela/spin was used to verify the Curiosity rover’s filesys-
tem [GHH+ 14] and, as noted earlier, both cbmc and Nidhugg were appled to Linux-kernel
RCU.
    If advances in heuristics continue at the rate of the past three decades, we can look
forward to large reductions in overhead for formal verification. That said, combinatorial
explosion is still combinatorial explosion, which would be expected to sharply limit
the size of programs that could be verified, with or without continued improvements in
heuristics.
    However, the flip side of combinatorial explosion is Philip II of Macedon’s timeless
advice: “Divide and rule.” If a large program can be divided and the pieces verified,
the result can be combinatorial implosion [McK11e]. One natural place to divide is on
API boundaries, for example, those of locking primitives. One verification pass can
then verify that the locking implementation is correct, and additional verification passes
can verify correct use of the locking APIs.
    The performance benefits of this approach can be demonstrated using the Linux-
kernel memory model [AMM+ 18]. This model provides spin_lock() and spin_
unlock() primitives, but these primitives can also be emulated using cmpxchg_
acquire() and smp_store_release(), as shown in Listing 17.2 (C-SB+l-o-o-
u+l-o-o-*u.litmus and C-SB+l-o-o-u+l-o-o-u*-C.litmus). Table 17.4 com-
pares the performance and scalability of using the model’s spin_lock() and spin_

                   Table 17.4: Emulating Locking: Performance (s)

                        # Threads    Locking    cmpxchg_acquire
                            2         0.004            0.022
                            3         0.041            0.743
                            4         0.374           59.565
                            5         4.905

unlock() against emulating these primitives as shown in the listing. The difference is
not insignificant: At four processes, the model is more than two orders of magnitude
faster than emulation!
Quick Quiz 17.20: Why bother with a separate filter command on line 27 of Listing 17.2
instead of just adding the condition to the exists clause? And wouldn’t it be simpler to use
xchg_acquire() instead of cmpxchg_acquire()?

    It would of course be quite useful for tools to automatically divide up large
programs, verify the pieces, and then verify the combinations of pieces. In the
meantime, verification of large programs will require significant manual intervention.
This intervention will preferably mediated by scripting, the better to reliably carry out
repeated verifications on each release, and preferably eventually in a manner well-suited
for continuous integration. And Facebook’s Infer tool has taken important steps towards
doing just that, via compositionality and abstraction [BGOS18, DFLO19].
    In any case, we can expect formal-verification capabilities to continue to increase
over time, and any such increases will in turn increase the applicability of formal
verification to regression testing.

17.4.4     Locate Bugs
Any software artifact of any size contains bugs. Therefore, a formal-verification tool
that reports only the presence or absence of bugs is not particularly useful. What is
needed is a tool that gives at least some information as to where the bug is located and
the nature of that bug.
     The cbmc output includes a traceback mapping back to the source code, similar to
Promela/spin’s, as does Nidhugg. Of course, these tracebacks can be quite long, and
analyzing them can be quite tedious. However, doing so is usually quite a bit faster and
more pleasant than locating bugs the old-fashioned way.
     In addition, one of the simplest tests of formal-verification tools is bug injection.
After all, not only could any of us write printf("VERIFIED\n"), but the plain fact is
that developers of formal-verification tools are just as bug-prone as are the rest of us.
Therefore, formal-verification tools that just proclaim that a bug exists are fundamentally
less trustworthy because it is more difficult to verify them on real-world code.
     All that aside, people writing formal-verification tools are permitted to leverage
existing tools. For example, a tool designed to determine only the presence or absence
of a serious but rare bug might leverage bisection. If an old version of the program
under test did not contain the bug, but a new version did, then bisection could be used to
quickly locate the commit that inserted the bug, which might be sufficient information
to find and fix the bug. Of course, this sort of strategy would not work well for common
bugs because in this case bisection would fail due to all commits having at least one
instance of the common bug.

   Therefore, the execution traces provided by many formal-verification tools will
continue to be valuable, particularly for complex and difficult-to-understand bugs. In
addition, recent work applies incorrectness-logic formalism reminiscent of the traditional
Hoare logic used for full-up correctness proofs, but with the sole purpose of finding
bugs [O’H19].

17.4.5      Minimal Scaffolding
In the old days, formal-verification researchers demanded a full specification against
which the software would be verified. Unfortunately, a mathematically rigorous
specification might well be larger than the actual code, and each line of specification is
just as likely to contain bugs as is each line of code. A formal verification effort proving
that the code faithfully implemented the specification would be a proof of bug-for-bug
compatibility between the two, which might not be all that helpful.
     Worse yet, the requirements for a number of software artifacts, including Linux-kernel
RCU, are empirical in nature [McK15h, McK15e, McK15f].16 For this common type of
software, a complete specification is a polite fiction. Nor are complete specifications any
less fictional for hardware, as was made clear by the late-2017 Meltdown and Spectre
side-channel attacks [Hor18].
     This situation might cause one to give up all hope of formal verification of real-world
software and hardware artifacts, but it turns out that there is quite a bit that can be done.
For example, design and coding rules can act as a partial specification, as can assertions
contained in the code. And in fact formal-verification tools such as cbmc and Nidhugg
both check for assertions that can be triggered, implicitly treating these assertions as
part of the specification. However, the assertions are also part of the code, which makes
it less likely that they will become obsolete, especially if the code is also subjected
to stress tests.17 The cbmc tool also checks for array-out-of-bound references, thus
implicitly adding them to the specification. The aforementioned incorrectness logic can
also be thought of as using an implicit bugs-not-present specification [O’H19].
     This implicit-specification approach makes quite a bit of sense, particularly if you
look at formal verification not as a full proof of correctness, but rather an alternative
form of validation with a different set of strengths and weaknesses than the common
case, that is, testing. From this viewpoint, software will always have bugs, and therefore
any tool of any kind that helps to find those bugs is a very good thing indeed.

17.4.6      Relevant Bugs
Finding bugs—and fixing them—is of course the whole point of any type of validation
effort. Clearly, false positives are to be avoided. But even in the absence of false
positives, there are bugs and there are bugs.
    For example, suppose that a software artifact had exactly 100 remaining bugs, each
of which manifested on average once every million years of runtime. Suppose further
that an omniscient formal-verification tool located all 100 bugs, which the developers
duly fixed. What happens to the reliability of this software artifact?
    The answer is that the reliability decreases.
    To see this, keep in mind that historical experience indicates that about 7 % of fixes
introduce a new bug [BJ12]. Therefore, fixing the 100 bugs, which had a combined

  16 Or, in formal-verification parlance, Linux-kernel RCU has an incomplete specification.
  17 And you do stress-test your code, don’t you?

                        Table 17.5: Formal Regression Scorecard

                                   Promela PPCMEM herd           cbmc    Nidhugg
         (1) Automated
         (2) Environment            (MM)                         (MM)      (MM)
         (3) Overhead                                            (SAT)
         (4) Locate Bugs
         (5) Minimal Scaffolding
         (6) Relevant Bugs           ???        ???       ???     ???       ???

mean time to failure (MTBF) of about 10,000 years, will introduce seven more bugs.
Historical statistics indicate that each new bug will have an MTBF much less than 70,000
years. This in turn suggests that the combined MTBF of these seven new bugs will most
likely be much less than 10,000 years, which in turn means that the well-intentioned
fixing of the original 100 bugs actually decreased the reliability of the overall software.
Quick Quiz 17.21: How do we know that the MTBFs of known bugs is a good estimate of the
MTBFs of bugs that have not yet been located?

Quick Quiz 17.22: But the formal-verification tools should immediately find all the bugs
introduced by the fixes, so why is this a problem?

    Worse yet, imagine another software artifact with one bug that fails once every day on
average and 99 more that fail every million years each. Suppose that a formal-verification
tool located the 99 million-year bugs, but failed to find the one-day bug. Fixing the 99
bugs located will take time and effort, decrease reliability, and do nothing at all about
the pressing each-day failure that is likely causing embarrassment and perhaps much
worse besides.
    Therefore, it would be best to have a validation tool that preferentially located
the most troublesome bugs. However, as noted in Section 17.4.4, it is permissible to
leverage additional tools. One powerful tool is none other than plain old testing. Given
knowledge of the bug, it should be possible to construct specific tests for it, possibly
also using some of the techniques described in Section 11.6.4 to increase the probability
of the bug manifesting. These techniques should allow calculation of a rough estimate
of the bug’s raw failure rate, which could in turn be used to prioritize bug-fix efforts.
Quick Quiz 17.23: But many formal-verification tools can only find one bug at a time, so
that each bug must be fixed before the tool can locate the next. How can bug-fix efforts be
prioritized given such a tool?

    There has been some recent formal-verification work that prioritizes executions
having fewer preemptions, under that reasonable assumption that smaller numbers of
preemptions are more likely.
    Identifying relevant bugs might sound like too much to ask, but it is what is really
required if we are to actually increase software reliability.

17.4.7     Formal Regression Scorecard
Table 17.5 shows a rough-and-ready scorecard for the formal-verification tools covered
in this chapter. Shorter wavelengths are better than longer wavelengths.

     Promela requires hand translation and supports only sequential consistency, so its
first two cells are red. It has reasonable overhead (for formal verification, anyway) and
provides a traceback, so its next two cells are yellow. Despite requiring hand translation,
Promela handles assertions in a natural way, so its fifth cell is green.
     PPCMEM usually requires hand translation due to the small size of litmus tests that
it supports, so its first cell is orange. It handles several memory models, so its second
cell is green. Its overhead is quite high, so its third cell is red. It provides a graphical
display of relations among operations, which is not as helpful as a traceback, but is still
quite useful, so its fourth cell is yellow. It requires constructing an exists clause and
cannot take intra-process assertions, so its fifth cell is also yellow.
     The herd tool has size restrictions similar to those of PPCMEM, so herd’s first cell
is also orange. It supports a wide variety of memory models, so its second cell is blue.
It has reasonable overhead, so its third cell is yellow. Its bug-location and assertion
capabilities are quite similar to those of PPCMEM, so herd also gets yellow for the
next two cells.
     The cbmc tool inputs C code directly, so its first cell is blue. It supports a few
memory models, so its second cell is yellow. It has reasonable overhead, so its third cell
is also yellow, however, perhaps SAT-solver performance will continue improving. It
provides a traceback, so its fourth cell is green. It takes assertions directly from the C
code, so its fifth cell is blue.
     Nidhugg also inputs C code directly, so its first cell is also blue. It supports only a
couple of memory models, so its second cell is orange. Its overhead is quite low (for
formal-verification), so its third cell is green. It provides a traceback, so its fourth cell is
green. It takes assertions directly from the C code, so its fifth cell is blue.
     So what about the sixth and final row? It is too early to tell how any of the tools do
at finding the right bugs, so they are all yellow with question marks.
 Quick Quiz 17.24: How would testing stack up in the scorecard shown in Table 17.5?

 Quick Quiz 17.25: But aren’t there a great many more formal-verification systems than are
 shown in Table 17.5?

    Once again, please note that this table rates these tools for use in regression testing.
Just because many of them are a poor fit for regression testing does not at all mean that
they are useless, in fact, many of them have proven their worth many times over.18 Just
not for regression testing.
    However, this might well change. After all, formal verification tools made impressive
strides in the 2010s. If that progress continues, formal verification might well become
an indispensable tool in the parallel programmer’s validation toolbox.

  18 For but one example, Promela was used to verify the file system of none other than the

Curiosity Rover. Was your formal verification tool used on software that currently runs on
Mars???

17.5      Functional Programming for Parallelism
                                         The curious failure of functional programming for
                                         parallel applications.
                                                                             Malte Skarupke

When I took my first-ever functional-programming class in the early 1980s, the professor
asserted that the side-effect-free functional-programming style was well-suited to trivial
parallelization and analysis. Thirty years later, this assertion remains, but mainstream
production use of parallel functional languages is minimal, a state of affairs that might
not be entirely unrelated to professor’s additional assertion that programs should neither
maintain state nor do I/O. There is niche use of functional languages such as Erlang,
and multithreaded support has been added to several other functional languages, but
mainstream production usage remains the province of procedural languages such as C,
C++, Java, and Fortran (usually augmented with OpenMP, MPI, or coarrays).
    This situation naturally leads to the question “If analysis is the goal, why not
transform the procedural language into a functional language before doing the analysis?”
There are of course a number of objections to this approach, of which I list but three:

   1. Procedural languages often make heavy use of global variables, which can be
      updated independently by different functions, or, worse yet, by multiple threads.
      Note that Haskell’s monads were invented to deal with single-threaded global
      state, and that multi-threaded access to global state inflicts additional violence on
      the functional model.
   2. Multithreaded procedural languages often use synchronization primitives such as
      locks, atomic operations, and transactions, which inflict added violence upon the
      functional model.
   3. Procedural languages can alias function arguments, for example, by passing a
      pointer to the same structure via two different arguments to the same invocation
      of a given function. This can result in the function unknowingly updating that
      structure via two different (and possibly overlapping) code sequences, which
      greatly complicates analysis.

    Of course, given the importance of global state, synchronization primitives, and
aliasing, clever functional-programming experts have proposed any number of attempts
to reconcile the function programming model to them, monads being but one case in
point.
    Another approach is to compile the parallel procedural program into a functional
program, then to use functional-programming tools to analyze the result. But it is
possible to do much better than this, given that any real computation is a large finite-state
machine with finite input that runs for a finite time interval. This means that any real
program can be transformed into an expression, possibly albeit an impractically large
one [DHK12].
    However, a number of the low-level kernels of parallel algorithms transform into
expressions that are small enough to fit easily into the memories of modern computers.
If such an expression is coupled with an assertion, checking to see if the assertion
would ever fire becomes a satisfiability problem. Even though satisfiability problems
are NP-complete, they can often be solved in much less time than would be required to

17.6. SUMMARY                                                                           647

generate the full state space. In addition, the solution time appears to be only weakly
dependent on the underlying memory model, so that algorithms running on weakly
ordered systems can also be checked [AKT13].
     The general approach is to transform the program into single-static-assignment
(SSA) form, so that each assignment to a variable creates a separate version of that
variable. This applies to assignments from all the active threads, so that the resulting
expression embodies all possible executions of the code in question. The addition of an
assertion entails asking whether any combination of inputs and initial values can result
in the assertion firing, which, as noted above, is exactly the satisfiability problem.
     One possible objection is that it does not gracefully handle arbitrary looping
constructs. However, in many cases, this can be handled by unrolling the loop a finite
number of times. In addition, perhaps some loops will also prove amenable to collapse
via inductive methods.
     Another possible objection is that spinlocks involve arbitrarily long loops, and any
finite unrolling would fail to capture the full behavior of the spinlock. It turns out that
this objection is easily overcome. Instead of modeling a full spinlock, model a trylock
that attempts to obtain the lock, and aborts if it fails to immediately do so. The assertion
must then be crafted so as to avoid firing in cases where a spinlock aborted due to the
lock not being immediately available. Because the logic expression is independent of
time, all possible concurrency behaviors will be captured via this approach.
     A final objection is that this technique is unlikely to be able to handle a full-sized
software artifact such as the millions of lines of code making up the Linux kernel. This
is likely the case, but the fact remains that exhaustive validation of each of the much
smaller parallel primitives within the Linux kernel would be quite valuable. And in
fact the researchers spearheading this approach have applied it to non-trivial real-world
code, including the Tree RCU implementation in the Linux kernel [LMKM16, KS17a].
     It remains to be seen how widely applicable this technique is, but it is one of the
more interesting innovations in the field of formal verification. Although it might
well be that the functional-programming advocates are at long last correct in their
assertion of the inevitable dominance of functional programming, it is clearly the case
that this long-touted methodology is starting to see credible competition on its formal-
verification home turf. There is therefore continued reason to doubt the inevitability of
functional-programming dominance.

17.6      Summary
                                         Life can only be understood backwards; but it must
                                         be lived forwards.
                                                                          Søren Kierkegaard

This chapter has taken a quick tour of a number of possible futures, including multicore,
transactional memory, formal verification as a regression test, and concurrent functional
programming. Any of these futures might come true, but it is more likely that, as in the
past, the future will be far stranger than we can possibly imagine.

