                                                    Order! Order in the court!
                                                                                                     Unknown

Appendix C

Why Memory Barriers?

So what possessed CPU designers to cause them to inflict memory barriers on poor
unsuspecting SMP software designers?
   In short, because reordering memory references allows much better performance,
courtesy of the finite speed of light and the non-zero size of atoms noted in Section 3.2,
and particularly in the hardware-performance question posed by Quick Quiz 3.9.
Therefore, memory barriers are needed to force ordering in things like synchronization
primitives whose correct operation depends on ordered memory references.
   Getting a more detailed answer to this question requires a good understanding of
how CPU caches work, and especially what is required to make caches really work well.
The following sections:
    1. Present the structure of a cache,
    2. Describe how cache-coherency protocols ensure that CPUs agree on the value of
       each location in memory, and, finally,
    3. Outline how store buffers and invalidate queues help caches and cache-coherency
       protocols achieve high performance.
We will see that memory barriers are a necessary evil that is required to enable good
performance and scalability, an evil that stems from the fact that CPUs are orders of
magnitude faster than are both the interconnects between them and the memory they are
attempting to access.

C.1        Cache Structure
Modern CPUs are much faster than are modern memory systems. A 2006 CPU might
be capable of executing ten instructions per nanosecond, but will require many tens of
nanoseconds to fetch a data item from main memory. This disparity in speed—more
than two orders of magnitude—has resulted in the multi-megabyte caches found on
modern CPUs. These caches are associated with the CPUs as shown in Figure C.1, and
can typically be accessed in a few cycles.1
     1 It is standard practice to use multiple levels of cache, with a small level-one cache close

to the CPU with single-cycle access time, and a larger level-two cache with a longer access
time, perhaps roughly ten clock cycles. Higher-performance CPUs often have three or even
four levels of cache.

                       CPU 0                                 CPU 1

                       Cache                                 Cache

                                       Interconnect

                                         Memory

               Figure C.1: Modern Computer System Cache Structure

    Data flows among the CPUs’ caches and memory in fixed-length blocks called
“cache lines”, which are normally a power of two in size, ranging from 16 to 256 bytes.
When a given data item is first accessed by a given CPU, it will be absent from that
CPU’s cache, meaning that a “cache miss” (or, more specifically, a “warm-up” cache
miss) has occurred. The cache miss means that the CPU will have to wait (or be
“stalled”) for hundreds of cycles while the item is fetched from memory. However, the
item will be loaded into that CPU’s cache, so that subsequent accesses will find it in the
cache and therefore run at full speed.
    After some time, the CPU’s cache will fill, and subsequent misses will likely need
to eject an item from the cache in order to make room for the newly fetched item. Such
a cache miss is termed a “capacity miss”, because it is caused by the cache’s limited
capacity. However, most caches can be forced to eject an old item to make room for a
new item even when they are not yet full. This is due to the fact that large caches are
implemented as hardware hash tables with fixed-size hash buckets (or “sets”, as CPU
designers call them) and no chaining, as shown in Figure C.2.
    This cache has sixteen “sets” and two “ways” for a total of 32 “lines”, each entry
containing a single 256-byte “cache line”, which is a 256-byte-aligned block of memory.
This cache line size is a little on the large size, but makes the hexadecimal arithmetic
much simpler. In hardware parlance, this is a two-way set-associative cache, and is
analogous to a software hash table with sixteen buckets, where each bucket’s hash
chain is limited to at most two elements. The size (32 cache lines in this case) and the
associativity (two in this case) are collectively called the cache’s “geometry”. Since this
cache is implemented in hardware, the hash function is extremely simple: Extract four
bits from the memory address.
    In Figure C.2, each box corresponds to a cache entry, which can contain a 256-byte
cache line. However, a cache entry can be empty, as indicated by the empty boxes in the
figure. The rest of the boxes are flagged with the memory address of the cache line that
they contain. Since the cache lines must be 256-byte aligned, the low eight bits of each
address are zero, and the choice of hardware hash function means that the next-higher
four bits match the hash line number.
    The situation depicted in the figure might arise if the program’s code were located at
address 0x43210E00 through 0x43210EFF, and this program accessed data sequentially
from 0x12345000 through 0x12345EFF. Suppose that the program were now to access
location 0x12345F00. This location hashes to line 0xF, and both ways of this line are

C.1. CACHE STRUCTURE                                                                   689

                                   Way 0                 Way 1
                       0x0      0x12345000
                       0x1      0x12345100
                       0x2      0x12345200
                       0x3      0x12345300
                       0x4      0x12345400
                       0x5      0x12345500
                       0x6      0x12345600
                       0x7      0x12345700
                       0x8      0x12345800
                       0x9      0x12345900
                       0xA      0x12345A00
                       0xB      0x12345B00
                       0xC      0x12345C00
                       0xD      0x12345D00
                       0xE      0x12345E00           0x43210E00
                       0xF

                           Figure C.2: CPU Cache Structure

empty, so the corresponding 256-byte line can be accommodated. If the program were
to access location 0x1233000, which hashes to line 0x0, the corresponding 256-byte
cache line can be accommodated in way 1. However, if the program were to access
location 0x1233E00, which hashes to line 0xE, one of the existing lines must be ejected
from the cache to make room for the new cache line. If this ejected line were accessed
later, a cache miss would result. Such a cache miss is termed an “associativity miss”.

     Thus far, we have been considering only cases where a CPU reads a data item. What
happens when it does a write? Because it is important that all CPUs agree on the value
of a given data item, before a given CPU writes to that data item, it must first cause
it to be removed, or “invalidated”, from other CPUs’ caches. Once this invalidation
has completed, the CPU may safely modify the data item. If the data item was present
in this CPU’s cache, but was read-only, this process is termed a “write miss”. Once a
given CPU has completed invalidating a given data item from other CPUs’ caches, that
CPU may repeatedly write (and read) that data item.

    Later, if one of the other CPUs attempts to access the data item, it will incur a cache
miss, this time because the first CPU invalidated the item in order to write to it. This
type of cache miss is termed a “communication miss”, since it is usually due to several
CPUs using the data items to communicate (for example, a lock is a data item that is
used to communicate among CPUs using a mutual-exclusion algorithm).

    Clearly, much care must be taken to ensure that all CPUs maintain a coherent view
of the data. With all this fetching, invalidating, and writing, it is easy to imagine data
being lost or (perhaps worse) different CPUs having conflicting values for the same data
item in their respective caches. These problems are prevented by “cache-coherency
protocols”, described in the next section.

C.2       Cache-Coherence Protocols
Cache-coherence protocols manage cache-line states so as to prevent inconsistent or
lost data. These protocols can be quite complex, with many tens of states,2 but for our
purposes we need only concern ourselves with the four-state MESI cache-coherence
protocol.

C.2.1      MESI States
MESI stands for “modified”, “exclusive”, “shared”, and “invalid”, the four states a given
cache line can take on using this protocol. Caches using this protocol therefore maintain
a two-bit state “tag” on each cache line in addition to that line’s physical address and
data.
     A line in the “modified” state has been subject to a recent memory store from the
corresponding CPU, and the corresponding memory is guaranteed not to appear in any
other CPU’s cache. Cache lines in the “modified” state can thus be said to be “owned”
by the CPU. Because this cache holds the only up-to-date copy of the data, this cache is
ultimately responsible for either writing it back to memory or handing it off to some
other cache, and must do so before reusing this line to hold other data.
     The “exclusive” state is very similar to the “modified” state, the single exception
being that the cache line has not yet been modified by the corresponding CPU, which in
turn means that the copy of the cache line’s data that resides in memory is up-to-date.
However, since the CPU can store to this line at any time, without consulting other
CPUs, a line in the “exclusive” state can still be said to be owned by the corresponding
CPU. That said, because the corresponding value in memory is up to date, this cache
can discard this data without writing it back to memory or handing it off to some other
CPU.
     A line in the “shared” state might be replicated in at least one other CPU’s cache, so
that this CPU is not permitted to store to the line without first consulting with other
CPUs. As with the “exclusive” state, because the corresponding value in memory is up
to date, this cache can discard this data without writing it back to memory or handing it
off to some other CPU.
     A line in the “invalid” state is empty, in other words, it holds no data. When new
data enters the cache, it is placed into a cache line that was in the “invalid” state if
possible. This approach is preferred because replacing a line in any other state could
result in an expensive cache miss should the replaced line be referenced in the future.
     Since all CPUs must maintain a coherent view of the data carried in the cache lines,
the cache-coherence protocol provides messages that coordinate the movement of cache
lines through the system.

C.2.2      MESI Protocol Messages
Many of the transitions described in the previous section require communication among
the CPUs. If the CPUs are on a single shared bus, the following messages suffice:
Read:
     The “read” message contains the physical address of the cache line to be read.
    2 See Culler et al. [CSG99] pages 670 and 671 for the nine-state and 26-state diagrams

for SGI Origin2000 and Sequent (now IBM) NUMA-Q, respectively. Both diagrams are
significantly simpler than real life.

C.2. CACHE-COHERENCE PROTOCOLS                                                           691

Read Response:
     The “read response” message contains the data requested by an earlier “read”
     message. This “read response” message might be supplied either by memory or
     by one of the other caches. For example, if one of the caches has the desired data
     in “modified” state, that cache must supply the “read response” message.

Invalidate:
      The “invalidate” message contains the physical address of the cache line to be
      invalidated. All other caches must remove the corresponding data from their
      caches and respond.

Invalidate Acknowledge:
      A CPU receiving an “invalidate” message must respond with an “invalidate
      acknowledge” message after removing the specified data from its cache.

Read Invalidate:
     The “read invalidate” message contains the physical address of the cache line to
     be read, while at the same time directing other caches to remove the data. Hence,
     it is a combination of a “read” and an “invalidate”, as indicated by its name. A
     “read invalidate” message requires both a “read response” and a set of “invalidate
     acknowledge” messages in reply.

Writeback:
     The “writeback” message contains both the address and the data to be written
     back to memory (and perhaps “snooped” into other CPUs’ caches along the way).
     This message permits caches to eject lines in the “modified” state as needed to
     make room for other data.

Quick Quiz C.1: Where does a writeback message originate from and where does it go to?

    Interestingly enough, a shared-memory multiprocessor system really is a message-
passing computer under the covers. This means that clusters of SMP machines that use
distributed shared memory are using message passing to implement shared memory at
two different levels of the system architecture.
Quick Quiz C.2:     What happens if two CPUs attempt to invalidate the same cache line
concurrently?

Quick Quiz C.3: When an “invalidate” message appears in a large multiprocessor, every CPU
must give an “invalidate acknowledge” response. Wouldn’t the resulting “storm” of “invalidate
acknowledge” responses totally saturate the system bus?

Quick Quiz C.4: If SMP machines are really using message passing anyway, why bother with
SMP at all?

C.2.3    MESI State Diagram
A given cache line’s state changes as protocol messages are sent and received, as shown
in Figure C.3.
    The transition arcs in this figure are as follows:

                                                M

                                a                           f
                                    b       c       d   e

                                                    g
                        E                                       S
                                        h

                                    j                   k
                                i                           l

                                                I
                 Figure C.3: MESI Cache-Coherency State Diagram

Transition (a):
     A cache line is written back to memory, but the CPU retains it in its cache
     and further retains the right to modify it. This transition requires a “writeback”
     message.
Transition (b):
     The CPU writes to the cache line that it already had exclusive access to. This
     transition does not require any messages to be sent or received.
Transition (c):
     The CPU receives a “read invalidate” message for a cache line that it has modified.
     The CPU must invalidate its local copy, then respond with both a “read response”
     and an “invalidate acknowledge” message, both sending the data to the requesting
     CPU and indicating that it no longer has a local copy.
Transition (d):
     The CPU does an atomic read-modify-write operation on a data item that was
     not present in its cache. It transmits a “read invalidate”, receiving the data via a
     “read response”. The CPU can complete the transition once it has also received a
     full set of “invalidate acknowledge” responses.
Transition (e):
     The CPU does an atomic read-modify-write operation on a data item that was
     previously read-only in its cache. It must transmit “invalidate” messages, and
     must wait for a full set of “invalidate acknowledge” responses before completing
     the transition.
Transition (f):
     Some other CPU reads the cache line, and it is supplied from this CPU’s cache,
     which retains a read-only copy, possibly also writing it back to memory. This
     transition is initiated by the reception of a “read” message, and this CPU responds
     with a “read response” message containing the requested data.
Transition (g):
     Some other CPU reads a data item in this cache line, and it is supplied either from

C.2. CACHE-COHERENCE PROTOCOLS                                                          693

      this CPU’s cache or from memory. In either case, this CPU retains a read-only
      copy. This transition is initiated by the reception of a “read” message, and this
      CPU responds with a “read response” message containing the requested data.

Transition (h):
     This CPU realizes that it will soon need to write to some data item in this cache
     line, and thus transmits an “invalidate” message. The CPU cannot complete
     the transition until it receives a full set of “invalidate acknowledge” responses,
     indicating that no other CPU has this cacheline in its cache. In other words, this
     CPU is the only CPU caching it.

Transition (i):
     Some other CPU does an atomic read-modify-write operation on a data item in a
     cache line held only in this CPU’s cache, so this CPU invalidates it from its cache.
     This transition is initiated by the reception of a “read invalidate” message, and
     this CPU responds with both a “read response” and an “invalidate acknowledge”
     message.

Transition (j):
     This CPU does a store to a data item in a cache line that was not in its cache,
     and thus transmits a “read invalidate” message. The CPU cannot complete
     the transition until it receives the “read response” and a full set of “invalidate
     acknowledge” messages. The cache line will presumably transition to “modified”
     state via transition (b) as soon as the actual store completes.

Transition (k):
     This CPU loads a data item in a cache line that was not in its cache. The CPU
     transmits a “read” message, and completes the transition upon receiving the
     corresponding “read response”.

Transition (l):
     Some other CPU does a store to a data item in this cache line, but holds this
     cache line in read-only state due to its being held in other CPUs’ caches (such
     as the current CPU’s cache). This transition is initiated by the reception of an
     “invalidate” message, and this CPU responds with an “invalidate acknowledge”
     message.

Quick Quiz C.5: How does the hardware handle the delayed transitions described above?

C.2.4     MESI Protocol Example
Let’s now look at this from the perspective of a couple of cache lines’ worth of data,
initially residing in memory at address 0 and 8, as they travel through the various
single-line direct-mapped caches in a four-CPU system. Table C.1 shows this flow of
data, with the first column showing the steps each operation takes, the second the CPU
performing the operation, the third the operation being performed, the next four the
state of each CPU’s cache line (memory address followed by MESI state), and the final
two columns whether the corresponding memory contents are valid (“V”) or invalid
(“I”). As we will see, a single machine instructions can require several steps in order to
keep the cache and memory state consistent.

                        Table C.1: Cache Coherence Example

                                                                    CPU Cache          Memory

 Step #   CPU #     Operation                                 0      1    2      3     0      8

                    Initial State                             −/I   −/I   −/I   −/I    V      V
 1.1         0      Load 0 (read miss)                        0/S   −/I   −/I   −/I    V      V
 2.1         2      Load 0 (read miss)                        0/S   −/I   0/S   −/I    V      V
 3.1         0      Load 8 (collision, invalidation)          −/I   −/I   0/S   −/I    V      V
 3.2         0      Load 8 (read miss)                        8/S   −/I   0/S   −/I    V      V
 4.1         3      Load 0 (read miss)                        8/S   −/I   0/S   0/S    V      V
 5.1         3      CAS 0 (cache hit)                         8/S   −/I   0/S   0/S    V      V
 5.2         3      CAS 0 (write miss)                        8/S   −/I   −/I   0/E    V      V
 5.3         3      CAS 0                                     8/S   −/I   −/I   0/M    I      V
 6.1         1      Store 8 (read miss and also write miss)   −/I   8/E   −/I   0/M    I      V
 6.2         1      Store 8                                   −/I   8/M   −/I   0/M    I      I
 7.1         3      CAS 0                                     −/I   8/M   −/I   0/M    I      I
 8.1         1      Load 0 (collision, flush)                 −/I   −/I   −/I   0/M    I      V
 8.2         1      Load 0 (cache miss)                       −/I   0/S   −/I   0/S    I      V
 9.1         3      Load 0 (cache hit)                        −/I   0/S   −/I   0/S    I      V

    Please note that this is a conceptual example. Different hardware implementations
can and do make different choices, and most implementations are far more complex
than this simple example might lead you to believe.
    Initially, the CPU cache lines in which the data could reside are in the “invalid”
state, and the data is valid in memory, as shown in the first row. In step 1.1, CPU 0
loads the data at address 0, incurring a cache miss, loading the value into its cache, and
transitioning that cache line to the “shared” state. The contents of memory at address 0
remain valid. In step 2.1, CPU 2 also loads the data at address 0, also incurring a cache
miss, loading the data into its cache, and transitioning that cache line to the “shared”
state. The cache line corresponding to address 0 is now in “shared” state in both CPUs’
caches, and the contents of memory at address 0 remain valid.
    In step 3.1, CPU 0 loads the data at address 8. However, its cache still contains the
value from address 0, and its single-line direct-mapped cache cannot accommodate two
values at once. The CPU therefore forces the data at address 0 out of its cache via an
invalidation, and then step 3.2 then replaces it with the data at address 8. The cache line
corresponding to address 8 is now in “shared” state in CPU 0’s cache, and the contents
of memory at both addresses remain valid.
    In step 4.1, CPU 3 loads the data at address 0, incurring a cache miss and loading
the data from either memory or from CPU 2’s cache. The data at address 8 is now in
CPU 0’s cache and that of address 0 in both CPU 2’s and 3’s caches, and memory state
remains unchanged.
    In step 5.1, CPU 3 commences a CAS operation on the data at address 0, enjoying a
cache hit. However, in step 5.2, CPU 3 incurs what can be thought of as a cache write
miss: The data is there, but CPU 3 does not have the necessary permissions to complete
the memory-write portion of its CAS operation. So it causes CPU 2 to invalidate this
address from its cache, transitioning CPU 3’s cache line to the “exclusive” state. This

C.3. STORES RESULT IN UNNECESSARY STALLS                                                           695

ensures that CPU 3’s cache contains the only copy of the data at address 0, permitting
step 5.3 to complete CPU 3’s CAS, transitioning its cache line to the “modified” state.
Note that the data residing in memory at address 0 is now invalid.
    In step 6.1, CPU 1 commences a single-byte store to address 8, which must leave the
other seven bytes unchanged. CPU 1 must therefore load this data (either from CPU 0
or from memory), incurring a cache miss, loading the data into its cache (obtaining
the data from either CPU 0 or from memory), and transitioning that cache line directly
to the exclusive state, while at the same time invalidating CPU 0’s cache. This again
ensures that CPU 1’s cache contains the only copy of the data at address 8, permitting
step 6.2 to complete CPU 1’s store, transitioning its cache line to the “modified” state.
Note that the data residing in memory at both address 0 and address 8 is now invalid.
    In step 7.1, CPU 3 does another CAS operation on the data at address 0. However,
because its cache holds that data in the “modified” state, CPU 3 can immediately execute
that CAS without any change to cache or memory state.
    In step 8.1, CPU 1 loads the data at address 0, incurring a cache miss that is also
a write miss. Because the data from address 8 is modified in its cache, it must first
flush that data to memory, transitioning its cache line to “shared” state and causing the
memory at address 8 to once again become valid. Step 8.2 must obtain the value from
CPU 3, keeping in mind that the data in memory at address 0 is invalid. Both CPUs 1
and 3 transition their cache state to “shared”, and the contents of memory at address 0
remain invalid.
    Finally, in step 9.1, CPU 0 loads the data at address 0, but because this data is
already in its cache, the load completes without any change to cache or memory state.
    Note that we end with data in some of the CPU’s caches.
Quick Quiz C.6: What sequence of operations would put the CPUs’ caches all back into the
“invalid” state?

C.3        Stores Result in Unnecessary Stalls
Although the cache structure shown in Figure C.1 provides good performance for
repeated reads and writes from a given CPU to a given item of data, its performance
for the first write to a given cache line is quite poor. To see this, consider Figure C.4,
which shows a timeline of a write by CPU 0 to a cacheline held in CPU 1’s cache. Since
CPU 0 must wait for the cache line to arrive before it can write to it, CPU 0 must stall
for an extended period of time.3
    But there is no real reason to force CPU 0 to stall for so long—after all, regardless
of what data happens to be in the cache line that CPU 1 sends it, CPU 0 is going to
unconditionally overwrite it.

C.3.1       Store Buffers
One way to prevent this unnecessary stalling of writes is to add “store buffers” between
each CPU and its cache, as shown in Figure C.5. With the addition of these store buffers,
CPU 0 can simply record its write in its store buffer and continue executing. When the

     3 The time required to transfer a cache line from one CPU’s cache to another’s is typically

a few orders of magnitude more than that required to execute a simple register-to-register
instruction.

                              CPU 0                                 CPU 1

                         Write

                                               Invalidate

                          Stall
                                          Acknowledgement

                          Figure C.4: Writes See Unnecessary Stalls

cache line does finally make its way from CPU 1 to CPU 0, the data will be moved from
the store buffer to the cache line.
    Quick Quiz C.7: But then why do uniprocessors also have store buffers?

    Please note that the store buffer does not necessarily operate on full cache lines.
The reason for this is that a given store-buffer entry need only contain the value stored,
not the other data contained in the corresponding cache line. Which is a good thing,
because the CPU doing the store has no idea what that other data might be! But once
the corresponding cache line arrives, any values from the store buffer that update that
cache line can be merged into it, and the corresponding entries can then be removed
from the store buffer. Any other data in that cache line is of course left intact.
    Quick Quiz C.8: So store-buffer entries are variable length? Isn’t that difficult to implement
    in hardware?

    These store buffers are local to a given CPU or, on systems with hardware multi-
threading, local to a given core. Either way, a given CPU is permitted to access only the
store buffer assigned to it. For example, in Figure C.5, CPU 0 cannot access CPU 1’s
store buffer and vice versa. This restriction simplifies the hardware by separating
concerns: The store buffer improves performance for consecutive writes, while the
responsibility for communicating among CPUs (or cores, as the case may be) is fully
shouldered by the cache-coherence protocol. However, even given this restriction, there
are complications that must be addressed, which are covered in the next two sections.

C.3.2        Store Forwarding
To see the first complication, a violation of self-consistency, consider the following
code with variables “a” and “b” both initially zero, and with the cache line containing
variable “a” initially owned by CPU 1 and that containing “b” initially owned by CPU 0:

1    a = 1;
2    b = a + 1;
3    assert(b == 2);

C.3. STORES RESULT IN UNNECESSARY STALLS                                            697

                      CPU 0                                CPU 1

                           Store                                Store
                           Buffer                               Buffer

                      Cache                                Cache

                                      Interconnect

                                        Memory

                       Figure C.5: Caches With Store Buffers

    One would not expect the assertion to fail. However, if one were foolish enough to
use the very simple architecture shown in Figure C.5, one would be surprised. Such a
system could potentially see the following sequence of events:

   1 CPU 0 starts executing the a = 1.

   2 CPU 0 looks “a” up in the cache, and finds that it is missing.

   3 CPU 0 therefore sends a “read invalidate” message in order to get exclusive
     ownership of the cache line containing “a”.

   4 CPU 0 records the store to “a” in its store buffer.

   5 CPU 1 receives the “read invalidate” message, and responds by transmitting the
     cache line and removing that cacheline from its cache.

   6 CPU 0 starts executing the b = a + 1.

   7 CPU 0 receives the cache line from CPU 1, which still has a value of zero for “a”.

   8 CPU 0 loads “a” from its cache, finding the value zero.

   9 CPU 0 applies the entry from its store buffer to the newly arrived cache line,
     setting the value of “a” in its cache to one.

  10 CPU 0 adds one to the value zero loaded for “a” above, and stores it into the
     cache line containing “b” (which we will assume is already owned by CPU 0).

  11 CPU 0 executes assert(b == 2), which fails.

    The problem is that we have two copies of “a”, one in the cache and the other in the
store buffer.
    This example breaks a very important guarantee, namely that each CPU will always
see its own operations as if they happened in program order. Breaking this guarantee is

                         CPU 0                                 CPU 1

                              Store                                 Store
                              Buffer                                Buffer

                         Cache                                 Cache

                                         Interconnect

                                           Memory

                        Figure C.6: Caches With Store Forwarding

 violently counter-intuitive to software types, so much so that the hardware guys took
 pity and implemented “store forwarding”, where each CPU refers to (or “snoops”) its
 store buffer as well as its cache when performing loads, as shown in Figure C.6. In other
 words, a given CPU’s stores are directly forwarded to its subsequent loads, without
 having to pass through the cache.
     With store forwarding in place, item 8 in the above sequence would have found the
 correct value of 1 for “a” in the store buffer, so that the final value of “b” would have
 been 2, as one would hope.

 C.3.3       Store Buffers and Memory Barriers
 To see the second complication, a violation of global memory ordering, consider the
 following code sequences with variables “a” and “b” initially zero:

 1   void foo(void)
 2   {
 3           a = 1;
 4           b = 1;
 5   }
 6
 7   void bar(void)
 8   {
 9           while (b == 0) continue;
10           assert(a == 1);
11   }

     Suppose CPU 0 executes foo() and CPU 1 executes bar(). Suppose further that
 the cache line containing “a” resides only in CPU 1’s cache, and that the cache line
 containing “b” is owned by CPU 0. Then the sequence of operations might be as
 follows:
       1 CPU 0 executes a = 1. The cache line is not in CPU 0’s cache, so CPU 0 places
         the new value of “a” in its store buffer and transmits a “read invalidate” message.

 C.3. STORES RESULT IN UNNECESSARY STALLS                                                      699

        2 CPU 1 executes while (b == 0)continue, but the cache line containing “b”
          is not in its cache. It therefore transmits a “read” message.

        3 CPU 0 executes b = 1. It already owns this cache line (in other words, the cache
          line is already in either the “modified” or the “exclusive” state), so it stores the
          new value of “b” in its cache line.

        4 CPU 0 receives the “read” message, and transmits the cache line containing the
          now-updated value of “b” to CPU 1, also marking the line as “shared” in its own
          cache (but only after writing back the line containing “b” to main memory).

        5 CPU 1 receives the cache line containing “b” and installs it in its cache.

        6 CPU 1 can now finish executing while (b == 0)continue, and since it finds
          that the value of “b” is 1, it proceeds to the next statement.

        7 CPU 1 executes the assert(a == 1), and, since CPU 1 is working with the old
          value of “a”, this assertion fails.

        8 CPU 1 receives the “read invalidate” message, and transmits the cache line
          containing “a” to CPU 0 and invalidates this cache line from its own cache. But
          it is too late.

        9 CPU 0 receives the cache line containing “a” and applies the buffered store just
          in time to fall victim to CPU 1’s failed assertion.

     Quick Quiz C.9: In step 1 above, why does CPU 0 need to issue a “read invalidate” rather
     than a simple “invalidate”? After all, foo() will overwrite the variable a in any case, so why
     should it care about the old value of a?

     Quick Quiz C.10: In step 4 above, don’t systems avoid that store to memory?

     Quick Quiz C.11: In step 9 above, did bar() read a stale value from a, or did its reads of b
     and a get reordered?

     The hardware designers cannot help directly here, since the CPUs have no idea
 which variables are related, let alone how they might be related. Therefore, the hardware
 designers provide memory-barrier instructions to allow the software to tell the CPU
 about such relations. The program fragment must be updated to contain the memory
 barrier:

 1    void foo(void)
 2    {
 3            a = 1;
 4            smp_mb();
 5            b = 1;
 6    }
 7
 8    void bar(void)
 9    {
10            while (b == 0) continue;
11            assert(a == 1);
12    }

     The memory barrier smp_mb() will cause the CPU to flush its store buffer before
applying each subsequent store to its variable’s cache line. The CPU could either simply
stall until the store buffer was empty before proceeding, or it could use the store buffer to
hold subsequent stores until all of the prior entries in the store buffer had been applied.
     With this latter approach the sequence of operations might be as follows:
      1 CPU 0 executes a = 1. The cache line is not in CPU 0’s cache, so CPU 0 places
        the new value of “a” in its store buffer and transmits a “read invalidate” message.
      2 CPU 1 executes while (b == 0)continue, but the cache line containing “b”
        is not in its cache. It therefore transmits a “read” message.
      3 CPU 0 executes smp_mb(), and marks all current store-buffer entries (namely,
        the a = 1).
      4 CPU 0 executes b = 1. It already owns this cache line (in other words, the cache
        line is already in either the “modified” or the “exclusive” state), but there is a
        marked entry in the store buffer. Therefore, rather than store the new value of “b”
        in the cache line, it instead places it in the store buffer (but in an unmarked entry).
      5 CPU 0 receives the “read” message, and transmits the cache line containing the
        original value of “b” to CPU 1. It also marks its own copy of this cache line as
        “shared”.
      6 CPU 1 receives the cache line containing “b” and installs it in its cache.
      7 CPU 1 can now load the value of “b”, but since it finds that the value of “b” is
        still 0, it repeats the while statement. The new value of “b” is safely hidden in
        CPU 0’s store buffer.
      8 CPU 1 receives the “read invalidate” message, and transmits the cache line
        containing “a” to CPU 0 and invalidates this cache line from its own cache.
      9 CPU 0 receives the cache line containing “a” and applies the buffered store,
        placing this line into the “modified” state.
  10 Since the store to “a” was the only entry in the store buffer that was marked by
     the smp_mb(), CPU 0 can also store the new value of “b”—except for the fact
     that the cache line containing “b” is now in “shared” state.
  11 CPU 0 therefore sends an “invalidate” message to CPU 1.
  12 CPU 1 receives the “invalidate” message, invalidates the cache line containing
     “b” from its cache, and sends an “acknowledgement” message to CPU 0.
  13 CPU 1 executes while (b == 0)continue, but the cache line containing “b”
     is not in its cache. It therefore transmits a “read” message to CPU 0.
  14 CPU 0 receives the “acknowledgement” message, and puts the cache line contain-
     ing “b” into the “exclusive” state. CPU 0 now stores the new value of “b” into
     the cache line.
  15 CPU 0 receives the “read” message, and transmits the cache line containing the
     new value of “b” to CPU 1. It also marks its own copy of this cache line as
     “shared”.

C.4. STORE SEQUENCES RESULT IN UNNECESSARY STALLS                                       701

  16 CPU 1 receives the cache line containing “b” and installs it in its cache.

  17 CPU 1 can now load the value of “b”, and since it finds that the value of “b” is 1,
     it exits the while loop and proceeds to the next statement.

  18 CPU 1 executes the assert(a == 1), but the cache line containing “a” is no
     longer in its cache. Once it gets this cache from CPU 0, it will be working with
     the up-to-date value of “a”, and the assertion therefore passes.

 Quick Quiz C.12: After step 15 in Appendix C.3.3 on page 700, both CPUs might drop the
 cache line containing the new value of “b”. Wouldn’t that cause this new value to be lost?

    As you can see, this process involves no small amount of bookkeeping. Even
something intuitively simple, like “load the value of a” can involve lots of complex steps
in silicon.

C.4      Store Sequences Result in Unnecessary Stalls
Unfortunately, each store buffer must be relatively small, which means that a CPU
executing a modest sequence of stores can fill its store buffer (for example, if all of them
result in cache misses). At that point, the CPU must once again wait for invalidations
to complete in order to drain its store buffer before it can continue executing. This
same situation can arise immediately after a memory barrier, when all subsequent store
instructions must wait for invalidations to complete, regardless of whether or not these
stores result in cache misses.
    This situation can be improved by making invalidate acknowledge messages arrive
more quickly. One way of accomplishing this is to use per-CPU queues of invalidate
messages, or “invalidate queues”.

C.4.1     Invalidate Queues
One reason that invalidate acknowledge messages can take so long is that they must
ensure that the corresponding cache line is actually invalidated, and this invalidation
can be delayed if the cache is busy, for example, if the CPU is intensively loading and
storing data, all of which resides in the cache. In addition, if a large number of invalidate
messages arrive in a short time period, a given CPU might fall behind in processing
them, thus possibly stalling all the other CPUs.
    However, in real-world systems, the CPU might not actually invalidate the cache
line before sending the acknowledgement. It might instead queue the invalidate message
with the understanding that the message will be processed before the CPU sends any
further messages regarding that cache line.
 Quick Quiz C.13: How can the CPU possibly send the invalidate acknowledge before actually
 invalidating the corresponding cache line without wreaking all kinds of havoc, including
 different CPUs seeing multiple different values for the same variables at the same time???

C.4.2     Invalidate Queues and Invalidate Acknowledge
Figure C.7 shows a system with invalidate queues. A CPU with an invalidate queue may
acknowledge an invalidate message as soon as it is placed in the queue, instead of having

                       CPU 0                                 CPU 1

                            Store                                 Store
                            Buffer                                Buffer

                       Cache                                 Cache

                     Invalidate                            Invalidate
                       Queue                                 Queue

                                       Interconnect

                                         Memory

                     Figure C.7: Caches With Invalidate Queues

to wait until the corresponding line is actually invalidated. Of course, the CPU must refer
to its invalidate queue when preparing to transmit invalidation messages—if an entry
for the corresponding cache line is in the invalidate queue, the CPU cannot immediately
transmit the invalidate message; it must instead wait until the invalidate-queue entry has
been processed.
    Placing an entry into the invalidate queue is essentially a promise by the CPU to
process that entry before transmitting any MESI protocol messages regarding that cache
line. As long as the corresponding data structures are not highly contended, the CPU
will rarely be inconvenienced by such a promise.
    However, the fact that invalidate messages can be buffered in the invalidate queue
provides additional opportunity for memory-misordering, as discussed in the next
section.

C.4.3     Invalidate Queues and Memory Barriers

Let us suppose that CPUs queue invalidation requests, but respond to them immediately.
This approach minimizes the cache-invalidation latency seen by CPUs doing stores, but
can defeat memory barriers, as seen in the following example.
    Suppose the values of “a” and “b” are initially zero, that “a” is replicated read-only
(MESI “shared” state), and that “b” is owned by CPU 0 (MESI “exclusive” or “modified”
state). Then suppose that CPU 0 executes foo() while CPU 1 executes function bar()
in the following code fragment:

 C.4. STORE SEQUENCES RESULT IN UNNECESSARY STALLS                                              703

 1    void foo(void)
 2    {
 3            a = 1;
 4            smp_mb();
 5            b = 1;
 6    }
 7
 8    void bar(void)
 9    {
10            while (b == 0) continue;
11            assert(a == 1);
12    }

        Then the sequence of operations might be as follows:
        1 CPU 0 executes a = 1. The corresponding cache line is read-only in CPU 0’s
          cache, so CPU 0 places the new value of “a” in its store buffer and transmits an
          “invalidate” message in order to flush the corresponding cache line from CPU 1’s
          cache.
        2 CPU 1 executes while (b == 0)continue, but the cache line containing “b”
          is not in its cache. It therefore transmits a “read” message.
        3 CPU 1 receives CPU 0’s “invalidate” message, queues it, and immediately
          responds to it.
        4 CPU 0 receives the response from CPU 1, and is therefore free to proceed past
          the smp_mb() on line 4 above, moving the value of “a” from its store buffer to its
          cache line.
        5 CPU 0 executes b = 1. It already owns this cache line (in other words, the cache
          line is already in either the “modified” or the “exclusive” state), so it stores the
          new value of “b” in its cache line.
        6 CPU 0 receives the “read” message, and transmits the cache line containing the
          now-updated value of “b” to CPU 1, also marking the line as “shared” in its own
          cache.
        7 CPU 1 receives the cache line containing “b” and installs it in its cache.
        8 CPU 1 can now finish executing while (b == 0)continue, and since it finds
          that the value of “b” is 1, it proceeds to the next statement.
        9 CPU 1 executes the assert(a == 1), and, since the old value of “a” is still in
          CPU 1’s cache, this assertion fails.
      10 Despite the assertion failure, CPU 1 processes the queued “invalidate” message,
         and (tardily) invalidates the cache line containing “a” from its own cache.

     Quick Quiz C.14: In step 1 of the first scenario in Appendix C.4.3, why is an “invalidate” sent
     instead of a ”read invalidate” message? Doesn’t CPU 0 need the values of the other variables
     that share this cache line with “a”?

     There is clearly not much point in accelerating invalidation responses if doing
 so causes memory barriers to effectively be ignored. However, the memory-barrier

 instructions can interact with the invalidate queue, so that when a given CPU executes a
 memory barrier, it marks all the entries currently in its invalidate queue, and forces any
 subsequent load to wait until all marked entries have been applied to the CPU’s cache.
 Therefore, we can add a memory barrier to function bar as follows:

 1    void foo(void)
 2    {
 3            a = 1;
 4            smp_mb();
 5            b = 1;
 6    }
 7
 8    void bar(void)
 9    {
10            while (b == 0) continue;
11            smp_mb();
12            assert(a == 1);
13    }

     Quick Quiz C.15: Say what??? Why do we need a memory barrier here, given that the CPU
     cannot possibly execute the assert() until after the while loop completes?

       With this change, the sequence of operations might be as follows:

       1 CPU 0 executes a = 1. The corresponding cache line is read-only in CPU 0’s
         cache, so CPU 0 places the new value of “a” in its store buffer and transmits an
         “invalidate” message in order to flush the corresponding cache line from CPU 1’s
         cache.

       2 CPU 1 executes while (b == 0)continue, but the cache line containing “b”
         is not in its cache. It therefore transmits a “read” message.

       3 CPU 1 receives CPU 0’s “invalidate” message, queues it, and immediately
         responds to it.

       4 CPU 0 receives the response from CPU 1, and is therefore free to proceed past
         the smp_mb() on line 4 above, moving the value of “a” from its store buffer to its
         cache line.

       5 CPU 0 executes b = 1. It already owns this cache line (in other words, the cache
         line is already in either the “modified” or the “exclusive” state), so it stores the
         new value of “b” in its cache line.

       6 CPU 0 receives the “read” message, and transmits the cache line containing the
         now-updated value of “b” to CPU 1, also marking the line as “shared” in its own
         cache.

       7 CPU 1 receives the cache line containing “b” and installs it in its cache.

       8 CPU 1 can now finish executing while (b == 0)continue, and since it finds
         that the value of “b” is 1, it proceeds to the next statement, which is now a memory
         barrier.

       9 CPU 1 must now stall until it processes all pre-existing messages in its invalidation
         queue.

C.5. READ AND WRITE MEMORY BARRIERS                                                      705

  10 CPU 1 now processes the queued “invalidate” message, and invalidates the cache
     line containing “a” from its own cache.

  11 CPU 1 executes the assert(a == 1), and, since the cache line containing “a”
     is no longer in CPU 1’s cache, it transmits a “read” message.

  12 CPU 0 responds to this “read” message with the cache line containing the new
     value of “a”.

  13 CPU 1 receives this cache line, which contains a value of 1 for “a”, so that the
     assertion does not trigger.

    With much passing of MESI messages, the CPUs arrive at the correct answer. This
section illustrates why CPU designers must be extremely careful with their cache-
coherence optimizations. The key requirement is that the memory barriers provide the
appearance of ordering to the software. As long as these appearances are maintained, the
hardware can carry out whatever queueing, buffering, marking, stallings, and flushing
optimizations it likes.

Quick Quiz C.16: Instead of all of this marking of invalidation-queue entries and stalling of
loads, why not simply force an immediate flush of the invalidation queue?

C.5      Read and Write Memory Barriers
In the previous section, memory barriers were used to mark entries in both the store
buffer and the invalidate queue. But in our code fragment, foo() had no reason to do
anything with the invalidate queue, and bar() similarly had no reason to do anything
with the store buffer.
     Many CPU architectures therefore provide weaker memory-barrier instructions that
do only one or the other of these two. Roughly speaking, a “read memory barrier”
marks only the invalidate queue (and snoops entries in the store buffer) and a “write
memory barrier” marks only the store buffer, while a full-fledged memory barrier does
all of the above.
     The software-visible effect of these hardware mechanisms is that a read memory
barrier orders only loads on the CPU that executes it, so that all loads preceding the
read memory barrier will appear to have completed before any load following the read
memory barrier. Similarly, a write memory barrier orders only stores, again on the
CPU that executes it, and again so that all stores preceding the write memory barrier
will appear to have completed before any store following the write memory barrier. A
full-fledged memory barrier orders both loads and stores, but again only on the CPU
executing the memory barrier.

Quick Quiz C.17: But can’t full memory barriers impose global ordering? After all, isn’t that
needed to provide the ordering shown in Listing 12.27?

    If we update foo() and bar() to use read and write memory barriers, they appear
as follows:

 1   void foo(void)
 2   {
 3           a = 1;
 4           smp_wmb();
 5           b = 1;
 6   }
 7
 8   void bar(void)
 9   {
10           while (b == 0) continue;
11           smp_rmb();
12           assert(a == 1);
13   }

     Some computers have even more flavors of memory barriers, but understanding
 these three variants will provide a good introduction to memory barriers in general.

 C.6       Example Memory-Barrier Sequences
 This section presents some seductive but subtly broken uses of memory barriers.
 Although many of them will work most of the time, and some will work all the time
 on some specific CPUs, these uses must be avoided if the goal is to produce code that
 works reliably on all CPUs. To help us better see the subtle breakage, we first need to
 focus on an ordering-hostile architecture.

 C.6.1      Ordering-Hostile Architecture
 A number of ordering-hostile computer systems have been produced over the decades,
 but the nature of the hostility has always been extremely subtle, and understanding it
 has required detailed knowledge of the specific hardware. Rather than picking on a
 specific hardware vendor, and as a presumably attractive alternative to dragging the
 reader through detailed technical specifications, let us instead design a mythical but
 maximally memory-ordering-hostile computer architecture.4
     This hardware must obey the following ordering constraints [McK05a, McK05b]:
     1. Each CPU will always perceive its own memory accesses as occurring in program
        order.
     2. CPUs will reorder a given operation with a store only if the two operations are
        referencing different locations.
     3. All of a given CPU’s loads preceding a read memory barrier (smp_rmb()) will be
        perceived by all CPUs to precede any loads following that read memory barrier.
     4. All of a given CPU’s stores preceding a write memory barrier (smp_wmb()) will
        be perceived by all CPUs to precede any stores following that write memory
        barrier.

     4 Readers preferring a detailed look at real hardware architectures are encouraged to

 consult CPU vendors’ manuals [SW95, Adv02, Int02a, IBM94, LHF05, SPA94, Int04b,
 Int04a, Int04c], Gharachorloo’s dissertation [Gha95], Peter Sewell’s work [Sew], or the
 excellent hardware-oriented primer by Sorin, Hill, and Wood [SHW11].

C.6. EXAMPLE MEMORY-BARRIER SEQUENCES                                                            707

                                Node 0                                 Node 1
                       CPU 0          CPU 1                     CPU 2         CPU 3

                                Cache                                  Cache

                       CPU 0         CPU 1                     CPU 2           CPU 3
                      Message       Message                   Message         Message
                       Queue         Queue                     Queue           Queue

                                               Interconnect

                                                   Memory

                     Figure C.8: Example Ordering-Hostile Architecture

                                Listing C.1: Memory Barrier Example 1
                        CPU 0              CPU 1                      CPU 2
                     a = 1;
                     smp_wmb();      while (b == 0);
                     b = 1;          c = 1;                z = c;
                                                           smp_rmb();
                                                           x = a;
                                                           assert(z == 0 || x == 1);

    5. All of a given CPU’s accesses (loads and stores) preceding a full memory barrier
       (smp_mb()) will be perceived by all CPUs to precede any accesses following that
       memory barrier.

Quick Quiz C.18: Does the guarantee that each CPU sees its own memory accesses in order
also guarantee that each user-level thread will see its own memory accesses in order? Why or
why not?

    Imagine a large non-uniform cache architecture (NUCA) system that, in order to
provide fair allocation of interconnect bandwidth to CPUs in a given node, provided
per-CPU queues in each node’s interconnect interface, as shown in Figure C.8. Although
a given CPU’s accesses are ordered as specified by memory barriers executed by that
CPU, however, the relative order of a given pair of CPUs’ accesses could be severely
reordered, as we will see.5

C.6.2       Example 1
Listing C.1 shows three code fragments, executed concurrently by CPUs 0, 1, and 2.
Each of “a”, “b”, and “c” are initially zero.
     Suppose CPU 0 recently experienced many cache misses, so that its message queue
is full, but that CPU 1 has been running exclusively within the cache, so that its message

     5 Any real hardware architect or designer will no doubt be objecting strenuously, as they

just might be a bit upset about the prospect of working out which queue should handle a
message involving a cache line that both CPUs accessed, to say nothing of the many races
that this example poses. All I can say is “Give me a better example”.

                            Listing C.2: Memory Barrier Example 2
                    CPU 0          CPU 1                    CPU 2
                   a = 1;     while (a == 0);
                              smp_mb();            y = b;
                              b = 1;               smp_rmb();
                                                   x = a;
                                                   assert(y == 0 || x == 1);

                            Listing C.3: Memory Barrier Example 3
                      CPU 0                CPU 1                    CPU 2
             1   a = 1;
             2   smp_wmb();
             3   b = 1;             while (b == 0);      while (b == 0);
             4                      smp_mb();            smp_mb();
             5                      c = 1;               d = 1;
             6   while (c == 0);
             7   while (d == 0);
             8   smp_mb();
             9   e = 1;                                  assert(e == 0 || a == 1);

queue is empty. Then CPU 0’s assignment to “a” and “b” will appear in Node 0’s cache
immediately (and thus be visible to CPU 1), but will be blocked behind CPU 0’s prior
traffic. In contrast, CPU 1’s assignment to “c” will sail through CPU 1’s previously
empty queue. Therefore, CPU 2 might well see CPU 1’s assignment to “c” before it sees
CPU 0’s assignment to “a”, causing the assertion to fire, despite the memory barriers.
     Therefore, portable code cannot rely on this assertion not firing, as both the compiler
and the CPU can reorder the code so as to trip the assertion.
Quick Quiz C.19: Could this code be fixed by inserting a memory barrier between CPU 1’s
“while” and assignment to “c”? Why or why not?

C.6.3     Example 2
Listing C.2 shows three code fragments, executed concurrently by CPUs 0, 1, and 2.
Both “a” and “b” are initially zero.
     Again, suppose CPU 0 recently experienced many cache misses, so that its message
queue is full, but that CPU 1 has been running exclusively within the cache, so that its
message queue is empty. Then CPU 0’s assignment to “a” will appear in Node 0’s cache
immediately (and thus be visible to CPU 1), but will be blocked behind CPU 0’s prior
traffic. In contrast, CPU 1’s assignment to “b” will sail through CPU 1’s previously
empty queue. Therefore, CPU 2 might well see CPU 1’s assignment to “b” before it sees
CPU 0’s assignment to “a”, causing the assertion to fire, despite the memory barriers.
     In theory, portable code should not rely on this example code fragment, however, as
before, in practice it actually does work on most mainstream computer systems.

C.6.4     Example 3
Listing C.3 shows three code fragments, executed concurrently by CPUs 0, 1, and 2.
All variables are initially zero.
    Note that neither CPU 1 nor CPU 2 can proceed to line 5 until they see CPU 0’s
assignment to “b” on line 3. Once CPU 1 and 2 have executed their memory barriers on
line 4, they are both guaranteed to see all assignments by CPU 0 preceding its memory
barrier on line 2. Similarly, CPU 0’s memory barrier on line 8 pairs with those of

C.7. ARE MEMORY BARRIERS FOREVER?                                                            709

CPUs 1 and 2 on line 4, so that CPU 0 will not execute the assignment to “e” on line 9
until after its assignment to “b” is visible to both of the other CPUs. Therefore, CPU 2’s
assertion on line 9 is guaranteed not to fire.
Quick Quiz C.20: Suppose that lines 3–5 for CPUs 1 and 2 in Listing C.3 are in an interrupt
handler, and that the CPU 2’s line 9 runs at process level. In other words, the code in all three
columns of the table runs on the same CPU, but the first two columns run in an interrupt handler,
and the third column runs at process level, so that the code in third column can be interrupted
by the code in the first two columns. What changes, if any, are required to enable the code to
work correctly, in other words, to prevent the assertion from firing?

Quick Quiz C.21: If CPU 2 executed an assert(e==0||c==1) in the example in Listing C.3,
would this assert ever trigger?

    The Linux kernel’s synchronize_rcu() primitive uses an algorithm similar to
that shown in this example.

C.7      Are Memory Barriers Forever?
There have been a number of recent systems that are significantly less aggressive about
out-of-order execution in general and re-ordering memory references in particular. Will
this trend continue to the point where memory barriers are a thing of the past?
    The argument in favor would cite proposed massively multi-threaded hardware
architectures, so that each thread would wait until memory was ready, with tens,
hundreds, or even thousands of other threads making progress in the meantime. In such
an architecture, there would be no need for memory barriers, because a given thread
would simply wait for all outstanding operations to complete before proceeding to the
next instruction. Because there would be potentially thousands of other threads, the
CPU would be completely utilized, so no CPU time would be wasted.
    The argument against would cite the extremely limited number of applications
capable of scaling up to a thousand threads, as well as increasingly severe realtime
requirements, which are in the tens of microseconds for some applications. The
realtime-response requirements are difficult enough to meet as is, and would be even
more difficult to meet given the extremely low single-threaded throughput implied by
the massive multi-threaded scenarios.
    Another argument in favor would cite increasingly sophisticated latency-hiding
hardware implementation techniques that might well allow the CPU to provide the
illusion of fully sequentially consistent execution while still providing almost all of the
performance advantages of out-of-order execution. A counter-argument would cite the
increasingly severe power-efficiency requirements presented both by battery-operated
devices and by environmental responsibility.
    Who is right? We have no clue, so we are preparing to live with either scenario.

C.8      Advice to Hardware Designers
There are any number of things that hardware designers can do to make the lives of
software people difficult. Here is a list of a few such things that we have encountered in
the past, presented here in the hope that it might help prevent future such problems:

   1. I/O devices that ignore cache coherence.

       This charming misfeature can result in DMAs from memory missing recent
       changes to the output buffer, or, just as bad, cause input buffers to be overwritten
       by the contents of CPU caches just after the DMA completes. To make your
       system work in face of such misbehavior, you must carefully flush the CPU caches
       of any location in any DMA buffer before presenting that buffer to the I/O device.
       Otherwise, a store from one of the CPUs might not be accounted for in the data
       DMAed out through the device. This is a form of data corruption, which is an
       extremely serious bug.
       Similarly, you need to invalidate6 the CPU caches corresponding to any location
       in any DMA buffer after DMA to that buffer completes. Otherwise, a given CPU
       might see the old data still residing in its cache instead of the newly DMAed data
       that it was supposed to see. This is another form of data corruption.
       And even then, you need to be very careful to avoid pointer bugs, as even a
       misplaced read to an input buffer can result in corrupting the data input! One way
       to avoid this is to invalidate all of the caches of all of the CPUs once the DMA
       completes, but it is much easier and more efficient if the device DMA participates
       in the cache-coherence protocol, making all of this flushing and invalidating
       unnecessary.
   2. External busses that fail to transmit cache-coherence data.
       This is an even more painful variant of the above problem, but causes groups
       of devices—and even memory itself—to fail to respect cache coherence. It is
       my painful duty to inform you that as embedded systems move to multicore
       architectures, we will no doubt see a fair number of such problems arise. By
       the year 2021, there were some efforts to address these problems with new
       interconnect standards, with some debate as to how effective these standards will
       really be [Won19].

   3. Device interrupts that ignore cache coherence.
       This might sound innocent enough—after all, interrupts aren’t memory references,
       are they? But imagine a CPU with a split cache, one bank of which is extremely
       busy, therefore holding onto the last cacheline of the input buffer. If the
       corresponding I/O-complete interrupt reaches this CPU, then that CPU’s memory
       reference to the last cache line of the buffer could return old data, again resulting
       in data corruption, but in a form that will be invisible in a later crash dump. By
       the time the system gets around to dumping the offending input buffer, the DMA
       will most likely have completed.
   4. Inter-processor interrupts (IPIs) that ignore cache coherence.
       This can be problematic if the IPI reaches its destination before all of the cache
       lines in the corresponding message buffer have been committed to memory.
   5. Context switches that get ahead of cache coherence.
       If memory accesses can complete too wildly out of order, then context switches
       can be quite harrowing. If the task flits from one CPU to another before all the
       memory accesses visible to the source CPU make it to the destination CPU, then

  6 Why not flush? If there is a difference, then a CPU must have incorrectly stored to the

DMA buffer in the midst of the DMA operation.

C.8. ADVICE TO HARDWARE DESIGNERS                                                     711

     the task could easily see the corresponding variables revert to prior values, which
     can fatally confuse most algorithms.
  6. Overly kind simulators and emulators.
     It is difficult to write simulators or emulators that force memory re-ordering, so
     software that runs just fine in these environments can get a nasty surprise when it
     first runs on the real hardware. Unfortunately, it is still the rule that the hardware
     is more devious than are the simulators and emulators, but we hope that this
     situation changes.
  Again, we encourage hardware designers to avoid these practices!

