                                        The Answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, The
                                        Universe, and Everything.
                                         The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy, Douglas Adams

Appendix E

Answers to Quick Quizzes

E.1      How To Use This Book

Quick Quiz 1.1:                                                                        p.3
Where are the answers to the Quick Quizzes found?

Answer:
In Appendix E starting on page 735. Hey, I thought I owed you an easy one! ❑

Quick Quiz 1.2:                                                                 p.3
Some of the Quick Quiz questions seem to be from the viewpoint of the reader rather
than the author. Is that really the intent?

Answer:
Indeed it is! Many are questions that Paul E. McKenney would probably have asked if
he was a novice student in a class covering this material. It is worth noting that Paul was
taught most of this material by parallel hardware and software, not by professors. In
Paul’s experience, professors are much more likely to provide answers to verbal questions
than are parallel systems, recent advances in voice-activated assistants notwithstanding.
Of course, we could have a lengthy debate over which of professors or parallel systems
provide the most useful answers to these sorts of questions, but for the time being
let’s just agree that usefulness of answers varies widely across the population both of
professors and of parallel systems.
     Other quizzes are quite similar to actual questions that have been asked during
conference presentations and lectures covering the material in this book. A few others
are from the viewpoint of the author. ❑

Quick Quiz 1.3:                                                                        p.3
These Quick Quizzes are just not my cup of tea. What can I do about it?

Answer:
Here are a few possible strategies:

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
736                                        APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

   1. Just ignore the Quick Quizzes and read the rest of the book. You might miss out
      on the interesting material in some of the Quick Quizzes, but the rest of the book
      has lots of good material as well. This is an eminently reasonable approach if
      your main goal is to gain a general understanding of the material or if you are
      skimming through the book to find a solution to a specific problem.

   2. Look at the answer immediately rather than investing a large amount of time in
      coming up with your own answer. This approach is reasonable when a given
      Quick Quiz’s answer holds the key to a specific problem you are trying to solve.
      This approach is also reasonable if you want a somewhat deeper understanding of
      the material, but when you do not expect to be called upon to generate parallel
      solutions given only a blank sheet of paper.
   3. If you find the Quick Quizzes distracting but impossible to ignore, you can always
      clone the LATEX source for this book from the git archive.1 You can then run
      the command make nq, which will produce a perfbook-nq.pdf. This PDF
      contains unobtrusive boxed tags where the Quick Quizzes would otherwise be,
      and gathers each chapter’s Quick Quizzes at the end of that chapter in the classic
      textbook style.
   4. Learn to like (or at least tolerate) the Quick Quizzes. Experience indicates that
      quizzing yourself periodically while reading greatly increases comprehension
      and depth of understanding.

    Note that the quick quizzes are hyperlinked to the answers and vice versa. Click
either the “Quick Quiz” heading or the small black square to move to the beginning of
the answer. From the answer, click on the heading or the small black square to move to
the beginning of the quiz, or, alternatively, click on the small white square at the end of
the answer to move to the end of the corresponding quiz. ❑

Quick Quiz 1.4:                                                                    p.3
If passively reading this book doesn’t get me full problem-solving and code-production
capabilities, what on earth is the point???

Answer:
For those preferring analogies, coding concurrent software is similar to playing music
in that there are good uses for many different levels of talent and skill. Not everyone
needs to devote their entire live to becoming a concert pianist. In fact, for every such
virtuoso, there are a great many lesser pianists whose of music is welcomed by their
friends and families. But these lesser pianists are probably doing something else to
support themselves, and so it is with concurrent coding.
    One potential benefit of passively reading this book is the ability to read and
understand modern concurrent code. This ability might in turn permit you to:

   1. See what the concurrent code does so that you can check to see if a proposed use
      case is valid.
   2. Chase down a bug in concurrent code.

   1 See Section 1.6 for instructions to do this.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.2. INTRODUCTION                                                                             737

   3. Use information in the concurrent code base to more easily chase down a bug in
      other code interacting with that code base.
   4. Produce a fix for a bug in concurrent code.

   5. Create a straightforward feature in a concurrent code base, whether coding by
      hand from scratch or using the modern “copy-pasta” development methodology
      involving downloading code from Internet.2

    If you are proficient with straightforward uses of locks and atomic operations,
passively reading this book should enable you to successfully apply modern concurrency
techniques.
    And finally, if your job is to coordinate the activities of developers making use of
modern concurrency techniques, passively reading this book might help you understand
what on earth they are talking about. ❑

E.2       Introduction

 Quick Quiz 2.1:                                                              p.11
 Come on now!!! Parallel programming has been known to be exceedingly hard for
 many decades. You seem to be hinting that it is not so hard. What sort of game are
 you playing?

Answer:
If you really believe that parallel programming is exceedingly hard, then you should have
a ready answer to the question “Why is parallel programming hard?” One could list any
number of reasons, ranging from deadlocks to race conditions to testing coverage, but
the real answer is that it is not really all that hard. After all, if parallel programming was
really so horribly difficult, how could a large number of open-source projects, ranging
from Apache to MySQL to the Linux kernel, have managed to master it?
     A better question might be: “Why is parallel programming perceived to be so
difficult?” To see the answer, let’s go back to the year 1991. Paul McKenney was
walking across the parking lot to Sequent’s benchmarking center carrying six dual-80486
Sequent Symmetry CPU boards, when he suddenly realized that he was carrying several
times the price of the house he had just purchased.3 This high cost of parallel systems
meant that parallel programming was restricted to a privileged few who worked for
an employer who either manufactured or could afford to purchase machines costing
upwards of $100,000—in 1991 dollars US.
     In contrast, in 2020, Paul finds himself typing these words on a six-core x86 laptop.
Unlike the dual-80486 CPU boards, this laptop also contains 64 GB of main memory, a
1 TB solid-state disk, a display, Ethernet, USB ports, wireless, and Bluetooth. And the
laptop is more than an order of magnitude cheaper than even one of those dual-80486
CPU boards, even before taking inflation into account.
     Parallel systems have truly arrived. They are no longer the sole domain of a
privileged few, but something available to almost everyone.

    2 But be careful of copyright and licensing issues!
    3 Yes, this sudden realization did cause him to walk quite a bit more carefully. Why do

you ask?

                                                                                                    v2025.12.18a
738                                      APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

   The earlier restricted availability of parallel hardware is the real reason that parallel
programming is considered so difficult. After all, it is quite difficult to learn to program
even the simplest machine if you have no access to it. Since the age of rare and
expensive parallel machines is for the most part behind us, the age during which parallel
programming is perceived to be mind-crushingly difficult is coming to a close.4 ❑

 Quick Quiz 2.2:                                                           p.11
 How could parallel programming ever be as easy as sequential programming?

Answer:
It depends on the programming environment. SQL [Int92] is an underappreciated
success story, as it permits programmers who know nothing about parallelism to keep a
large parallel system productively busy. We can expect more variations on this theme as
parallel computers continue to become cheaper and more readily available. For example,
one possible contender in the scientific and technical computing arena is MATLAB*P,
which is an attempt to automatically parallelize common matrix operations.
    Finally, on Linux and UNIX systems, consider the following shell command:

           get_input | grep "interesting" | sort

    This shell pipeline runs the get_input, grep, and sort processes in parallel.
There, that wasn’t so hard, now was it?
    In short, parallel programming is just as easy as sequential programming—at least
in those environments that hide the parallelism from the user! ❑

 Quick Quiz 2.3:                                                               p.11
 Oh, really??? What about correctness, maintainability, robustness, and so on?

Answer:
These are important goals, but they are just as important for sequential programs as they
are for parallel programs. Therefore, important though they are, they do not belong on a
list specific to parallel programming. ❑

Quick Quiz 2.4:                                                            p.11
And if correctness, maintainability, and robustness don’t make the list, why do
productivity and generality?

Answer:
Given that parallel programming is perceived to be much harder than sequential
programming, productivity is paramount and therefore must not be omitted. Furthermore,
high-productivity parallel-programming environments such as SQL serve a specific
purpose, hence generality must also be added to the list. ❑

   4 Parallel programming is in some ways more difficult than sequential programming, for

example, parallel validation is more difficult. But no longer mind-crushingly difficult.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.2. INTRODUCTION                                                                      739

 Quick Quiz 2.5:                                                             p.11
 Given that parallel programs are much harder to prove correct than are sequential
 programs, again, shouldn’t correctness really be on the list?

Answer:
From an engineering standpoint, the difficulty in proving correctness, either formally or
informally, would be important insofar as it impacts the primary goal of productivity.
So, in cases where correctness proofs are important, they are subsumed under the
“productivity” rubric. ❑

 Quick Quiz 2.6:                                                                     p.11
 What about just having fun?

Answer:
Having fun is important as well, but, unless you are a hobbyist, would not normally be a
primary goal. On the other hand, if you are a hobbyist, go wild! ❑

 Quick Quiz 2.7:                                                        p.12
 Are there no cases where parallel programming is about something other than
 performance?

Answer:
There certainly are cases where the problem to be solved is inherently parallel, for
example, Monte Carlo methods and some numerical computations. Even in these cases,
however, there will be some amount of extra work managing the parallelism.
    Parallelism is also sometimes used for reliability. For but one example, triple-modulo
redundancy has three systems run in parallel and vote on the result. In extreme cases,
the three systems will be independently implemented using different algorithms and
technologies. ❑

 Quick Quiz 2.8:                                                                  p.12
 Why not instead rewrite programs from inefficient scripting languages to C or C++?

Answer:
If the developers, budget, and time is available for such a rewrite, and if the result will
attain the required levels of performance on a single CPU, this can be a reasonable
approach. ❑

 Quick Quiz 2.9:                                                                  p.13
 Why all this prattling on about non-technical issues??? And not just any non-technical
 issue, but productivity of all things? Who cares?

Answer:
If you are a pure hobbyist, perhaps you don’t need to care. But even pure hobbyists
will often care about how much they can get done, and how quickly. After all, the
most popular hobbyist tools are usually those that are the best suited for the job, and an
important part of the definition of “best suited” involves productivity. And if someone
is paying you to write parallel code, they will very likely care deeply about your

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
740                                  APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

productivity. And if the person paying you cares about something, you would be most
wise to pay at least some attention to it!
    Besides, if you really didn’t care about productivity, you would be doing it by hand
rather than using a computer! ❑

Quick Quiz 2.10:                                                             p.14
Given how cheap parallel systems have become, how can anyone afford to pay people
to program them?

Answer:
There are a number of answers to this question:

   1. Given a large computational cluster of parallel machines, the aggregate cost of
      the cluster can easily justify substantial developer effort, because the development
      cost can be spread over the large number of machines.

   2. Popular software that is run by tens of millions of users can easily justify substantial
      developer effort, as the cost of this development can be spread over the tens of
      millions of users. Note that this includes things like kernels and system libraries.

   3. If the low-cost parallel machine is controlling the operation of a valuable piece of
      equipment, then the cost of this piece of equipment might easily justify substantial
      developer effort.

   4. If the software for the low-cost parallel machine produces an extremely valuable
      result (e.g., energy savings), then this valuable result might again justify substantial
      developer cost.

   5. Safety-critical systems protect lives, which can clearly justify very large developer
      effort.

   6. Hobbyists and researchers might instead seek knowledge, experience, fun, or
      glory.

So it is not the case that the decreasing cost of hardware renders software worthless, but
rather that it is no longer possible to “hide” the cost of software development within the
cost of the hardware, at least not unless there are extremely large quantities of hardware.
❑

Quick Quiz 2.11:                                                               p.15
SQL??? That is ancient history. Here in the 2020s, if you really want to make good
use of a large parallel system, why not use machine learning?

Answer:
It certainly is the case that machine learning can keep many large parallel systems busy!
However, the jury is still out as to whether this constitutes good use of those systems. ❑

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
E.2. INTRODUCTION                                                                       741

Quick Quiz 2.12:                                                        p.16
This is a ridiculously unachievable ideal! Why not focus on something that is
achievable in practice?

Answer:
This is eminently achievable. The cellphone is a computer that can be used to make
phone calls and to send and receive text messages with little or no programming or
configuration on the part of the end user.
    This might seem to be a trivial example at first glance, but if you consider it carefully
you will see that it is both simple and profound. When we are willing to sacrifice
generality, we can achieve truly astounding increases in productivity. Those who indulge
in excessive generality will therefore fail to set the productivity bar high enough to
succeed near the top of the software stack. This fact of life even has its own acronym:
YAGNI, or “You Ain’t Gonna Need It.” ❑

Quick Quiz 2.13:                                                                p.18
Wait a minute! Doesn’t this approach simply shift the development effort from you to
whoever wrote the existing parallel software you are using?

Answer:
Exactly! And that is the whole point of using existing software. One team’s work can
be used by many other teams, resulting in a large decrease in overall effort compared to
all teams needlessly reinventing the wheel. ❑

Quick Quiz 2.14:                                                          p.18
What other bottlenecks might prevent additional CPUs from providing additional
performance?

Answer:
There are any number of potential bottlenecks:

   1. Main memory. If a single thread consumes all available memory, additional
      threads will simply page themselves silly.

   2. Cache. If a single thread’s cache footprint completely fills any shared CPU
      cache(s), then adding more threads will simply thrash those affected caches, as
      will be seen in Chapter 10.

   3. Memory bandwidth. If a single thread consumes all available memory band-
      width, additional threads will simply result in additional queuing on the system
      interconnect.

   4. I/O bandwidth. If a single thread is I/O bound, adding more threads will simply
      result in them all waiting in line for the affected I/O resource.

    Specific hardware systems might have any number of additional bottlenecks. The
fact is that every resource which is shared between multiple CPUs or threads is a
potential bottleneck. ❑

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
742                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

 Quick Quiz 2.15:                                                              p.20
 Other than CPU cache capacity, what might require limiting the number of concurrent
 threads?

Answer:
There are any number of potential limits on the number of threads:

   1. Main memory. Each thread consumes some memory (for its stack if nothing else),
      so that excessive numbers of threads can exhaust memory, resulting in excessive
      paging or memory-allocation failures.

   2. I/O bandwidth. If each thread initiates a given amount of mass-storage I/O
      or networking traffic, excessive numbers of threads can result in excessive I/O
      queuing delays, again degrading performance. Some networking protocols may
      be subject to timeouts or other failures if there are so many threads that networking
      events cannot be responded to in a timely fashion.

   3. Synchronization overhead. For many synchronization protocols, excessive
      numbers of threads can result in excessive spinning, blocking, or rollbacks, thus
      degrading performance.

    Specific applications and platforms may have any number of additional limiting
factors. ❑

Quick Quiz 2.16:                                                                      p.21
Just what is “explicit timing”???

Answer:
Where each thread is given access to some set of resources during an agreed-to slot
of time. For example, a parallel program with eight threads might be organized into
eight-millisecond time intervals, so that the first thread is given access during the first
millisecond of each interval, the second thread during the second millisecond, and so
on. This approach clearly requires carefully synchronized clocks and careful control of
execution times, and therefore should be used with considerable caution.
    In fact, outside of hard realtime environments, you almost certainly want to use
something else instead. Explicit timing is nevertheless worth a mention, as it is always
there when you need it. ❑

Quick Quiz 2.17:                                                                   p.22
That sounds like a difficult tradeoff. Just how are developers supposed to resolve it???

Answer:
Testing different partitioning schemes on the available hardware is often the best approach.
But don’t forget about the possibility of substituting replication for partitioning, as will
be shown in Section 10.3. ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.2. INTRODUCTION                                                                     743

Quick Quiz 2.18:                                                                    p.23
Are there any other obstacles to parallel programming?

Answer:
There are a great many other potential obstacles to parallel programming. Here are a
few of them:

   1. The only known algorithms for a given project might be inherently sequential in
      nature. In this case, either avoid parallel programming (there being no law saying
      that your project has to run in parallel) or invent a new parallel algorithm.
   2. The project allows binary-only plugins that share the same address space, such
      that no one developer has access to all of the source code for the project. Because
      many parallel bugs, including deadlocks, are global in nature, such binary-only
      plugins pose a severe challenge to current software development methodologies.
      This might well change, but for the time being, all developers of parallel code
      sharing a given address space need to be able to see all of the code running in
      that address space.
   3. The project contains heavily used APIs that were designed without regard to
      parallelism [AGH+ 11a, CKZ+ 13]. Some of the more ornate features of the
      System V message-queue API form a case in point. Of course, if your project has
      been around for a few decades, and its developers did not have access to parallel
      hardware, it undoubtedly has at least its share of such APIs.
   4. The project was implemented without regard to parallelism. Given that there are a
      great many techniques that work extremely well in a sequential environment, but
      that fail miserably in parallel environments, if your project ran only on sequential
      hardware for most of its lifetime, then your project undoubtably has at least its
      share of parallel-unfriendly code.
   5. The project was implemented without regard to good software-development
      practice. The cruel truth is that shared-memory parallel environments are
      often much less forgiving of sloppy development practices than are sequential
      environments. You may be well-served to clean up the existing design and code
      prior to attempting parallelization.
   6. The people who originally did the development on your project have since moved
      on, and the people remaining, while well able to maintain it or add small features,
      are unable to make “big animal” changes. In this case, unless you can work out a
      very simple way to parallelize your project, you will probably be best off leaving
      it sequential. That said, there are a number of simple approaches that you might
      use to parallelize your project, including running multiple instances of it, using a
      parallel implementation of some heavily used library function, or making use of
      some other parallel project, such as a database.

    One can argue that many of these obstacles are non-technical in nature, but that
does not make them any less real. In short, parallelization of a large body of code can
be a large and complex effort. As with any large and complex effort, it makes sense to
do your homework beforehand. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
744                                  APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

E.3      Hardware and its Habits

Quick Quiz 3.1:                                                                   p.25
Why should parallel programmers bother learning low-level properties of the hardware?
Wouldn’t it be easier, better, more elegant, and more productive to remain at a higher
level of abstraction?

Answer:
It is often easier to ignore the detailed properties of the hardware, and higher levels of
abstraction can greatly improve productivity. But those of us working with low-level
concurrent software would be quite foolish to ignore those properties.
     After all, if you accept that the only purpose of parallelism is to increase performance,
and if you further accept that performance depends on detailed properties of the hardware,
then it logically follows that parallel programmers are going to need to know at least a
few hardware properties.
     This is also the case in most engineering disciplines. Would you want to use a
bridge designed by an engineer who did not understand the properties of the concrete
and steel making up that bridge? If not, why would you expect a parallel programmer to
be able to develop competent parallel software without at least some understanding of
the underlying hardware?
     In short, you might not care about the laws of physics, but the laws of physics cares
deeply about your code! ❑

Quick Quiz 3.2:                                                              p.30
What types of machines would allow atomic operations on multiple data elements?

Answer:
One answer to this question is that it is often possible to pack multiple elements of data
into a single machine word, which can then be manipulated atomically.
    A more trendy answer would be machines supporting transactional memory [Lom77,
Kni86, HM93]. By early 2014, several mainstream systems provided limited hardware
transactional memory implementations, the ups and downs of which are covered in
more detail in Section 17.3. The jury is also still out on the applicability of software
transactional memory [MMW07, PW07, RHP+ 07, CBM+ 08, DFGG11, MS12], which
is covered in Section 17.2. ❑

Quick Quiz 3.3:                                                              p.31
But what does this have to do with scaling workloads across a multi-core CPU???

Answer:
In many cases, quite a bit! For example, on a system with hyperthreaded cores, the
hardware threads sharing a core also share its functional units, which can result in yet
another form of contention that can limit scalability. For another example, the whole
point of having an impressive array of functional units is to support instruction-level
parallelism, that is, intra-CPU concurrency and thus scalability. ❑

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
E.3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS                                                           745

Quick Quiz 3.4:                                                           p.33
Given a long thermal warmup or cooldown period and a fixed workload, why would
ambient temperature matter?

Answer:
Yes, a fixed workload running at a fixed CPU core clock frequency might well generate
a constant flow of heat, give or take the many challenges one faces when creating
thermal models of CPUs. However, the lower the ambient temperature, the more quickly
heat flows from the CPU to the surrounding environment. This in turn, coupled with
constant flow of heat, means that lower ambient temperatures will result in lower CPU
temperatures, and thus less thermal throttling. Therefore, a given benchmark might well
yield higher performance at night or during winter, that is, when ambient temperatures
tend to be lower. ❑

Quick Quiz 3.5:                                                                      p.33
So have CPU designers also greatly reduced the overhead of cache misses?

Answer:
Unfortunately, not so much. There has been some reduction given constant numbers of
CPUs, but the finite speed of light and the atomic nature of matter limits their ability to
reduce cache-miss overhead for larger systems. Section 3.3 discusses some possible
avenues for possible future progress. ❑

Quick Quiz 3.6:                                                                p.37
This is a simplified sequence of events? How could it possibly be any more complex?

Answer:
This sequence ignored a number of possible complications, including:

   1. Other CPUs might be concurrently attempting to perform memory-reference
      operations involving this same cacheline.

   2. The cacheline might have been replicated read-only in several CPUs’ caches, in
      which case, it would need to be flushed from their caches.

   3. CPU 6 might have been operating on the cache line when the request for it arrived,
      in which case CPU 6 might need to hold off the request until its own operation
      completed.

   4. CPU 6 might have ejected the cacheline from its cache (for example, in order
      to make room for other data), so that by the time that the request arrived, the
      cacheline was on its way to memory.

   5. A correctable error might have occurred in the cacheline, which would then need
      to be corrected at some point before the data was used.

    Production-quality cache-coherence mechanisms are extremely complicated due to
these sorts of considerations [HP95, CSG99, MHS12, SHW11]. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
746                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

 Quick Quiz 3.7:                                                                   p.37
 Why is it necessary to flush the cacheline from CPU 6’s cache?

Answer:
If the cacheline was not flushed from CPU 6’s cache, then CPUs 1 and 6 might have
different values for the same set of variables in the cacheline. This sort of incoherence
greatly complicates parallel software, which is why wise hardware architects avoid it. ❑

 Quick Quiz 3.8:                                                             p.39
 Table 3.1 shows CPU 0 sharing a core with CPU 224. However, isn’t it more logical
 for CPU 0 to share a core with CPU 1 instead of CPU 224???
Answer:
It is easy to be sympathetic to this view, but the file /sys/devices/system/cpu/
cpu0/cache/index0/shared_cpu_list really does contain the string 0,224. There-
fore, CPU 0’s hyperthread twin really is CPU 224. Some people speculate that this
numbering allows naive applications and schedulers to perform better, citing the fact
that on many workloads the second hyperthread does not provide a huge amount of
additional performance. This speculation assumes that naive applications and schedulers
would utilize CPUs in numerical order, leaving aside the weaker hyperthread twin CPUs
until all cores are in use. ❑

 Quick Quiz 3.9:                                                              p.39
 Surely the hardware designers could be persuaded to improve this situation! Why
 have they been content with such abysmal performance for these single-instruction
 operations?

Answer:
The hardware designers have been working on this problem, and have consulted with
no less a luminary than the late physicist Stephen Hawking. Hawking’s observation was
that the hardware designers have two basic problems [Gar07]:

   1. The finite speed of light, and

   2. The atomic nature of matter.

    The first problem limits raw speed, and the second limits miniaturization, which
in turn limits frequency. And even this sidesteps the power-consumption issue that is
currently limiting production frequencies to well below 10 GHz.
    In addition, Table 3.1 on page 38 represents a reasonably large system with no fewer
than 448 hardware threads. Smaller systems often achieve better latency, as may be seen
in Table E.1, which represents a much smaller system with only 16 hardware threads.
A similar view is provided by the rows of Table 3.1 down to and including the two
“Off-Core” rows.
    Furthermore, newer small-scale single-socket systems such as the laptop on which I
am typing this also have more reasonable latencies, as can be seen in Table E.2.
    Alternatively, a 64-CPU system in the mid 1990s had cross-interconnect latencies
in excess of five microseconds, so even the eight-socket 448-hardware-thread monster
shown in Table 3.1 represents more than a five-fold improvement over its 25-years-prior
counterparts.

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS                                                    747

Table E.1: Performance of Synchronization Mechanisms on 16-CPU 2.8 GHz Intel
    X5550 (Nehalem) System
                                                                  Ratio
                Operation               Cost (ns)          (cost/clock)
                Clock period                    0.4                   1.0
                Same-CPU
                  CAS                          12.2                  33.8
                  lock                         25.6                  71.2
                On-Core
                  Blind CAS                    12.9                  35.8
                  CAS                           7.0                  19.4
                Off-Core
                   Blind CAS                   31.2                  86.6
                   CAS                         31.2                  86.5
                Off-Socket
                   Blind CAS                   92.4              256.7
                   CAS                         95.9              266.4
                Off-System
                   Comms Fabric          2,600                7,220
                   Global Comms    195,000,000          542,000,000

Table E.2: CPU 0 View of Synchronization Mechanisms on 12-CPU Intel Core
    i7-8750H CPU @ 2.20 GHz
                                                             Ratio
            Operation              Cost (ns)          (cost/clock)     CPUs
            Clock period                0.5                   1.0
            Same-CPU                                                        0
              CAS                       6.2                  13.6
              lock                     13.5                  29.6
            On-Core                                                         6
              Blind CAS                 6.5                  14.3
              CAS                      16.2                  35.6
            Off-Core                                                     1–5
               Blind CAS               22.2                  48.8       7–11
               CAS                     53.6                 117.9
            Off-System
               Comms Fabric          5,000            11,000
               Global Comms    195,000,000       429,000,000

                                                                                      v2025.12.18a
748                                    APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

    Integration of hardware threads in a single core and multiple cores on a die have
improved latencies greatly, at least within the confines of a single core or single die.
There has been some improvement in overall system latency, but only by about a factor
of two. Unfortunately, neither the speed of light nor the atomic nature of matter has
changed much in the past few years [Har16]. Therefore, spatial and temporal locality
are first-class concerns for concurrent software, even when running on relatively small
systems.
    Section 3.3 looks at what else hardware designers might be able to do to ease the
plight of parallel programmers. ❑

Quick Quiz 3.10:                                                                p.39
Table E.1 in the answer to Quick Quiz 3.9 on page 747 says that on-core CAS is faster
than both of same-CPU CAS and on-core blind CAS. What is happening there?

Answer:
I was surprised by the data I obtained and did a rigorous check of their validity. I got the
same result persistently. One theory that might explain the observation would be: The
two threads in the core are able to overlap their accesses, while the single CPU must
do everything sequentially. Unfortunately, there seems to be no public documentation
explaining why the Intel X5550 (Nehalem) system behaved like that. ❑

Quick Quiz 3.11:                                                            p.40
These numbers are insanely large! How can I possibly get my head around them?

Answer:
Get a roll of toilet paper. In the USA, each roll will normally have somewhere around
350–500 sheets. Tear off one sheet to represent a single clock cycle, setting it aside.
Now unroll the rest of the roll.
    The resulting pile of toilet paper will likely represent a single CAS cache miss.
    For the more-expensive inter-system communications latencies, use several rolls (or
multiple cases) of toilet paper to represent the communications latency.
    Important safety tip: Make sure to account for the needs of those you live with when
appropriating toilet paper, especially in 2020 or during a similar time when store shelves
are free of toilet paper and much else besides.
    Furthermore, for those working on kernel code, a CPU disabling interrupts across a
cache miss is analogous to you holding your breath while unrolling a roll of toilet paper.
How many rolls of toilet paper can you unroll while holding your breath? You might
wish to avoid disabling interrupts across that many cache misses.5 ❑

Quick Quiz 3.12:                                                                  p.42
But individual electrons don’t move anywhere near that fast, even in conductors!!!
The electron drift velocity in a conductor under semiconductor voltage levels is on the
order of only one millimeter per second. What gives???

Answer:
Electron drift velocity tracks the long-term movement of individual electrons. It turns
out that individual electrons bounce around quite randomly, so that their instantaneous

   5 Kudos to Matthew Wilcox for this holding-breath analogy.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.3. HARDWARE AND ITS HABITS                                                            749

speed is very high, but over the long term, they don’t move very far. In this, electrons
resemble long-distance commuters, who might spend most of their time traveling at full
highway speed, but over the long term go nowhere. These commuters’ speed might be
70 miles per hour (113 kilometers per hour), but their long-term drift velocity relative
to the planet’s surface is zero.
    Therefore, we should pay attention not to the electrons’ drift velocity, but to their
instantaneous velocities. However, even their instantaneous velocities are nowhere
near a significant fraction of the speed of light. Nevertheless, the measured velocity of
electric waves in conductors is a substantial fraction of the speed of light, so we still
have a mystery on our hands.
    The other trick is that electrons interact with each other at significant distances (from
an atomic perspective, anyway), courtesy of their negative charge. This interaction is
carried out by photons, which do move at the speed of light. So even with electricity’s
electrons, it is photons doing most of the fast footwork.
    Extending the commuter analogy, a driver might use a smartphone to inform other
drivers of an accident or congestion, thus allowing a change in traffic flow to propagate
much faster than the instantaneous velocity of the individual cars. Summarizing the
analogy between electricity and traffic flow:

   1. The (very low) drift velocity of an electron is similar to the long-term velocity of
      a commuter, both being very nearly zero.
   2. The (still rather low) instantaneous velocity of an electron is similar to the
      instantaneous velocity of a car in traffic. Both are much higher than the drift
      velocity, but quite small compared to the rate at which changes propagate.
   3. The (much higher) propagation velocity of an electric wave is primarily due to
      photons transmitting electromagnetic force among the electrons. Similarly, traffic
      patterns can change quite quickly due to communication among drivers. Not that
      this is necessarily of much help to the drivers already stuck in traffic, any more
      than it is to the electrons already pooled in a given capacitor.

    To fully understand this topic, study electrodynamics. ❑

Quick Quiz 3.13:                                                           p.46
Given that distributed-systems communication is so horribly expensive, why does
anyone bother with such systems?

Answer:
There are a number of reasons:

   1. Shared-memory multiprocessor systems have strict size limits. If you need more
      than a few thousand CPUs, you have no choice but to use a distributed system.
   2. Large shared-memory systems tend to be more expensive per unit computation
      than their smaller counterparts.
   3. Large shared-memory systems tend to have much longer cache-miss latencies
      than do smaller system. To see this, compare Table 3.1 on page 38 with Table E.2.
   4. The distributed-systems communications operations do not necessarily use much
      CPU, so that computation can proceed in parallel with message transfer.

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
750                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

   5. Many important problems are “embarrassingly parallel”, so that extremely large
      quantities of processing may be enabled by a very small number of messages.
      SETI@HOME [Uni08b] was but one example of such an application. These sorts
      of applications can make good use of networks of computers despite extremely
      long communications latencies.

     Thus, large shared-memory systems tend to be used for applications that benefit
from faster latencies than can be provided by distributed computing, and particularly for
those applications that benefit from a large shared memory.
     It is likely that continued work on parallel applications will increase the number
of embarrassingly parallel applications that can run well on machines and/or clusters
having long communications latencies, reductions in cost being the driving force that
it is. That said, greatly reduced hardware latencies would be an extremely welcome
development, both for single-system and for distributed computing. And such reductions
are in fact happening, albeit rather slowly from the perspective of those of us who lived
through the exponential CPU-clock-frequency increases up to the early 2000s. ❑

Quick Quiz 3.14:                                                              p.46
OK, if we are going to have to apply distributed-programming techniques to shared-
memory parallel programs, why not just always use these distributed techniques and
dispense with shared memory?

Answer:
Because it is often the case that only a small fraction of the program is performance-
critical. Shared-memory parallelism allows us to focus distributed-programming
techniques on that small fraction, allowing simpler shared-memory techniques to be
used on the non-performance-critical bulk of the program. ❑

E.4      Tools of the Trade

Quick Quiz 4.1:                                                               p.49
You call these tools??? They look more like low-level synchronization primitives to
me!
Answer:
They look that way because they are in fact low-level synchronization primitives. And
they are in fact the fundamental tools for building low-level concurrent software. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.2:                                                                      p.50
But this silly shell script isn’t a real parallel program! Why bother with such trivia???

Answer:
Because you should never forget the simple stuff!
   Please keep in mind that the title of this book is “Is Parallel Programming Hard,
And, If So, What Can You Do About It?”. One of the most effective things you can do
about it is to avoid forgetting the simple stuff! After all, if you choose to do parallel
programming the hard way, you have no one but yourself to blame. ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.4. TOOLS OF THE TRADE                                                                 751

Quick Quiz 4.3:                                                                     p.50
Is there a simpler way to create a parallel shell script? If so, how? If not, why not?

Answer:
One straightforward approach is the shell pipeline:

  grep $pattern1 | sed -e 's/a/b/' | sort

    For a sufficiently large input file, grep will pattern-match in parallel with sed editing
and with the input processing of sort. See the file parallel.sh for a demonstration
of shell-script parallelism and pipelining. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.4:                                                                  p.50
But if script-based parallel programming is so easy, why bother with anything else?

Answer:
In fact, it is quite likely that a very large fraction of parallel programs in use today are
script-based. However, script-based parallelism does have its limitations:

   1. Creation of new processes is usually quite heavyweight, involving the expensive
      fork() and exec() system calls.

   2. Sharing of data, including pipelining, typically involves expensive file I/O.

   3. The reliable synchronization primitives available to scripts also typically involve
      expensive file I/O.

   4. Scripting languages are often too slow, but are often quite useful when coordi-
      nating execution of long-running programs written in lower-level programming
      languages.

These limitations require that script-based parallelism use coarse-grained parallelism,
with each unit of work having execution time of at least tens of milliseconds, and
preferably much longer.
    Those requiring finer-grained parallelism are well advised to think hard about their
problem to see if it can be expressed in a coarse-grained form. If not, they should
consider using other parallel-programming environments, such as those discussed in
Section 4.2. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.5:                                                          p.52
Why does this wait() primitive need to be so complicated? Why not just make it
work like the shell-script wait does?

Answer:
Some parallel applications need to take special action when specific children exit, and
therefore need to wait for each child individually. In addition, some parallel applications
need to detect the reason that the child died. As we saw in Listing 4.2, it is not hard to
build a waitall() function out of the wait() function, but it would be impossible to
do the reverse. Once the information about a specific child is lost, it is lost. ❑

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
752                                  APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 4.6:                                                                         p.52
Isn’t there a lot more to fork() and wait() than discussed here?

Answer:
Indeed there is, and it is quite possible that this section will be expanded in future
versions to include messaging features (such as UNIX pipes, TCP/IP, and shared file
I/O) and memory mapping (such as mmap() and shmget()). In the meantime, there
are any number of textbooks that cover these primitives in great detail, and the truly
motivated can read man pages, existing parallel applications using these primitives, as
well as the source code of the Linux-kernel implementations themselves.
    It is important to note that the parent process in Listing 4.3 waits until after the child
terminates to do its printf(). Using printf()’s buffered I/O concurrently to the
same file from multiple processes is non-trivial, and is best avoided. If you really need
to do concurrent buffered I/O, consult the documentation for your OS. For UNIX/Linux
systems, Stewart Weiss’s lecture notes provide a good introduction with informative
examples [Wei13]. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.7:                                                         p.53
If the mythread() function in Listing 4.4 can simply return, why bother with
pthread_exit()?

Answer:
In this simple example, there is no reason whatsoever. However, imagine a more
complex example, where mythread() invokes other functions, possibly separately
compiled. In such a case, pthread_exit() allows these other functions to end the
thread’s execution without having to pass some sort of error return all the way back up
to mythread(). ❑

Quick Quiz 4.8:                                                                  p.54
If the C language makes no guarantees in presence of a data race, then why does the
Linux kernel have so many data races? Are you trying to tell me that the Linux kernel
is completely broken???

Answer:
Ah, but the Linux kernel is written in a carefully selected superset of the C language
that includes special GNU extensions, such as asms, that permit safe execution even
in presence of data races. In addition, the Linux kernel does not run on a number of
platforms where data races would be especially problematic. For an example, consider
embedded systems with 32-bit pointers and 16-bit busses. On such a system, a data
race involving a store to and a load from a given pointer might well result in the load
returning the low-order 16 bits of the old value of the pointer concatenated with the
high-order 16 bits of the new value of the pointer.
    Nevertheless, even in the Linux kernel, data races can be quite dangerous and should
be avoided where feasible [Cor12]. ❑

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
E.4. TOOLS OF THE TRADE                                                           753

Quick Quiz 4.9:                                                                  p.54
What if I want several threads to hold the same lock at the same time?

Answer:
The first thing you should do is to ask yourself why you would want to do such a thing.
If the answer is “because I have a lot of data that is read by many threads, and only
occasionally updated”, then POSIX reader-writer locks might be what you are looking
for. These are introduced in Section 4.2.4.
    Another way to get the effect of multiple threads holding the same lock is for one
thread to acquire the lock, and then use pthread_create() to create the other threads.
The question of why this would ever be a good idea is left to the reader. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.10:                                                           p.54
Why not simply make the argument to lock_reader() on line 6 of Listing 4.5 be a
pointer to a pthread_mutex_t?

Answer:
Because we will need to pass lock_reader() to pthread_create(). Although we
could cast the function when passing it to pthread_create(), function casts are quite
a bit uglier and harder to get right than are simple pointer casts. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.11:                                                         p.54
What is the READ_ONCE() on lines 20 and 47 and the WRITE_ONCE() on line 47 of
Listing 4.5?

Answer:
These macros constrain the compiler so as to prevent it from carrying out optimizations
that would be problematic for concurrently accessed shared variables. They don’t
constrain the CPU at all, other than by preventing reordering of accesses to a given
single variable. Note that this single-variable constraint does apply to the code shown
in Listing 4.5 because only the variable x is accessed.
    For more information on READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE(), please see Sec-
tion 4.2.5. For more information on ordering accesses to multiple variables by
multiple threads, please see Chapter 15. In the meantime, READ_ONCE(x) has much in
common with the GCC intrinsic __atomic_load_n(&x, __ATOMIC_RELAXED) and
WRITE_ONCE(x, v) has much in common with the GCC intrinsic __atomic_store_
n(&x, v, __ATOMIC_RELAXED). ❑

Quick Quiz 4.12:                                                             p.54
Writing four lines of code for each acquisition and release of a pthread_mutex_t
sure seems painful! Isn’t there a better way?

Answer:
Indeed! And for that reason, the pthread_mutex_lock() and pthread_mutex_
unlock() primitives are normally wrapped in functions that do this error checking.
Later on, we will wrap them with the Linux kernel spin_lock() and spin_unlock()
APIs. ❑

                                                                                          v2025.12.18a
754                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 4.13:                                                              p.56
Is “x = 0” the only possible output from the code fragment shown in Listing 4.6? If
so, why? If not, what other output could appear, and why?

Answer:
No. The reason that “x = 0” was output was that lock_reader() acquired the lock
first. Had lock_writer() instead acquired the lock first, then the output would have
been “x = 3”. However, because the code fragment started lock_reader() first and
because this run was performed on a multiprocessor, one would normally expect lock_
reader() to acquire the lock first. Nevertheless, there are no guarantees, especially on
a busy system. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.14:                                                                p.57
Using different locks could cause quite a bit of confusion, what with threads seeing
each others’ intermediate states. So should well-written parallel programs restrict
themselves to using a single lock in order to avoid this kind of confusion?

Answer:
Although it is sometimes possible to write a program using a single global lock that both
performs and scales well, such programs are exceptions to the rule. You will normally
need to use multiple locks to attain good performance and scalability.
    One possible exception to this rule is “transactional memory”, which is currently a
research topic. Transactional-memory semantics can be loosely thought of as those of a
single global lock with optimizations permitted and with the addition of rollback [Boe09].
❑

Quick Quiz 4.15:                                                               p.57
In the code shown in Listing 4.7, is lock_reader() guaranteed to see all the values
produced by lock_writer()? Why or why not?

Answer:
No. On a busy system, lock_reader() might be preempted for the entire duration of
lock_writer()’s execution, in which case it would not see any of lock_writer()’s
intermediate states for x. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.16:                                                                p.57
Wait a minute here!!! Listing 4.6 didn’t initialize shared variable x, so why does it
need to be initialized in Listing 4.7?

Answer:
See line 4 of Listing 4.5. Because the code in Listing 4.6 ran first, it could rely on
the compile-time initialization of x. The code in Listing 4.7 ran next, so it had to
re-initialize x. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.4. TOOLS OF THE TRADE                                                                    755

 Quick Quiz 4.17:                                                             p.59
 Instead of using READ_ONCE() everywhere, why not just declare goflag as volatile
 on line 10 of Listing 4.8?

Answer:
A volatile declaration is in fact a reasonable alternative in this particular case.
However, use of READ_ONCE() has the benefit of clearly flagging to the reader that
goflag is subject to concurrent reads and updates. Note that READ_ONCE() is especially
useful in cases where most of the accesses are protected by a lock (and thus not subject
to change), but where a few of the accesses are made outside of the lock. Using a
volatile declaration in this case would make it harder for the reader to note the special
accesses outside of the lock, and would also make it harder for the compiler to generate
good code under the lock. ❑

 Quick Quiz 4.18:                                                             p.59
 READ_ONCE() only affects the compiler, not the CPU. Don’t we also need memory
 barriers to make sure that the change in goflag’s value propagates to the CPU in a
 timely fashion in Listing 4.8?

Answer:
No, memory barriers are not needed and won’t help here. Memory barriers only enforce
ordering among multiple memory references: They absolutely do not guarantee to
expedite the propagation of data from one part of the system to another.6 This leads to a
quick rule of thumb: You do not need memory barriers unless you are using more than
one variable to communicate between multiple threads.
    But what about nreadersrunning? Isn’t that a second variable used for communi-
cation? Indeed it is, and there really are the needed memory-barrier instructions buried
in __sync_fetch_and_add(), which make sure that the thread proclaims its presence
before checking to see if it should start. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.19:                                                              p.59
Would it ever be necessary to use READ_ONCE() when accessing a per-thread variable,
for example, a variable declared using GCC’s __thread storage class?

Answer:
It depends. If the per-thread variable was accessed only from its thread, and never from
a signal handler, then no. Otherwise, it is quite possible that READ_ONCE() is needed.
We will see examples of both situations in Section 5.4.4.
    This leads to the question of how one thread can gain access to another thread’s
__thread variable, and the answer is that the second thread must store a pointer to
its __thread variable somewhere that the first thread has access to. One common
approach is to maintain a linked list with one element per thread, and to store the address
of each thread’s __thread variable in the corresponding element. ❑

    6 There have been persistent rumors of hardware in which memory barriers actually do

expedite propagation of data, but no confirmed sightings.

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
756                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 4.20:                                                                      p.60
Isn’t comparing against single-CPU throughput a bit harsh?

Answer:
Not at all. In fact, this comparison was, if anything, overly lenient. A more balanced
comparison would be against single-CPU throughput with the locking primitives
commented out. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.21:                                                                 p.60
But one microsecond is not a particularly small size for a critical section. What do I
do if I need a much smaller critical section, for example, one containing only a few
instructions?

Answer:
If the data being read never changes, then you do not need to hold any locks while
accessing it. If the data changes sufficiently infrequently, you might be able to checkpoint
execution, terminate all threads, change the data, then restart at the checkpoint.
    Another approach is to keep a single exclusive lock per thread, so that a thread
read-acquires the larger aggregate reader-writer lock by acquiring its own lock, and
write-acquires by acquiring all the per-thread locks [HW92]. This can work quite well
for readers, but causes writers to incur increasingly large overheads as the number of
threads increases.
    Some other ways of efficiently handling very small critical sections are described in
Chapter 9. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.22:                                                                p.60
The system used is a few years old, and new hardware should be faster. So why should
anyone worry about reader-writer locks being slow?

Answer:
In general, newer hardware is improving. However, it will need to improve several
orders of magnitude to permit reader-writer lock to achieve ideal performance on 448
CPUs. Worse yet, the greater the number of CPUs, the larger the required performance
improvement. The performance problems of reader-writer locking are therefore very
likely to be with us for quite some time to come. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.23:                                                                      p.60
Is it really necessary to have both sets of primitives?

Answer:
Strictly speaking, no. One could implement any member of the second set using the
corresponding member of the first set. For example, one could implement __sync_
nand_and_fetch() in terms of __sync_fetch_and_nand() as follows:

  tmp = v;
  ret = __sync_fetch_and_nand(p, tmp);
  ret = ~ret & tmp;

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.4. TOOLS OF THE TRADE                                                                757

   It is similarly possible to implement __sync_fetch_and_add(), __sync_fetch_
and_sub(), and __sync_fetch_and_xor() in terms of their post-value counterparts.
   However, the alternative forms can be quite convenient, both for the programmer
and for the compiler/library implementor. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.24:                                                                p.61
Given that these atomic operations will often be able to generate single atomic
instructions that are directly supported by the underlying instruction set, shouldn’t
they be the fastest possible way to get things done?

Answer:
Unfortunately, no. See Chapter 5 for some stark counterexamples. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.25:                                                                      p.61
What happened to ACCESS_ONCE()?

Answer:
In the 2018 v4.15 release, the Linux kernel’s ACCESS_ONCE() was replaced by READ_
ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE() for reads and writes, respectively [Cor12, Cor14a, Rut17].
ACCESS_ONCE() was introduced as a helper in RCU code, but was promoted to core API
soon afterward [McK07b, Tor08]. Linux kernel’s READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE()
have evolved into complex forms that look quite different than the original ACCESS_
ONCE() implementation due to the need to support access-once semantics for large
structures, but with the possibility of load/store tearing if the structure cannot be loaded
and stored with a single machine instruction. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.26:                                                                      p.65
What happened to the Linux-kernel equivalents to fork() and wait()?

Answer:
They don’t really exist. All tasks executing within the Linux kernel share memory, at
least unless you want to do a huge amount of memory-mapping work by hand. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.27:                                                         p.66
What problems could occur if the variable counter were incremented without the
protection of mutex?

Answer:
On CPUs with load-store architectures, incrementing counter might compile into
something like the following:

  LOAD counter,r0
  INC r0
  STORE r0,counter

    On such machines, two threads might simultaneously load the value of counter,
each increment it, and each store the result. The new value of counter will then only
be one greater than before, despite two threads each incrementing it. ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
758                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 4.28:                                                                     p.67
What is wrong with loading Listing 4.14’s global_ptr up to three times?

Answer:
Suppose that global_ptr is initially non-NULL, but that some other thread sets global_
ptr to NULL. Suppose further that line 1 of the transformed code (Listing 4.15) executes
just before global_ptr is set to NULL and line 2 just after. Then line 1 will conclude
that global_ptr is non-NULL, line 2 will conclude that it is less than high_address,
so that line 3 passes do_low() a NULL pointer, which do_low() just might not be
prepared to deal with.
    Your editor made exactly this mistake in the DYNIX/ptx kernel’s memory allocator
in the early 1990s. Tracking down the bug consumed a holiday weekend not just for
your editor, but also for several of his colleagues. In short, this is not a new problem,
nor is it likely to go away on its own. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.29:                                                     p.69
Why does it matter whether do_something() and do_something_else() in List-
ing 4.18 are inline functions?

Answer:
Because gp is not a static variable, if either do_something() or do_something_
else() were separately compiled, the compiler would have to assume that either or
both of these two functions might change the value of gp. This possibility would force
the compiler to reload gp on line 15, thus avoiding the NULL-pointer dereference. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.30:                                                                p.71
Ouch! So can’t the compiler invent a store to a normal variable pretty much any time
it likes?

Answer:
Thankfully, the answer is no. This is because the compiler is forbidden from introducing
data races. The case of inventing a store just before a normal store is quite special:
It is not possible for some other entity, be it CPU, thread, signal handler, or interrupt
handler, to be able to see the invented store unless the code already has a data race, even
without the invented store. And if the code already has a data race, it already invokes
the dreaded spectre of undefined behavior, which allows the compiler to generate pretty
much whatever code it wants, regardless of the wishes of the developer.
     But if the original store is volatile, as in WRITE_ONCE(), for all the compiler knows,
there might be a side effect associated with the store that could signal some other thread,
allowing data-race-free access to the variable. By inventing the store, the compiler
might be introducing a data race, which it is not permitted to do.
     Furthermore, in Listing 4.21, the address of that variable is passed to do_a_bunch_
of_stuff(). If the compiler can see this function’s definition, and notes that a is
unconditionally stored to without any synchronization operations, then the compiler can
be quite sure that it is not introducing a data race in this case.
     In the case of volatile and atomic variables, the compiler is specifically forbidden
from inventing writes. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.4. TOOLS OF THE TRADE                                                                759

Quick Quiz 4.31:                                                                  p.74
But aren’t full memory barriers very heavyweight? Isn’t there a cheaper way to enforce
the ordering needed in Listing 4.29?

Answer:
As is often the case, the answer is “it depends”. However, if only two threads are accessing
the status and other_task_ready variables, then the smp_store_release() and
smp_load_acquire() functions discussed in Section 4.3.5 will suffice. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.32:                                                                  p.76
What needs to happen if an interrupt or signal handler might itself be interrupted?

Answer:
Then that interrupt handler must follow the same rules that are followed by other
interrupted code. Only those handlers that cannot be themselves interrupted or that
access no variables shared with an interrupting handler may safely use plain accesses,
and even then only if those variables cannot be concurrently accessed by some other
CPU or thread. ❑

Quick Quiz 4.33:                                                             p.77
How could you work around the lack of a per-thread-variable API on systems that do
not provide it?

Answer:
One approach would be to create an array indexed by smp_thread_id(), and another
would be to use a hash table to map from smp_thread_id() to an array index—which
is in fact what this set of APIs does in pthread environments.
     Another approach would be for the parent to allocate a structure containing fields
for each desired per-thread variable, then pass this to the child during thread creation.
However, this approach can impose large software-engineering costs in large systems.
To see this, imagine if all global variables in a large system had to be declared in a
single file, regardless of whether or not they were C static variables! ❑

Quick Quiz 4.34:                                                                p.78
What do you do if you need a per-thread (not per-CPU!) variable in the Linux kernel?

Answer:
First, needing a per-thread variable is less likely than you might think. Per-CPU
variables can often do a per-thread variable’s job. For example, if you only need to
do addition, bitwise AND, bitwise OR, exchange, or compare-and-exchange, then the
this_cpu_add(), this_cpu_add_return(), this_cpu_and(), this_cpu_or(),
this_cpu_xchg(), this_cpu_cmpxchg(), and this_cpu_cmpxchg_double() op-
erations, respectively, will do the job cheaply and atomically with respect to context
switches, interrupt handlers, and softirq handlers, but not non-maskable interrupts.
    Second, within a preemption-disabled region of code, for example, one surrounded
by the preempt_disable() and preempt_enable() macros, the current task is
guaranteed to remain executing on the current CPU. Therefore, while within one
such region, any series of accesses to per-CPU variables is atomic with respect to

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
760                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

context switches, though not with respect to interrupt handlers, softirq handlers, and
non-maskable interrupts. But please be aware that a preemption-disabled region of
code that runs for more than a few microseconds will not be looked upon with favor by
people attempting to construct real-time systems.
    Third, a field added to the task_struct structure acts as set of per-task variables.
However, there are those who keep a close eye on the size of this structure, and these
people are likely to ask hard questions about the need for any added fields. Therefore,
if your field is being added for some facility that is only built into some kernels, you
should definitely place your new task_struct fields under an appropriate #ifdef.
    Fourth and finally, your per-task variable might instead be located in some other
structure and protected by some synchronization mechanism that is already in use. For
example, if your code must hold a given lock, can accesses to this storage instead be
protected by that lock? The fact that this is at the end of the list notwithstanding, you
should look into this possibility first, not last! ❑

Quick Quiz 4.35:                                                                     p.78
Wouldn’t the shell normally use vfork() rather than fork()?

Answer:
It might well do that, however, checking is left as an exercise for the reader. But in the
meantime, I hope that we can agree that vfork() is a variant of fork(), so that we
can use fork() as a generic term covering both. ❑

E.5      Counting

Quick Quiz 5.1:                                                            p.81
Why should efficient and scalable counting be hard??? After all, computers have
special hardware for the sole purpose of doing counting!!!

Answer:
Because the straightforward counting algorithms, for example, atomic operations on
a shared counter, either are slow and scale badly, or are inaccurate, as will be seen in
Section 5.1. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.2:                                                               p.81
Network-packet counting problem. Suppose that you need to collect statistics on the
number of networking packets transmitted and received. Packets might be transmitted
or received by any CPU on the system. Suppose further that your system is capable
of handling millions of packets per second per CPU, and that a systems-monitoring
package reads the count every five seconds. How would you implement this counter?

Answer:
Hint: The act of updating the counter must be blazingly fast, but because the counter is
read out only about once in five million updates, the act of reading out the counter can be
quite slow. In addition, the value read out normally need not be all that accurate—after
all, since the counter is updated a thousand times per millisecond, we should be able to

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.5. COUNTING                                                                           761

work with a value that is within a few thousand counts of the “true value”, whatever
“true value” might mean in this context. However, the value read out should maintain
roughly the same absolute error over time. For example, a 1 % error might be just fine
when the count is on the order of a million or so, but might be absolutely unacceptable
once the count reaches a trillion. See Section 5.2. ❑

 Quick Quiz 5.3:                                                                   p.81
 Approximate structure-allocation limit problem. Suppose that you need to maintain
 a count of the number of structures allocated in order to fail any allocations once the
 number of structures in use exceeds a limit (say, 10,000). Suppose further that the
 structures are short-lived, the limit is rarely exceeded, and a “sloppy” approximate
 limit is acceptable.

Answer:
Hint: The act of updating the counter must again be blazingly fast, but the counter is
read out each time that the counter is increased. However, the value read out need not
be accurate except that it must distinguish approximately between values below the limit
and values greater than or equal to the limit. See Section 5.3. ❑

 Quick Quiz 5.4:                                                                        p.81
 Exact structure-allocation limit problem. Suppose that you need to maintain a
 count of the number of structures allocated in order to fail any allocations once the
 number of structures in use exceeds an exact limit (again, say 10,000). Suppose further
 that these structures are short-lived, and that the limit is rarely exceeded, that there is
 almost always at least one structure in use, and suppose further still that it is necessary
 to know exactly when this counter reaches zero, for example, in order to free up some
 memory that is not required unless there is at least one structure in use.

Answer:
Hint: The act of updating the counter must once again be blazingly fast, but the counter
is read out each time that the counter is increased. However, the value read out need not
be accurate except that it absolutely must distinguish perfectly between values between
the limit and zero on the one hand, and values that either are less than or equal to zero
or are greater than or equal to the limit on the other hand. See Section 5.4. ❑

 Quick Quiz 5.5:                                                                   p.81
 Removable I/O device access-count problem. Suppose that you need to maintain a
 reference count on a heavily used removable mass-storage device, so that you can tell
 the user when it is safe to remove the device. As usual, the user indicates a desire to
 remove the device, and the system tells the user when it is safe to do so.

Answer:
Hint: Yet again, the act of updating the counter must be blazingly fast and scalable
in order to avoid slowing down I/O operations, but because the counter is read out
only when the user wishes to remove the device, the counter read-out operation can be
extremely slow. Furthermore, there is no need to be able to read out the counter at all
unless the user has already indicated a desire to remove the device. In addition, the
value read out need not be accurate except that it absolutely must distinguish perfectly
between non-zero and zero values, and even then only when the device is in the process

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
762                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

of being removed. However, once it has read out a zero value, it must act to keep the
value at zero until it has taken some action to prevent subsequent threads from gaining
access to the device being removed. See Section 5.4.6. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.6:                                                                p.82
One thing that could be simpler is ++ instead of that concatenation of READ_ONCE()
and WRITE_ONCE(). Why all that extra typing???

Answer:
See Section 4.3.4.1 on page 67 for more information on how the compiler can cause
trouble, as well as how READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE() can avoid this trouble. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.7:                                                                p.82
But can’t a smart compiler prove that line 5 of Listing 5.1 is equivalent to the ++
operator and produce an x86 add-to-memory instruction? And won’t the CPU cache
cause this to be atomic?

Answer:
Although the ++ operator could be atomic, there is no requirement that it be so unless it
is applied to a C11 _Atomic variable. And indeed, in the absence of _Atomic, GCC
often chooses to load the value to a register, increment the register, then store the value
to memory, which is decidedly non-atomic.
     Furthermore, note the volatile casts in READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE(), which
tell the compiler that the location might well be an MMIO device register. Because
MMIO registers are not cached, it would be unwise for the compiler to assume that the
increment operation is atomic. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.8:                                                                   p.82
The 8-figure accuracy on the number of failures indicates that you really did test this.
Why would it be necessary to test such a trivial program, especially when the bug is
easily seen by inspection?

Answer:
Not only are there very few trivial parallel programs, and most days I am not so sure
that there are many trivial sequential programs, either.
     No matter how small or simple the program, if you haven’t tested it, it does not work.
And even if you have tested it, Murphy’s Law says that there will be at least a few bugs
still lurking.
    Furthermore, while proofs of correctness certainly do have their place, they never
will replace testing, including the counttorture.h test setup used here. After all,
proofs are only as good as the assumptions that they are based on. Finally, proofs can
be every bit as buggy as are programs! ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.5. COUNTING                                                                         763

Quick Quiz 5.9:                                                                  p.83
Why doesn’t the horizontal dashed line on the x axis meet the diagonal line at 𝑥 = 1?

Answer:
Because of the overhead of the atomic operation. The dashed line on the x axis
represents the overhead of a single non-atomic increment. After all, an ideal algorithm
would not only scale linearly, it would also incur no performance penalty compared to
single-threaded code.
     This level of idealism may seem severe, but if it is good enough for Linus Torvalds,
it is good enough for you. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.10:                                                                   p.83
But atomic increment is still pretty fast. And incrementing a single variable in a tight
loop sounds pretty unrealistic to me, after all, most of the program’s execution should
be devoted to actually doing work, not accounting for the work it has done! Why
should I care about making this go faster?

Answer:
In many cases, atomic increment will in fact be fast enough for you. In those cases, you
should by all means use atomic increment.
    That said, there are many real-world situations where more elaborate counting
algorithms are required. The canonical example of such a situation is counting packets
and bytes in highly optimized networking stacks, where it is all too easy to find much
of the execution time going into these sorts of accounting tasks, especially on large
multiprocessors. In fact, some workers defined the “configuration that outperforms a
single thread” (COST), finding that a surprisingly large number of threads are often
required to outperform a single thread [MIM15]. In other words, this is not a trivial
matter and it is not likely to go away without concerted effort.
    In short, as noted at the beginning of this chapter, counting provides an excellent
view of the issues encountered in shared-memory parallel programs. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.11:                                                                  p.84
But why can’t CPU designers simply ship the addition operation to the data, avoiding
the need to circulate the cache line containing the global variable being incremented?

Answer:
It might well be possible to do this in some cases. However, there are a few complications:

   1. If the value of the variable is required, then the thread will be forced to wait for
      the operation to be shipped to the data, and then for the result to be shipped back.

   2. If the atomic increment must be ordered with respect to prior and/or subsequent
      operations, then the thread will be forced to wait for the operation to be shipped
      to the data, and for an indication that the operation completed to be shipped back.

   3. Shipping operations among CPUs will likely require more lines in the system
      interconnect, which will consume more die area and more electrical power.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
764                                        APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

                       CPU 0            CPU 1               CPU 2            CPU 3
                       Cache            Cache               Cache            Cache
                            Interconnect                         Interconnect

                      Memory              System Interconnect               Memory

                            Interconnect                         Interconnect
                       Cache            Cache               Cache            Cache
                       CPU 4            CPU 5               CPU 6            CPU 7

         Figure E.1: Data Flow For Global Combining-Tree Atomic Increment

But what if neither of the first two conditions holds? Then you should think carefully
about the algorithms discussed in Section 5.2, which achieve near-ideal performance on
commodity hardware.
     If either or both of the first two conditions hold, there is some hope for improved
hardware. One could imagine the hardware implementing a combining tree, so that the
increment requests from multiple CPUs are combined by the hardware into a single
addition when the combined request reaches the hardware. The hardware could also
apply an order to the requests, thus returning to each CPU the return value corresponding
to its particular atomic increment. This results in instruction latency that varies as
O (log 𝑁), where 𝑁 is the number of CPUs, as shown in Figure E.1. Some say that a
few CPUs with this sort of hardware optimization were in production use in the 1990s
and started to reappear in 2011.7
     This is a great improvement over the O (𝑁) performance of current hardware
shown in Figure 5.2, and it is possible that hardware latencies might decrease further
if innovations such as three-dimensional fabrication prove practical. Nevertheless, we
will see that in some important special cases, software can do much better. ❑

 Quick Quiz 5.12:                                                                              p.85
 But doesn’t the fact that C’s “integers” are limited in size complicate things?

Answer:
No, because modulo addition is still commutative and associative. At least as long as
you use unsigned integers. Recall that in the C standard, overflow of signed integers
results in undefined behavior, never mind the fact that machines that do anything other
than wrap on overflow are quite rare these days. Unfortunately, compilers frequently
carry out optimizations that assume that signed integers will not overflow, so if your
code allows signed integers to overflow, you can run into trouble even on modern
twos-complement hardware.
    That said, one potential source of additional complexity arises when attempting
to gather (say) a 64-bit sum from 32-bit per-thread counters. Dealing with this added
complexity is left as an exercise for the reader, for whom some of the techniques
introduced later in this chapter could be quite helpful. ❑
    7 The first reader to send a citable reference confirming or invalidating this statement

will be mentioned in a future version of this footnote.

                                                                                                      v2025.12.18a
E.5. COUNTING                                                                          765

Quick Quiz 5.13:                                                                      p.85
An array??? But doesn’t that limit the number of threads?

Answer:
It can, and in this toy implementation, it does. But it is not that hard to come up with an
alternative implementation that permits an arbitrary number of threads, for example,
using C11’s _Thread_local facility, as shown in Section 5.2.3. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.14:                                                                      p.86
What other nasty optimizations could GCC apply?

Answer:
See Sections 4.3.4.1 and 15.4 for more information. One nasty optimization would be
to apply common subexpression elimination to successive calls to the read_count()
function, which might come as a surprise to code expecting changes in the values
returned from successive calls to that function. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.15:                                                                      p.86
How does the per-thread counter variable in Listing 5.3 get initialized?

Answer:
The C standard specifies that the initial value of global variables is zero, unless they are
explicitly initialized, thus implicitly initializing all the instances of counter to zero.
Besides, in the common case where the user is interested only in differences between
consecutive reads from statistical counters, the initial value is irrelevant. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.16:                                                                      p.86
How is the code in Listing 5.3 supposed to permit more than one counter?

Answer:
Indeed, this toy example does not support more than one counter. Modifying it so that it
can provide multiple counters is left as an exercise to the reader. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.17:                                                                p.86
The read operation takes time to sum up the per-thread values, and during that
time, the counter could well be changing. This means that the value returned by
read_count() in Listing 5.3 will not necessarily be exact. Assume that the counter is
being incremented at rate 𝑟 counts per unit time, and that read_count()’s execution
consumes 𝛥 units of time. What is the expected error in the return value?

Answer:
Let’s do worst-case analysis first, followed by a less conservative analysis.
    In the worst case, the read operation completes immediately, but is then delayed for
𝛥 time units before returning, in which case the worst-case error is simply 𝑟 𝛥.
    This worst-case behavior is rather unlikely, so let us instead consider the case where
the reads from each of the 𝑁 counters is spaced equally over the time period 𝛥. There
will be 𝑁 + 1 intervals of duration 𝑁𝛥+1 between the 𝑁 reads. The rate 𝑟 of increments
is expected to be spread evenly over the 𝑁 counters, for 𝑁𝑟 increments per unit time for

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
766                                  APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

each individual counter. The error due to the delay after the read from the last thread’s
counter will be given by 𝑁 (𝑟𝑁𝛥+1) , the second-to-last thread’s counter by 𝑁 (2𝑟𝑁𝛥+1) , the
third-to-last by 𝑁 (3𝑟𝑁𝛥+1) , and so on. The total error is given by the sum of the errors due
to the reads from each thread’s counter, which is:
                                                 𝑁
                                         𝑟𝛥     ∑︁
                                                    𝑖                                   (E.1)
                                      𝑁 (𝑁 + 1) 𝑖=1

      Expressing the summation in closed form yields:

                                      𝑟𝛥     𝑁 (𝑁 + 1)
                                                                                        (E.2)
                                   𝑁 (𝑁 + 1)     2
      Canceling yields the intuitively expected result:

                                           𝑟𝛥
                                                                                  (E.3)
                                            2
   It is important to remember that error continues accumulating as the caller executes
code making use of the count returned by the read operation. For example, if the caller
spends time 𝑡 executing some computation based on the result of the returned count, the
worst-case error will have increased to 𝑟 ( 𝛥 + 𝑡).
   The expected error will have similarly increased to:
                                         ?       ?
                                           𝛥
                                       𝑟      +𝑡                                  (E.4)
                                           2
     Of course, it is sometimes unacceptable for the counter to continue incrementing
during the read operation. Section 5.4.6 discusses a way to handle this situation.
     Thus far, we have been considering a counter that is only increased, never decreased.
If the counter value is being changed by 𝑟 counts per unit time, but in either direction,
we should expect the error to reduce. However, the worst case is unchanged because
although the counter could move in either direction, the worst case is when the read
operation completes immediately, but then is delayed for 𝛥 time units, during which
time all the changes in the counter’s value move it in the same direction, again giving us
an absolute error of 𝑟 𝛥.
     There are a number of ways to compute the average error, based on a variety of
assumptions about the patterns of increments and decrements. For simplicity, let’s
assume that the 𝑓 fraction of the operations are decrements, and that the error of
interest is the deviation from the counter’s long-term trend line. Under this assumption,
if 𝑓 is less than or equal to 0.5, each decrement will be canceled by an increment,
so that 2 𝑓 of the operations will cancel each other, leaving 1 − 2 𝑓 of the operations
being uncanceled increments. On the other hand, if 𝑓 is greater than 0.5, 1 − 𝑓 of
the decrements are canceled by increments, so that the counter moves in the negative
direction by −1 + 2 (1 − 𝑓 ), which simplifies to 1 − 2 𝑓 , so that the counter moves an
average of 1 − 2 𝑓 per operation in either case. Therefore, that the long-term movement
of the counter is given by (1 − 2 𝑓 ) 𝑟. Plugging this into Eq. E.3 yields:

                                       (1 − 2 𝑓 ) 𝑟 𝛥
                                                                                      (E.5)
                                             2
   All that aside, in most uses of statistical counters, the error in the value returned by
read_count() is irrelevant. This irrelevance is due to the fact that the time required for

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
E.5. COUNTING                                                                        767

read_count() to execute is normally extremely small compared to the time interval
between successive calls to read_count(). ❑

Quick Quiz 5.18:                                                                 p.88
Doesn’t that explicit counterp array in Listing 5.4 reimpose an arbitrary limit on the
number of threads? Why doesn’t the C language provide a per_thread() interface,
similar to the Linux kernel’s per_cpu() primitive, to allow threads to more easily
access each others’ per-thread variables?

Answer:
Why indeed?
    To be fair, user-mode thread-local storage faces some challenges that the Linux kernel
gets to ignore. When a user-level thread exits, its per-thread variables all disappear,
which complicates the problem of per-thread-variable access, particularly before the
advent of user-level RCU (see Section 9.5). In contrast, in the Linux kernel, when a
CPU goes offline, that CPU’s per-CPU variables remain mapped and accessible.
    Similarly, when a new user-level thread is created, its per-thread variables suddenly
come into existence. In contrast, in the Linux kernel, all per-CPU variables are mapped
and initialized at boot time, regardless of whether the corresponding CPU exists yet, or
indeed, whether the corresponding CPU will ever exist.
   A key limitation that the Linux kernel imposes is a compile-time maximum bound
on the number of CPUs, namely, CONFIG_NR_CPUS, along with a typically tighter
boot-time bound of nr_cpu_ids. In contrast, in user space, there is not necessarily a
hard-coded upper limit on the number of threads.
    Of course, both environments must handle dynamically loaded code (dynamic
libraries in user space, kernel modules in the Linux kernel), which increases the
complexity of per-thread variables.
    These complications make it significantly harder for user-space environments to
provide access to other threads’ per-thread variables. Nevertheless, such access is highly
useful, and it is hoped that it will someday appear.
    In the meantime, textbook examples such as this one can use arrays whose limits can
be easily adjusted by the user. Alternatively, such arrays can be dynamically allocated
and expanded as needed at runtime. Finally, variable-length data structures such as
linked lists can be used, as is done in the userspace RCU library [Des09b, DMS+ 12a].
This last approach can also reduce false sharing in some cases. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.19:                                                                 p.88
Doesn’t the check for NULL on line 19 of Listing 5.4 add extra branch mispredictions?
Why not have a variable set permanently to zero, and point unused counter-pointers to
that variable rather than setting them to NULL?

Answer:
This is a reasonable strategy. Checking for the performance difference is left as
an exercise for the reader. However, please keep in mind that the fastpath is not
read_count(), but rather inc_count(). ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
768                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 5.20:                                                             p.88
Why on earth do we need something as heavyweight as a lock guarding the summation
in the function read_count() in Listing 5.4?

Answer:
Remember, when a thread exits, its per-thread variables disappear. Therefore, if we
attempt to access a given thread’s per-thread variables after that thread exits, we will get
a segmentation fault. The lock coordinates summation and thread exit, preventing this
scenario.
     Of course, we could instead read-acquire a reader-writer lock, but Chapter 9 will
introduce even lighter-weight mechanisms for implementing the required coordination.
     Another approach would be to use an array instead of a per-thread variable, which, as
Alexey Roytman notes, would eliminate the tests against NULL. However, array accesses
are often slower than accesses to per-thread variables, and use of an array would imply
a fixed upper bound on the number of threads. Also, note that neither tests nor locks are
needed on the inc_count() fastpath. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.21:                                                                 p.88
Why on earth do we need to acquire the lock in count_register_thread() in
Listing 5.4? It is a single properly aligned machine-word store to a location that no
other thread is modifying, so it should be atomic anyway, right?

Answer:
This lock could in fact be omitted, but better safe than sorry, especially given that this
function is executed only at thread startup, and is therefore not on any critical path. Now,
if we were testing on machines with thousands of CPUs, we might need to omit the lock,
but on machines with “only” a hundred or so CPUs, there is no need to get fancy. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.22:                                                                    p.88
Fine, but the Linux kernel doesn’t have to acquire a lock when reading out the aggregate
value of per-CPU counters. So why should user-space code need to do this???

Answer:
Remember, the Linux kernel’s per-CPU variables are always accessible, even if the
corresponding CPU is offline—even if the corresponding CPU never existed and never
will exist.
    One workaround is to ensure that each thread continues to exist until all threads
are finished, as shown in Listing E.1 (count_tstat.c). Analysis of this code is
left as an exercise to the reader, however, please note that it requires tweaks in
the counttorture.h counter-evaluation scheme. (Hint: See #ifndef KEEP_GCC_
THREAD_LOCAL.) Chapter 9 will introduce synchronization mechanisms that handle
this situation in a much more graceful manner. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.23:                                                                      p.89
Wouldn’t that period scan be bad for battery lifetime?

Answer:
It quite likely would. Can you think of other more battery-friendly ways to update the
global_count variable? ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.5. COUNTING                                                                        769

Listing E.1: Per-Thread Statistical Counters With Lockless Summation
1    unsigned long __thread counter = 0;
2    unsigned long *counterp[NR_THREADS] = { NULL };
3    int finalthreadcount = 0;
4    DEFINE_SPINLOCK(final_mutex);
5
6    static __inline__ void inc_count(void)
7    {
8            WRITE_ONCE(counter, counter + 1);
9    }
10
11   static __inline__ unsigned long read_count(void)
12                     /* need to tweak counttorture! */
13   {
14           int t;
15           unsigned long sum = 0;
16
17              for_each_thread(t) {
18                      if (READ_ONCE(counterp[t]) != NULL)
19                              sum += READ_ONCE(*counterp[t]);
20              }
21              return sum;
22   }
23
24   void count_register_thread(unsigned long *p)
25   {
26           WRITE_ONCE(counterp[smp_thread_id()], &counter);
27   }
28
29   void count_unregister_thread(int nthreadsexpected)
30   {
31           spin_lock(&final_mutex);
32           finalthreadcount++;
33           spin_unlock(&final_mutex);
34           while (READ_ONCE(finalthreadcount) < nthreadsexpected)
35                   poll(NULL, 0, 1);
36   }

 Quick Quiz 5.24:                                                            p.89
 Why doesn’t inc_count() in Listing 5.5 need to use atomic instructions? After all,
 we now have multiple threads accessing the per-thread counters!

Answer:
Because one of the two threads only reads, and because the variable is aligned and
machine-sized, non-atomic instructions suffice. That said, the READ_ONCE() macro is
used to prevent compiler optimizations that might otherwise prevent the counter updates
from becoming visible to eventual().8
    An older version of this algorithm did in fact use atomic instructions, kudos to
Ersoy Bayramoglu for pointing out that they are in fact unnecessary. However, note
that on a 32-bit system, the per-thread counter variables might need to be limited to
32 bits in order to sum them accurately, but with a 64-bit global_count variable to
avoid overflow. In this case, it is necessary to zero the per-thread counter variables
periodically in order to avoid overflow, which does require atomic instructions. It is
extremely important to note that this zeroing cannot be delayed too long or overflow of
the smaller per-thread variables will result. This approach therefore imposes real-time
requirements on the underlying system, and in turn must be used with extreme care.
    In contrast, if all variables are the same size, overflow of any variable is harmless
because the eventual sum will be modulo the word size. ❑

         8 A simple definition of READ_ONCE() is shown in Listing 4.9.

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
770                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 5.25:                                                              p.89
Won’t the single global thread in the function eventual() of Listing 5.5 be just as
severe a bottleneck as a global lock would be?

Answer:
In this case, no. What will happen instead is that as the number of threads increases, the
estimate of the counter value returned by read_count() will become more inaccurate.
❑

Quick Quiz 5.26:                                                          p.89
Won’t the estimate returned by read_count() in Listing 5.5 become increasingly
inaccurate as the number of threads rises?
Answer:
Yes. If this proves problematic, one fix is to provide multiple eventual() threads,
each covering its own subset of the other threads. In more extreme cases, a tree-like
hierarchy of eventual() threads might be required. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.27:                                                                 p.89
Given that in the eventually-consistent algorithm shown in Listing 5.5 both reads and
updates have extremely low overhead and are extremely scalable, why would anyone
bother with the implementation described in Section 5.2.2, given its costly read-side
code?
Answer:
The thread executing eventual() consumes CPU time. As more of these eventually-
consistent counters are added, the resulting eventual() threads will eventually consume
all available CPUs. This implementation therefore suffers a different sort of scalability
limitation, with the scalability limit being in terms of the number of eventually consistent
counters rather than in terms of the number of threads or CPUs.
     Of course, it is possible to make other tradeoffs. For example, a single thread could
be created to handle all eventually-consistent counters, which would limit the overhead
to a single CPU, but would result in increasing update-to-read latencies as the number
of counters increased. Alternatively, that single thread could track the update rates
of the counters, visiting the frequently-updated counters more frequently. In addition,
the number of threads handling the counters could be set to some fraction of the total
number of CPUs, and perhaps also adjusted at runtime. Finally, each counter could
specify its latency, and deadline-scheduling techniques could be used to provide the
required latencies to each counter.
     There are no doubt many other tradeoffs that could be made. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.28:                                                              p.89
What is the accuracy of the estimate returned by read_count() in Listing 5.5?

Answer:
A straightforward way to evaluate this estimate is to use the analysis derived in Quick
Quiz 5.17, but set 𝛥 to the interval between the beginnings of successive runs of the
eventual() thread. Handling the case where a given counter has multiple eventual()
threads is left as an exercise for the reader. ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.5. COUNTING                                                                        771

 Quick Quiz 5.29:                                                               p.91
 What fundamental difference is there between counting packets and counting the total
 number of bytes in the packets, given that the packets vary in size?

Answer:
When counting packets, the counter is only incremented by the value one. On the other
hand, when counting bytes, the counter might be incremented by largish numbers.
    Why does this matter? Because in the increment-by-one case, the value returned
will be exact in the sense that the counter must necessarily have taken on that value at
some point in time, even if it is impossible to say precisely when that point occurred.
In contrast, when counting bytes, two different threads might return values that are
inconsistent with any global ordering of operations.
    To see this, suppose that thread 0 adds the value three to its counter, thread 1 adds
the value five to its counter, and threads 2 and 3 sum the counters. If the system is
“weakly ordered” or if the compiler uses aggressive optimizations, thread 2 might find
the sum to be three and thread 3 might find the sum to be five. The only possible global
orders of the sequence of values of the counter are 0,3,8 and 0,5,8, and neither order is
consistent with the results obtained.
    If you missed this one, you are not alone. Michael Scott used this question to stump
Paul E. McKenney during Paul’s Ph.D. defense. ❑

 Quick Quiz 5.30:                                                                 p.91
 Given that the reader must sum all the threads’ counters, this counter-read operation
 could take a long time given large numbers of threads. Is there any way that the
 increment operation can remain fast and scalable while allowing readers to also enjoy
 not only reasonable performance and scalability, but also good accuracy?

Answer:
One approach would be to maintain a global approximation to the value, similar to the
approach described in Section 5.2.4. Updaters would increment their per-thread variable,
but when it reached some predefined limit, atomically add it to a global variable, then
zero their per-thread variable. This would permit a tradeoff between average increment
overhead and accuracy of the value read out. In particular, it would allow sharp bounds
on the read-side inaccuracy.
    Another approach makes use of the fact that readers often care only about certain
transitions in value, not in the exact value. This approach is examined in Section 5.3.
    The reader is encouraged to think up and try out other approaches, for example,
using a combining tree. ❑

 Quick Quiz 5.31:                                                         p.93
 Why does Listing 5.7 provide add_count() and sub_count() instead of the inc_
 count() and dec_count() interfaces show in Section 5.2?

Answer:
Because structures come in different sizes. Of course, a limit counter corresponding to a
specific size of structure might still be able to use inc_count() and dec_count(). ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
772                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 5.32:                                                               p.95
What is with the strange form of the condition on line 3 of Listing 5.7? Why not the
more intuitive form of the fastpath shown in Listing 5.8?

Answer:
Two words. “Integer overflow.”
   Try the formulation in Listing 5.8 with counter equal to 10 and delta equal to
ULONG_MAX. Then try it again with the code shown in Listing 5.7.
    A good understanding of integer overflow will be required for the rest of this example,
so if you have never dealt with integer overflow before, please try several examples to
get the hang of it. Integer overflow can sometimes be more difficult to get right than
parallel algorithms! ❑

Quick Quiz 5.33:                                                            p.95
Why does globalize_count() zero the per-thread variables, only to later call
balance_count() to refill them in Listing 5.7? Why not just leave the per-thread
variables non-zero?

Answer:
That is in fact what an earlier version of this code did. But addition and subtraction
are extremely cheap, and handling all of the special cases that arise is quite complex.
Again, feel free to try it yourself, but beware of integer overflow! ❑

Quick Quiz 5.34:                                                            p.95
Given that globalreserve counted against us in add_count(), why doesn’t it count
for us in sub_count() in Listing 5.7?

Answer:
The globalreserve variable tracks the sum of all threads’ countermax variables.
The sum of these threads’ counter variables might be anywhere from zero to
globalreserve. We must therefore take a conservative approach, assuming that
all threads’ counter variables are full in add_count() and that they are all empty in
sub_count().
      But remember this question, as we will come back to it later. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.35:                                                              p.96
Suppose that one thread invokes add_count() shown in Listing 5.7, and then another
thread invokes sub_count(). Won’t sub_count() return failure even though the
value of the counter is non-zero?

Answer:
Indeed it will! In many cases, this will be a problem, as discussed in Section 5.3.3, and
in those cases the algorithms from Section 5.4 will likely be preferable. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.5. COUNTING                                                                         773

Quick Quiz 5.36:                                                    p.96
Why have both add_count() and sub_count() in Listing 5.7? Why not simply
pass a negative number to add_count()?

Answer:
Given that add_count() takes an unsigned long as its argument, it is going to be a
bit tough to pass it a negative number. And unless you have some anti-matter memory,
there is little point in allowing negative numbers when counting the number of structures
in use!
     All kidding aside, it would of course be possible to combine add_count() and
sub_count(), however, the if conditions on the combined function would be more
complex than in the current pair of functions, which would in turn mean slower execution
of these fast paths. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.37:                                                      p.97
Why set counter to countermax / 2 in line 15 of Listing 5.9? Wouldn’t it be
simpler to just take countermax counts?

Answer:
First, it really is reserving countermax counts (see line 14), however, it adjusts so that
only half of these are actually in use by the thread at the moment. This allows the thread
to carry out at least countermax / 2 increments or decrements before having to refer
back to globalcount again.
     Note that the accounting in globalcount remains accurate, thanks to the adjustment
in line 18. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.38:                                                                   p.98
In Figure 5.6, even though a quarter of the remaining count up to the limit is assigned
to thread 0, only an eighth of the remaining count is consumed, as indicated by the
uppermost dotted line connecting the center and the rightmost configurations. Why is
that?
Answer:
The reason this happened is that thread 0’s counter was set to half of its countermax.
Thus, of the quarter assigned to thread 0, half of that quarter (one eighth) came from
globalcount, leaving the other half (again, one eighth) to come from the remaining
count.
    There are two purposes for taking this approach: (1) To allow thread 0 to use the
fastpath for decrements as well as increments and (2) To reduce the inaccuracies if all
threads are monotonically incrementing up towards the limit. To see this last point, step
through the algorithm and watch what it does. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.39:                                                            p.100
Why is it necessary to atomically manipulate the thread’s counter and countermax
variables as a unit? Wouldn’t it be good enough to atomically manipulate them
individually?

Answer:
This might well be possible, but great care is required. Note that removing counter

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
774                                   APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

without first zeroing countermax could result in the corresponding thread increasing
counter immediately after it was zeroed, completely negating the effect of zeroing the
counter.
   The opposite ordering, namely zeroing countermax and then removing counter,
can also result in a non-zero counter. To see this, consider the following sequence of
events:

   1. Thread A fetches its countermax, and finds that it is non-zero.

   2. Thread B zeroes Thread A’s countermax.

   3. Thread B removes Thread A’s counter.

   4. Thread A, having found that its countermax is non-zero, proceeds to add to its
      counter, resulting in a non-zero value for counter.

    Again, it might well be possible to atomically manipulate countermax and counter
as separate variables, but it is clear that great care is required. It is also quite likely that
doing so will slow down the fastpath.
    Exploring these possibilities are left as exercises for the reader. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.40:                                                                         p.101
In what way does line 7 of Listing 5.12 violate the C standard?

Answer:
It assumes eight bits per byte. This assumption does hold for all current commodity
microprocessors that can be easily assembled into shared-memory multiprocessors, but
certainly does not hold for all computer systems that have ever run C code. (What could
you do instead in order to comply with the C standard? What drawbacks would it have?)
❑

Quick Quiz 5.41:                                                              p.101
Given that there is only one counterandmax variable, why bother passing in a pointer
to it on line 18 of Listing 5.12?

Answer:
There is only one counterandmax variable per thread. Later, we will see code that
needs to pass other threads’ counterandmax variables to split_counterandmax().
❑

Quick Quiz 5.42:                                                           p.101
Why does merge_counterandmax() in Listing 5.12 return an int rather than storing
directly into an atomic_t?

Answer:
Later, we will see that we need the int return to pass to the atomic_cmpxchg()
primitive. ❑

                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
E.5. COUNTING                                                                       775

Quick Quiz 5.43:                                                               p.101
Yecch! Why the ugly goto on line 11 of Listing 5.13? Haven’t you heard of the break
statement???

Answer:
Replacing the goto with a break would require keeping a flag to determine whether
or not line 15 should return, which is not the sort of thing you want on a fastpath. If
you really hate the goto that much, your best bet would be to pull the fastpath into a
separate function that returned success or failure, with “failure” indicating a need for
the slowpath. This is left as an exercise for goto-hating readers. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.44:                                                           p.101
Why would the atomic_cmpxchg() primitive at lines 13–14 of Listing 5.13 ever fail?
After all, we picked up its old value on line 9 and have not changed it!

Answer:
Later, we will see how the flush_local_count() function in Listing 5.15 might
update this thread’s counterandmax variable concurrently with the execution of the
fastpath on lines 8–14 of Listing 5.13. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.45:                                                          p.103
What stops a thread from simply refilling its counterandmax variable immediately
after flush_local_count() on line 14 of Listing 5.15 empties it?

Answer:
This other thread cannot refill its counterandmax until the caller of flush_local_
count() releases the gblcnt_mutex. By that time, the caller of flush_local_
count() will have finished making use of the counts, so there will be no problem with
this other thread refilling—assuming that the value of globalcount is large enough to
permit a refill. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.46:                                                            p.103
What prevents concurrent execution of the fastpath of either add_count() or sub_
count() from interfering with the counterandmax variable while flush_local_
count() is accessing it on line 27 of Listing 5.15?

Answer:
Nothing. Consider the following three cases:

   1. If flush_local_count()’s atomic_xchg() executes before the split_counterandmax()
      of either fastpath, then the fastpath will see a zero counter and countermax,
      and will thus transfer to the slowpath (unless of course delta is zero).

   2. If flush_local_count()’s atomic_xchg() executes after the split_counterandmax()
      of either fastpath, but before that fastpath’s atomic_cmpxchg(), then the
      atomic_cmpxchg() will fail, causing the fastpath to restart, which reduces
      to case 1 above.

                                                                                           v2025.12.18a
776                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

   3. If flush_local_count()’s atomic_xchg() executes after the atomic_cmpxchg()
      of either fastpath, then the fastpath will (most likely) complete successfully before
      flush_local_count() zeroes the thread’s counterandmax variable.
Either way, the race is resolved correctly. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.47:                                                       p.104
How can line 21 of balance_count() in Listing 5.16 work correctly in face of
concurrent flush_local_count() updates to this variable?

Answer:
It wouldn’t work if they were executed concurrently! But no worries. The callers of
both balance_count() and flush_local_count() hold gblcnt_mutex, so only
one may be executing at a given time. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.48:                                                        p.104
Does the atomic_set() primitive in balance_count() really need to be atomic?

Answer:
No, it does not. As far as the code in question is concerned, the atomic_set()
updates the per-thread variable counterandmax of its own, whose value can only be
updated either from its own thread’s fastpaths or from slowpaths of all updaters. As the
atomic_set() is in the slowpath, it can never race with other atomic operations.
   So, even if this code is ported to an ISA where a plain store to an atomic_t
can interfere with atomic read-modify-write operations, a non-atomic atomic_set()
should work.
   That said, such an optimization in slowpaths which is effective only for those peculiar
ISAs might not be worth bothering. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.49:                                                                   p.104
But signal handlers can be migrated to some other CPU while running. Doesn’t this
possibility require that atomic instructions and memory barriers are required to reliably
communicate between a thread and a signal handler that interrupts that thread?

Answer:
No. If the signal handler is migrated to another CPU, then the interrupted thread is also
migrated along with it. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.50:                                                                   p.106
In Figure 5.7, why is the REQ theft state colored red?

Answer:
To indicate that only the fastpath is permitted to change the theft state, and that if the
thread remains in this state for too long, the thread running the slowpath will resend the
POSIX signal. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.51:                                                             p.106
In Figure 5.7, what is the point of having separate REQ and ACK theft states? Why

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.5. COUNTING                                                                          777

not simplify the state machine by collapsing them into a single REQACK state? Then
whichever of the signal handler or the fastpath gets there first could set the state to
READY.
Answer:
Reasons why collapsing the REQ and ACK states would be a very bad idea include:

   1. The slowpath uses the REQ and ACK states to determine whether the signal
      should be retransmitted. If the states were collapsed, the slowpath would have no
      choice but to send redundant signals, which would have the unhelpful effect of
      needlessly slowing down the fastpath.

   2. The following race would result:

        (a) The slowpath sets a given thread’s state to REQACK.
        (b) That thread has just finished its fastpath, and notes the REQACK state.
        (c) The thread receives the signal, which also notes the REQACK state, and,
            because there is no fastpath in effect, sets the state to READY.
        (d) The slowpath notes the READY state, steals the count, and sets the state to
            IDLE, and completes.
        (e) The fastpath sets the state to READY, disabling further fastpath execution
            for this thread.

      The basic problem here is that the combined REQACK state can be referenced by
      both the signal handler and the fastpath. The clear separation maintained by the
      four-state setup ensures orderly state transitions.

That said, you might well be able to make a three-state setup work correctly. If you
do succeed, compare carefully to the four-state setup. Is the three-state solution really
preferable, and why or why not? ❑

Quick Quiz 5.52:                                                         p.106
In Listing 5.18, doesn’t flush_local_count_sig() need stronger memory barriers?

Answer:
No, that smp_store_release() suffices because this code communicates only with
flush_local_count(), and there is no need for store-to-load ordering. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.53:                                                            p.107
In Listing 5.18, why is it safe for line 25 to directly access the other thread’s
countermax variable?
Answer:
Because the other thread is not permitted to change the value of its countermax variable
unless it holds the gblcnt_mutex lock. But the caller has acquired this lock, so it is not
possible for the other thread to hold it, and therefore the other thread is not permitted to
change its countermax variable. We can therefore safely access it—but not change it.
❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
778                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 5.54:                                                                     p.107
In Listing 5.18, why doesn’t line 30 check for the current thread sending itself a signal?

Answer:
There is no need for an additional check. The caller of flush_local_count() has
already invoked globalize_count(), so the check on line 25 will have succeeded,
skipping the later pthread_kill(). ❑

Quick Quiz 5.55:                                                        p.107
The code shown in Listings 5.17 and 5.18 works with GCC and POSIX. What would
be required to make it also conform to the ISO C standard?

Answer:
The theft variable must be of type sig_atomic_t to guarantee that it can be safely
shared between the signal handler and the code interrupted by the signal. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.56:                                                                    p.107
In Listing 5.18, why does line 39 resend the signal?

Answer:
Because many operating systems over several decades have had the property of losing
the occasional signal. Whether this is a feature or a bug is debatable, but irrelevant. The
obvious symptom from the user’s viewpoint will not be a kernel bug, but rather a user
application hanging.
    Your user application hanging! ❑

Quick Quiz 5.57:                                                            p.111
Not only are POSIX signals slow, sending one to each thread simply does not scale.
What would you do if you had (say) 10,000 threads and needed the read side to be
fast?

Answer:
One approach is to use the techniques shown in Section 5.2.4, summarizing an
approximation to the overall counter value in a single variable. Another approach would
be to use multiple threads to carry out the reads, with each such thread interacting with
a specific subset of the updating threads. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.58:                                                                     p.111
What if you want an exact limit counter to be exact only for its lower limit, but to allow
the upper limit to be inexact?

Answer:
One simple solution is to overstate the upper limit by the desired amount. The limiting
case of such overstatement results in the upper limit being set to the largest value that
the counter is capable of representing. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.5. COUNTING                                                                         779

Quick Quiz 5.59:                                                                    p.111
What else had you better have done when using a biased counter?

Answer:
You had better have set the upper limit to be large enough accommodate the bias, the
expected maximum number of accesses, and enough “slop” to allow the counter to work
efficiently even when the number of accesses is at its maximum. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.60:                                                                p.112
This is ridiculous! We are read-acquiring a reader-writer lock to update the counter?
What are you playing at???

Answer:
Strange, perhaps, but true! Almost enough to make you think that the name “reader-writer
lock” was poorly chosen, isn’t it? ❑

Quick Quiz 5.61:                                                                    p.112
What other issues would need to be accounted for in a real system?

Answer:
A huge number!
   Here are a few to start with:
   1. There could be any number of devices, so that the global variables are inappropriate,
      as are the lack of arguments to functions like do_io().
   2. Polling loops can be problematic in real systems, wasting CPU time and energy.
      In many cases, an event-driven design is far better, for example, where the last
      completing I/O wakes up the device-removal thread.
   3. The I/O might fail, and so do_io() will likely need a return value.
   4. If the device fails, the last I/O might never complete. In such cases, there might
      need to be some sort of timeout to allow error recovery.
   5. Both add_count() and sub_count() can fail, but their return values are not
      checked.
   6. Reader-writer locks do not scale well. One way of avoiding the high read-
      acquisition costs of reader-writer locks is presented in Chapters 7 and 9. ❑

Quick Quiz 5.62:                                                                p.114
On the count_stat.c row of Table 5.1, we see that the read-side scales linearly with
the number of threads. How is that possible given that the more threads there are, the
more per-thread counters must be summed up?

Answer:
The read-side code must scan the entire fixed-size array, regardless of the number of
threads, so there is no difference in performance. In contrast, in the last two algorithms,
readers must do more work when there are more threads. In addition, the last two
algorithms interpose an additional level of indirection because they map from integer
thread ID to the corresponding _Thread_local variable. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
780                               APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

 Quick Quiz 5.63:                                                             p.114
 Even on the fourth row of Table 5.1, the read-side performance of these statistical
 counter implementations is pretty horrible. So why bother with them?

Answer:
“Use the right tool for the job.”
    As can be seen from Figure 5.1, single-variable atomic increment need not apply for
any job involving heavy use of parallel updates. In contrast, the algorithms shown in
the top half of Table 5.1 do an excellent job of handling update-heavy situations. Of
course, if you have a read-mostly situation, you should use something else, for example,
an eventually consistent design featuring a single atomically incremented variable that
can be read out using a single load, similar to the approach used in Section 5.2.4. ❑

 Quick Quiz 5.64:                                                             p.114
 Given the performance data shown in the bottom half of Table 5.1, we should always
 prefer signals over atomic operations, right?

Answer:
That depends on the workload. Note that on a 64-core system, you need more than one
hundred non-atomic operations (with roughly a 40-nanosecond performance gain) to
make up for even one signal (with almost a 5-microsecond performance loss). Although
there are no shortage of workloads with far greater read intensity, you will need to
consider your particular workload.
    In addition, although memory barriers have historically been expensive compared
to ordinary instructions, you should check this on the specific hardware you will be
running. The properties of computer hardware do change over time, and algorithms
must change accordingly. ❑

 Quick Quiz 5.65:                                                                p.114
 Can advanced techniques be applied to address the lock contention for readers seen in
 the bottom half of Table 5.1?

Answer:
One approach is to give up some update-side performance, as is done with scalable
non-zero indicators (SNZI) [ELLM07]. There are a number of other ways one might
go about this, and these are left as exercises for the reader. Any number of approaches
that apply hierarchy, which replace frequent global-lock acquisitions with local lock
acquisitions corresponding to lower levels of the hierarchy, should work quite well. ❑

 Quick Quiz 5.66:                                                                p.114
 The ++ operator works just fine for 1,000-digit numbers! Haven’t you heard of operator
 overloading???

Answer:
In the C++ language, you might well be able to use ++ on a 1,000-digit number, assuming
that you had access to a class implementing such numbers. But as of 2021, the C
language does not permit operator overloading. ❑

                                                                                           v2025.12.18a
E.6. PARTITIONING AND SYNCHRONIZATION DESIGN                                          781

Quick Quiz 5.67:                                                              p.115
But if we are going to have to partition everything, why bother with shared-memory
multithreading? Why not just partition the problem completely and run as multiple
processes, each in its own address space?

Answer:
Indeed, multiple processes with separate address spaces can be an excellent way to
exploit parallelism, as the proponents of the fork-join methodology and the Erlang
language would be very quick to tell you. However, there are also some advantages to
shared-memory parallelism:
   1. Only the most performance-critical portions of the application must be partitioned,
      and such portions are usually a small fraction of the application.
   2. Although cache misses are quite slow compared to individual register-to-register in-
      structions, they are typically considerably faster than inter-process-communication
      primitives, which in turn are considerably faster than things like TCP/IP network-
      ing.
   3. Shared-memory multiprocessors are readily available and quite inexpensive, so,
      in stark contrast to the 1990s, there is little cost penalty for use of shared-memory
      parallelism.
As always, use the right tool for the job! ❑

E.6      Partitioning and Synchronization Design

Quick Quiz 6.1:                                                                     p.122
Is there a better solution to the Dining Philosophers Problem?

Answer:
One such improved solution is shown in Figure E.2, where the philosophers are simply
provided with an additional five forks. All five philosophers may now eat simultaneously,
and there is never any need for philosophers to wait on one another. In addition, this
approach offers greatly improved disease control.
    This solution might seem like cheating to some, but such “cheating” is key to finding
good solutions to many concurrency problems, as any hungry philosopher would agree.
    And this is one solution to the Dining Philosophers concurrent-consumption problem
called out on page 119. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.2:                                                          p.122
How would you valididate an algorithm alleged to solve the Dining Philosophers
Problem?
Answer:
Much depends on the details of the algorithm, but here are a couple of places to start.
    First, for algorithms in which picking up left-hand and right-hand forks are separate
operations, start with all forks on the table. Then have all philosophers attempt to pick
up their first fork. Once all philosophers either have their first fork or are waiting for

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
782                                  APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

                                             P1

                        P5                                        P2

                                P4                        P3

             Figure E.2: Dining Philosophers Problem, Fully Partitioned

someone to put down their first fork, have each non-waiting philosopher pick up their
second fork. At this point in any starvation-free solution, at least one philosopher will
be eating. If there were any waiting philosophers, repeat this test, preferably imposing
random variations in timing.
    Second, create a stress test in which philosphers start and stop eating at random
times. Generate starvation and fairness conditions and verify that these conditions are
met. Here are a couple of example starvation and fairness conditions:

   1. If all other philosophers have stopped eating 𝑁 times since a given philosopher
      attempted to pick up a given fork, that philosopher should have succeeded in
      picking up that fork. For high-quality solutions using high-quality locking
      primitives (or high-quality atomic operations), 𝑁 = 1 is doable.
   2. Given an upper bound 𝑇 on the time any philosopher holds onto both forks
      before putting them down, the maximum waiting time for any philosopher should
      be bounded by 𝑁𝑇 for some 𝑁 that is not hugely larger than the number of
      philosophers.
   3. Generate some statistic representing the time from when philosophers attempt to
      pick up their first fork to the time when they start eating. The smaller this statistic,
      the better the solution. Mean, median, and maximum are all useful statistics, but
      examining the full distribution can also be enlightening.

   Readers are encouraged to actually try testing any of the solutions presented in this
book, and especially testing solutions of their own devising. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.3:                                                                  p.122
And in just what sense can this “horizontal parallelism” be said to be “horizontal”?

Answer:
Jack Inman [Inm85] was working with protocol stacks, which are normally depicted
vertically, with the application on top and the hardware interconnect on the bottom.
Data flows up and down this stack. “Horizontal parallelism” processes packets from

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
E.6. PARTITIONING AND SYNCHRONIZATION DESIGN                                                   783

different network connections in parallel, while “vertical parallelism” handles different
protocol-processing steps for a given packet in parallel.
    “Vertical parallelism” is also called “pipelining”. ❑

 Quick Quiz 6.4:                                                         p.125
 In this compound double-ended queue implementation, what should be done if the
 queue has become non-empty while releasing and reacquiring the lock?

Answer:
In this case, simply dequeue an item from the non-empty queue, release both locks, and
return. ❑

 Quick Quiz 6.5:                                                                             p.127
 Is the hashed double-ended queue a good solution? Why or why not?

Answer:
The best way to answer this is to run lockhdeq.c on a number of different multiprocessor
systems, and you are encouraged to do so in the strongest possible terms. One reason
for concern is that each operation on this implementation must acquire not one but two
locks.
    The first well-designed performance study will be cited.9 Do not forget to compare
to a sequential implementation! ❑

 Quick Quiz 6.6:                                                             p.129
 Move all the elements to the queue that became empty? In what possible universe is
 this brain-dead solution in any way optimal???

Answer:
It is optimal in the case where data flow switches direction only rarely. It would of
course be an extremely poor choice if the double-ended queue was being emptied from
both ends concurrently. This of course raises another question, namely, in what possible
universe emptying from both ends concurrently would be a reasonable thing to do.
Work-stealing queues are one possible answer to this question. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.7:                                                          p.130
Why can’t the compound parallel double-ended queue implementation be symmetric?

Answer:
The need to avoid deadlock by imposing a lock hierarchy forces the asymmetry, just
as it does in the fork-numbering solution to the Dining Philosophers Problem (see
Section 6.1.1). ❑

     9 The studies by Dalessandro et al. [DCW+ 11] and Dice et al. [DLM+ 10] are excellent

starting points.

                                                                                                     v2025.12.18a
784                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 6.8:                                                                 p.130
Why is it necessary to retry the right-dequeue operation on line 28 of Listing 6.3?

Answer:
This retry is necessary because some other thread might have enqueued an element
between the time that this thread dropped d->rlock on line 25 and the time that it
reacquired this same lock on line 27. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.9:                                                               p.130
Surely the left-hand lock must sometimes be available!!! So why is it necessary that
line 25 of Listing 6.3 unconditionally release the right-hand lock?

Answer:
It would be possible to use spin_trylock() to attempt to acquire the left-hand lock
when it was available. However, the failure case would still need to drop the right-hand
lock and then re-acquire the two locks in order. Making this transformation (and
determining whether or not it is worthwhile) is left as an exercise for the reader. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.10:                                                                p.130
But in the case where data is flowing in only one direction, the algorithm shown in
Listing 6.3 will have both ends attempting to acquire the same lock whenever the
consuming end empties its underlying double-ended queue. Doesn’t that mean that
sometimes this algorithm fails to provide concurrent access to both ends of the queue
even when the queue contains an arbitrarily large number of elements?

Answer:
Indeed it does!
    But the same is true of other algorithms claiming this property. For example, in
solutions using software transactional memory mechanisms based on hashed arrays of
locks, the leftmost and rightmost elements’ addresses will sometimes happen to hash to
the same lock. These hash collisions will also prevent concurrent access. For another
example, solutions using hardware transactional memory mechanisms with software
fallbacks [YHLR13, Mer11, JSG12] often use locking within those software fallbacks,
and thus suffer (albeit hopefully rarely) from whatever concurrency limitations that
these locking solutions suffer from.
    Therefore, as of 2021, all practical solutions to the concurrent double-ended queue
problem fail to provide full concurrency in at least some circumstances, including the
compound double-ended queue. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.11:                                                           p.131
Why are there not one but two solutions to the double-ended queue problem?

Answer:
There are actually at least three. The third, by Dominik Dingel, makes interesting use of
reader-writer locking, and may be found in lockrwdeq.c.
    And so there is not one, but rather three solutions to the lock-based double-ended
queue problem on page 119! ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.6. PARTITIONING AND SYNCHRONIZATION DESIGN                                           785

Quick Quiz 6.12:                                                              p.131
The tandem double-ended queue runs about twice as fast as the hashed double-ended
queue, even when I increase the size of the hash table to an insanely large number.
Why is that?

Answer:
The hashed double-ended queue’s locking design only permits one thread at a time at
each end, and further requires two lock acquisitions for each operation. The tandem
double-ended queue also permits one thread at a time at each end, and in the common case
requires only one lock acquisition per operation. Therefore, the tandem double-ended
queue should be expected to outperform the hashed double-ended queue.
   Can you create a double-ended queue that allows multiple concurrent operations at
each end? If so, how? If not, why not? ❑

Quick Quiz 6.13:                                                               p.131
Is there a significantly better way of handling concurrency for double-ended queues?

Answer:
One approach is to transform the problem to be solved so that multiple double-ended
queues can be used in parallel, allowing the simpler single-lock double-ended queue to
be used, and perhaps also replace each double-ended queue with a pair of conventional
single-ended queues. Without such “horizontal scaling”, the speedup is limited to 2.0. In
contrast, horizontal-scaling designs can achieve very large speedups, and are especially
attractive if there are multiple threads working either end of the queue, because in this
multiple-thread case the dequeue simply cannot provide strong ordering guarantees.
After all, the fact that a given thread removed an item first in no way implies that it will
process that item first [HKLP12]. And if there are no guarantees, we may as well obtain
the performance benefits that come with refusing to provide these guarantees.
    Regardless of whether or not the problem can be transformed to use multiple queues, it
is worth asking whether work can be batched so that each enqueue and dequeue operation
corresponds to larger units of work. This batching approach decreases contention on
the queue data structures, which increases both performance and scalability, as will be
seen in Section 6.3. After all, if you must incur high synchronization overheads, be sure
you are getting your money’s worth.
    Other researchers are working on other ways to take advantage of limited ordering
guarantees in queues [KLP12]. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.14:                                                              p.134
Don’t all these problems with critical sections mean that we should just always use
non-blocking synchronization [Her90], which don’t have critical sections?

Answer:
Although non-blocking synchronization can be very useful in some situations, it is
no panacea, as discussed in Section 14.2. Also, non-blocking synchronization really
does have critical sections, as noted by Josh Triplett. For example, in a non-blocking
algorithm based on compare-and-swap operations, the code starting at the initial load
and continuing to the compare-and-swap is analogous to a lock-based critical section. ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
786                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 6.15:                                                                      p.136
What should you do to validate a hash table?

Answer:
Quite a bit, actually.
   See Section 10.3.2 for a good starting point. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.16:                                                                      p.137
“Partitioning time”? Isn’t that an odd turn of phrase?

Answer:
Perhaps so.
    But in the next section we will be partitioning space (that is, address space) as well
as time. This nomenclature will permit us to partition spacetime, as opposed to (say)
partitioning space but segmenting time. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.17:                                                                p.140
What are some ways of preventing a structure from being freed while its lock is being
acquired?

Answer:
Here are a few possible solutions to this existence guarantee problem:

   1. Provide a statically allocated lock that is held while the per-structure lock is being
      acquired, which is an example of hierarchical locking (see Section 6.4.2). Of
      course, using a single global lock for this purpose can result in unacceptably high
      levels of lock contention, dramatically reducing performance and scalability.

   2. Provide an array of statically allocated locks, hashing the structure’s address to
      select the lock to be acquired, as described in Chapter 7. Given a hash function of
      sufficiently high quality, this avoids the scalability limitations of the single global
      lock, but in read-mostly situations, the lock-acquisition overhead can result in
      unacceptably degraded performance.

   3. Use a garbage collector, in software environments providing them, so that a
      structure cannot be deallocated while being referenced. This works very well,
      removing the existence-guarantee burden (and much else besides) from the
      developer’s shoulders, but imposes the overhead of garbage collection on the
      program. Although garbage-collection technology has advanced considerably in
      the past few decades, its overhead may be unacceptably high for some applications.
      In addition, some applications require that the developer exercise more control
      over the layout and placement of data structures than is permitted by most garbage
      collected environments.

   4. As a special case of a garbage collector, use a global reference counter, or a global
      array of reference counters. These have strengths and limitations similar to those
      called out above for locks.

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
E.6. PARTITIONING AND SYNCHRONIZATION DESIGN                                          787

   5. Use hazard pointers [Mic04a], which can be thought of as an inside-out reference
      count. Hazard-pointer-based algorithms maintain a per-thread list of pointers, so
      that the appearance of a given pointer on any of these lists acts as a reference
      to the corresponding structure. Hazard pointers are starting to see significant
      production use (see Section 9.6.3.1).
   6. Use transactional memory (TM) [HM93, Lom77, ST95], so that each reference
      and modification to the data structure in question is performed atomically.
      Although TM has engendered much excitement in recent years, and seems likely
      to be of some use in production software, developers should exercise some
      caution [BLM05, BLM06, MMW07], particularly in performance-critical code.
      In particular, existence guarantees require that the transaction covers the full path
      from a global reference to the data elements being updated. For more on TM,
      including ways to overcome some of its weaknesses by combining it with other
      synchronization mechanisms, see Sections 17.2 and 17.3.
   7. Use RCU, which can be thought of as an extremely lightweight approximation
      to a garbage collector. Updaters are not permitted to free RCU-protected data
      structures that RCU readers might still be referencing. RCU is most heavily used
      for read-mostly data structures, and is discussed at length in Section 9.5.

   For more on providing existence guarantees, see Chapters 7 and 9. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.18:                                                      p.141
But won’t system boot and shutdown (or application startup and shutdown) be
partitioning time, even for data ownership?

Answer:
You can indeed think in these terms.
    And if you are working on a persistent data store where state survives shutdown,
thinking in these terms might even be useful. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.19:                                                                  p.144
How can a single-threaded 64-by-64 matrix multiple possibly have an efficiency of
less than 1.0? Shouldn’t all of the traces in Figure 6.17 have efficiency of exactly 1.0
when running on one thread?

Answer:
The matmul.c program creates the specified number of worker threads, so even the
single-worker-thread case incurs thread-creation overhead. Making the changes required
to optimize away thread-creation overhead in the single-worker-thread case is left as an
exercise to the reader. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.20:                                                             p.144
How are data-parallel techniques going to help with matrix multiply? It is already
data parallel!!!

Answer:
I am glad that you are paying attention! This example serves to show that although
data parallelism can be a very good thing, it is not some magic wand that automatically

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
788                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

wards off any and all sources of inefficiency. Linear scaling at full performance, even to
“only” 64 threads, requires care at all phases of design and implementation.
    In particular, you need to pay careful attention to the size of the partitions. For
example, if you split a 64-by-64 matrix multiply across 64 threads, each thread gets
only 64 floating-point multiplies. The cost of a floating-point multiply is minuscule
compared to the overhead of thread creation, and cache-miss overhead also plays a role
in spoiling the theoretically perfect scalability (and also in making the traces so jagged).
The full 448 hardware threads would require a matrix with hundreds of thousands of
rows and columns to attain good scalability, but by that point GPGPUs become quite
attractive, especially from a price/performance viewpoint.
    Moral: If you have a parallel program with variable input, always include a check
for the input size being too small to be worth parallelizing. And when it is not helpful
to parallelize, it is not helpful to incur the overhead required to spawn a thread, now is
it? ❑

 Quick Quiz 6.21:                                                                   p.144
 What did you do to validate this matrix multiply algorithm?

Answer:
For this simple approach, very little.
    However, the validation of production-quality matrix multiply requires great care
and attention. Some cases require careful handling of floating-point rounding errors,
others involve complex sparse-matrix data structures, and still others make use of
special-purpose arithmetic hardware such as vector units or GPGPUs. Adequate tests
for handling of floating-point rounding errors can be especially challenging. ❑

 Quick Quiz 6.22:                                                                   p.145
 In what situation would hierarchical locking work well?

Answer:
If the comparison on line 31 of Listing 6.8 were replaced by a much heavier-weight
operation, then releasing bp->bucket_lock might reduce lock contention enough to
outweigh the overhead of the extra acquisition and release of cur->node_lock. ❑

 Quick Quiz 6.23:                                                                 p.149
 Doesn’t this resource-allocator design resemble that of the approximate limit counters
 covered in Section 5.3?
Answer:
Indeed it does! We are used to thinking of allocating and freeing memory, but the
algorithms in Section 5.3 are taking very similar actions to allocate and free “count”. ❑

 Quick Quiz 6.24:                                                                p.151
 In Figure 6.21, there is a pattern of performance rising with increasing run length in
 groups of three samples, for example, for run lengths 10, 11, and 12. Why?

Answer:
This is due to the per-CPU target value being three. A run length of 12 must acquire the
global-pool lock twice, while a run length of 13 must acquire the global-pool lock three
times. ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.6. PARTITIONING AND SYNCHRONIZATION DESIGN                                         789

                          Global Pool               g-i-p(n-1)

                      Per-Thread Pool    i      0            p-m     p-m

                 Per-Thread Allocation   0      0                m   m

                                                                 n

                  Figure E.3: Allocator Cache Run-Length Analysis

Quick Quiz 6.25:                                                                   p.151
Allocation failures were observed in the two-thread tests at run lengths of 19 and
greater. Given the global-pool size of 40 and the per-thread target pool size 𝑠 of three,
number of threads 𝑛 equal to two, and assuming that the per-thread pools are initially
empty with none of the memory in use, what is the smallest allocation run length 𝑚
at which failures can occur? (Recall that each thread repeatedly allocates 𝑚 block
of memory, and then frees the 𝑚 blocks of memory.) Alternatively, given 𝑛 threads
each with pool size 𝑠, and where each thread repeatedly first allocates 𝑚 blocks of
memory and then frees those 𝑚 blocks, how large must the global pool size be? Note:
Obtaining the correct answer will require you to examine the smpalloc.c source
code, and very likely single-step it as well. You have been warned!

Answer:
This solution is adapted from one put forward by Alexey Roytman. It is based on the
following definitions:

𝑔 Number of blocks globally available.

𝑖 Number of blocks left in the initializing thread’s per-thread pool. (This is one reason
     you needed to look at the code!)

𝑚 Allocation/free run length.

𝑛 Number of threads, excluding the initialization thread.

𝑝 Per-thread maximum block consumption, including both the blocks actually allocated
     and the blocks remaining in the per-thread pool.

   The values 𝑔, 𝑚, and 𝑛 are given. The value for 𝑝 is 𝑚 rounded up to the next
multiple of 𝑠, as follows:
                                          l𝑚m
                                    𝑝=𝑠                                    (E.6)
                                           𝑠
   The value for 𝑖 is as follows:
                           ?
                              𝑔 (mod 2𝑠) = 0 : 2𝑠
                        𝑖=                                                 (E.7)
                              𝑔 (mod 2𝑠) ≠ 0 : 𝑔 (mod 2𝑠)
    The relationships between these quantities are shown in Figure E.3. The global pool
is shown on the top of this figure, and the “extra” initializer thread’s per-thread pool

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
790                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

and per-thread allocations are the left-most pair of boxes. The initializer thread has no
blocks allocated, but has 𝑖 blocks stranded in its per-thread pool. The rightmost two
pairs of boxes are the per-thread pools and per-thread allocations of threads holding
the maximum possible number of blocks, while the second-from-left pair of boxes
represents the thread currently trying to allocate.
    The total number of blocks is 𝑔, and adding up the per-thread allocations and
per-thread pools, we see that the global pool contains 𝑔 − 𝑖 − 𝑝(𝑛 − 1) blocks. If the
allocating thread is to be successful, it needs at least 𝑚 blocks in the global pool, in
other words:

                                   𝑔 − 𝑖 − 𝑝(𝑛 − 1) ≥ 𝑚                                (E.8)
    The question has 𝑔 = 40, 𝑠 = 3, and 𝑛 = 2. Equation E.7 gives 𝑖 = 4, and Eq. E.6
gives 𝑝 = 18 for 𝑚 = 18 and 𝑝 = 21 for 𝑚 = 19. Plugging these into Eq. E.8 shows that
𝑚 = 18 will not overflow, but that 𝑚 = 19 might well do so.
    The presence of 𝑖 could be considered to be a bug. After all, why allocate memory
only to have it stranded in the initialization thread’s cache? One way of fixing this
would be to provide a memblock_flush() function that flushed the current thread’s
pool into the global pool. The initialization thread could then invoke this function after
freeing all of the blocks. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.26:                                                        p.159
Given that a 2D maze achieved 4x speedup on two CPUs, would a 3D maze achieve
an 8x speedup on two CPUs?

Answer:
This is an excellent question that is left to a suitably interested and industrious reader. ❑

Quick Quiz 6.27:                                                          p.162
Why place the third, fourth, and so on threads on the diagonal? Why not instead
distribute them evenly around the maze?

Answer:
There are indeed a great many ways to distribute the extra threads. Evaluation of
distribution strategies is left to a suitably interested and industrious reader. ❑

E.7      Locking

Quick Quiz 7.1:                                                              p.166
Just how can serving as a whipping boy be considered to be in any way honorable???

Answer:
The reason locking serves as a research-paper whipping boy is because it is heavily used
in practice. In contrast, if no one used or cared about locking, most research papers
would not bother even mentioning it. ❑

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
E.7. LOCKING                                                                                   791

 Quick Quiz 7.2:                                                               p.167
 But the definition of lock-based deadlock only said that each thread was holding at
 least one lock and waiting on another lock that was held by some thread. How do you
 know that there is a cycle?

Answer:
Suppose that there is no cycle in the graph. We would then have a directed acyclic graph
(DAG), which would have at least one leaf node.
    If this leaf node was a lock, then we would have a thread that was waiting on a lock
that wasn’t held by any thread, counter to the definition. In this case the thread would
immediately acquire the lock.
    On the other hand, if this leaf node was a thread, then we would have a thread that
was not waiting on any lock, again counter to the definition. And in this case, the thread
would either be running or be blocked on something that is not a lock. In the first case,
in the absence of infinite-loop bugs, the thread will eventually release the lock. In the
second case, in the absence of a failure-to-wake bug, the thread will eventually wake up
and release the lock.10
    Therefore, given this definition of lock-based deadlock, there must be a cycle in the
corresponding graph. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.3:                                                                   p.168
Are there any exceptions to this rule, so that there really could be a deadlock cycle
containing locks from both the library and the caller, even given that the library code
never invokes any of the caller’s functions?

Answer:
Indeed there are! Here are a few of them:
   1. If one of the library function’s arguments is a pointer to a lock that this library
      function acquires, and if the library function holds one of its locks while acquiring
      the caller’s lock, then we could have a deadlock cycle involving both caller and
      library locks.
   2. If one of the library functions returns a pointer to a lock that is acquired by the
      caller, and if the caller acquires one of its locks while holding the library’s lock,
      we could again have a deadlock cycle involving both caller and library locks.
   3. If one of the library functions acquires a lock and then returns while still holding
      it, and if the caller acquires one of its locks, we have yet another way to create a
      deadlock cycle involving both caller and library locks.
   4. If the caller has a signal handler that acquires locks, then the deadlock cycle can
      involve both caller and library locks. In this case, however, the library’s locks are
      innocent bystanders in the deadlock cycle. That said, please note that acquiring
      a lock from within a signal handler is a no-no in many environments—it is not
      just a bad idea, it is unsupported. But if you absolutely must acquire a lock in a
      signal handler, be sure to block that signal while holding that same lock in thread
      context, and also while holding any other locks acquired while that same lock is
      held. ❑
   10 Of course, one type of failure-to-wake bug is a deadlock that involves not only locks,

but also non-lock resources. But the question really did say “lock-based deadlock”!

                                                                                                     v2025.12.18a
792                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 7.4:                                                              p.169
But if qsort() releases all its locks before invoking the comparison function, how
can it protect against races with other qsort() threads?

Answer:
By privatizing the data elements being compared (as discussed in Chapter 8) or through
use of deferral mechanisms such as reference counting (as discussed in Chapter 9). Or
through use of layered locking hierarchies, as described in Section 7.1.1.3.
    On the other hand, changing a key in a list that is currently being sorted is at best
rather brave. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.5:                                                                 p.170
So the iterating thread may or may not observe the added child. What is the big deal?

Answer:
There are at least two hazards in this situation.
    One is indeed that the number of children may or may not be observed to have
changed. While that would be consistent with tree_add() being called either before
or after the iterator started, it is better not left to the vagaries of the compiler. A more
serious problem is that realloc() may not be able to extend the array in place, causing
the heap to free the one used by the iterator and replace it with another block of memory.
If the children pointer is not re-read then the iterating thread will access invalid
memory (either free or reclaimed). ❑

Quick Quiz 7.6:                                                            p.174
What do you mean “cannot always safely invoke the scheduler”? Either call_rcu()
can or cannot safely invoke the scheduler, right?

Answer:
It really does depend.
    The scheduler locks are always held with interrupts disabled. Therefore, if call_
rcu() is invoked with interrupts enabled, no scheduler locks are held, and call_rcu()
can safely call into the scheduler. Otherwise, if interrupts are disabled, one of the
scheduler locks might be held, so call_rcu() must play it safe and refrain from calling
into the scheduler. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.7:                                                              p.174
Name one common situation where a pointer to a lock is passed into a function.

Answer:
Locking primitives, of course! ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.7. LOCKING                                                                       793

Quick Quiz 7.8:                                                          p.174
Doesn’t the fact that pthread_cond_wait() first releases the mutex and then re-
acquires it eliminate the possibility of deadlock?

Answer:
Absolutely not!
    Consider a program that acquires mutex_a, and then mutex_b, in that order, and
then passes mutex_a to pthread_cond_wait(). Now, pthread_cond_wait() will
release mutex_a, but will re-acquire it before returning. If some other thread acquires
mutex_a in the meantime and then blocks on mutex_b, the program will deadlock. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.9:                                                                p.176
Can the transformation from Listing 7.4 to Listing 7.5 be applied universally?

Answer:
Absolutely not!
   This transformation assumes that the layer_2_processing() function is idem-
potent, given that it might be executed multiple times on the same packet when the
layer_1() routing decision changes. Therefore, in real life, this transformation can
become arbitrarily complex. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.10:                                                             p.176
But the complexity in Listing 7.5 is well worthwhile given that it avoids deadlock,
right?

Answer:
Maybe.
    If the routing decision in layer_1() changes often enough, the code will always
retry, never making forward progress. This is termed “livelock” if no thread makes any
forward progress or “starvation” if some threads make forward progress but others do
not (see Section 7.1.2). ❑

Quick Quiz 7.11:                                                            p.176
When using the “acquire needed locks first” approach described in Section 7.1.1.7,
how can livelock be avoided?
Answer:
Provide an additional global lock. If a given thread has repeatedly tried and failed to
acquire the needed locks, then have that thread unconditionally acquire the new global
lock, and then unconditionally acquire any needed locks. (Suggested by Doug Lea.) ❑

Quick Quiz 7.12:                                                                p.177
Suppose Lock A is never acquired within a signal handler, but Lock B is acquired both
from thread context and by signal handlers. Suppose further that Lock A is sometimes
acquired with signals unblocked. Why is it illegal to acquire Lock A holding Lock B?

Answer:
Because this would lead to deadlock. Given that Lock A is sometimes held outside of a

                                                                                          v2025.12.18a
794                                       APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

signal handler without blocking signals, a signal might be handled while holding this
lock. The corresponding signal handler might then acquire Lock B, so that Lock B is
acquired while holding Lock A. Therefore, if we also acquire Lock A while holding
Lock B, we will have a deadlock cycle. Note that this problem exists even if signals are
blocked while holding Lock B.
    This is another reason to be very careful with locks that are acquired within interrupt
or signal handlers. But the Linux kernel’s lock dependency checker knows about this
situation and many others as well, so please do make full use of it! ❑

Quick Quiz 7.13:                                                                    p.177
How can you legally block signals within a signal handler?

Answer:
One of the simplest and fastest ways to do so is to use the sa_mask field of the
struct sigaction that you pass to sigaction() when setting up the signal. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.14:                                                             p.177
If acquiring locks in signal handlers is such a bad idea, why even discuss ways of
making it safe?

Answer:
Because these same rules apply to the interrupt handlers used in operating-system
kernels and in some embedded applications.
    In many application environments, acquiring locks in signal handlers is frowned
upon [Ope97]. However, that does not stop clever developers from (perhaps unwisely)
fashioning home-brew locks out of atomic operations. And atomic operations are in
many cases perfectly legal in signal handlers. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.15:                                                                 p.177
Given an object-oriented application that passes control freely among a group of
objects such that there is no straightforward locking hierarchy,a layered or otherwise,
how can this application be parallelized?
      a Also known as “object-oriented spaghetti code.”

Answer:
There are a number of approaches:

   1. In the case of parametric search via simulation, where a large number of
      simulations will be run in order to converge on (for example) a good design for a
      mechanical or electrical device, leave the simulation single-threaded, but run many
      instances of the simulation in parallel. This retains the object-oriented design,
      and gains parallelism at a higher level, and likely also avoids both deadlocks and
      synchronization overhead.

   2. Partition the objects into groups such that there is no need to operate on objects in
      more than one group at a given time. Then associate a lock with each group. This
      is an example of a single-lock-at-a-time design, which discussed in Section 7.1.1.8.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.7. LOCKING                                                                         795

   3. Partition the objects into groups such that threads can all operate on objects in
      the groups in some groupwise ordering. Then associate a lock with each group,
      and impose a locking hierarchy over the groups.

   4. Impose an arbitrarily selected hierarchy on the locks, and then use conditional
      locking if it is necessary to acquire a lock out of order, as was discussed in
      Section 7.1.1.6.

   5. Before carrying out a given group of operations, predict which locks will be
      acquired, and attempt to acquire them before actually carrying out any updates.
      If the prediction turns out to be incorrect, drop all the locks and retry with an
      updated prediction that includes the benefit of experience. This approach was
      discussed in Section 7.1.1.7.

   6. Use transactional memory. This approach has a number of advantages and
      disadvantages which will be discussed in Sections 17.2–17.3.

   7. Refactor the application to be more concurrency-friendly. This would likely also
      have the side effect of making the application run faster even when single-threaded,
      but might also make it more difficult to modify the application.

   8. Use techniques from later chapters in addition to locking. ❑

 Quick Quiz 7.16:                                                                  p.178
 How can the livelock shown in Listing 7.6 be avoided?

Answer:
Listing 7.5 provides some good hints. In many cases, livelocks are a hint that you
should revisit your locking design. Or visit it in the first place if your locking design
“just grew”.
    That said, one good-and-sufficient approach due to Doug Lea is to use conditional
locking as described in Section 7.1.1.6, but combine this with acquiring all needed
locks first, before modifying shared data, as described in Section 7.1.1.7. If a given
critical section retries too many times, unconditionally acquire a global lock, then
unconditionally acquire all the needed locks. This avoids both deadlock and livelock,
and scales reasonably assuming that the global lock need not be acquired too often. ❑

 Quick Quiz 7.17:                                                                  p.178
 What problems can you spot in the code in Listing 7.7?

Answer:
Here are a couple:

   1. A one-second wait is way too long for most uses. Wait intervals should begin
      with roughly the time required to execute the critical section, which will normally
      be in the microsecond or millisecond range.

   2. The code does not check for overflow. On the other hand, this bug is nullified by
      the previous bug: 32 bits worth of seconds is more than 50 years. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
796                                     APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 7.18:                                                                   p.180
Wouldn’t it be better just to use a good parallel design so that lock contention was low
enough to avoid unfairness?

Answer:
It would be better in some sense, but there are situations where it can be appropriate to
use designs that sometimes result in high lock contentions.
     For example, imagine a system that is subject to a rare error condition. It might
well be best to have a simple error-handling design that has poor performance and
scalability for the duration of the rare error condition, as opposed to a complex and
difficult-to-debug design that is helpful only when one of those rare error conditions is
in effect.
     That said, it is usually worth putting some effort into attempting to produce a design
that both simple as well as efficient during error conditions, for example by partitioning
the problem. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.19:                                                                     p.181
How might the lock holder be interfered with?

Answer:
If the data protected by the lock is in the same cache line as the lock itself, then attempts
by other CPUs to acquire the lock will result in expensive cache misses on the part of
the CPU holding the lock. This is a special case of false sharing, which can also occur if
a pair of variables protected by different locks happen to share a cache line. In contrast,
if the lock is in a different cache line than the data that it protects, the CPU holding the
lock will usually suffer a cache miss only on first access to a given variable.
     Of course, the downside of placing the lock and data into separate cache lines is that
the code will incur two cache misses rather than only one in the uncontended case. As
always, choose wisely! ❑

Quick Quiz 7.20:                                                                p.181
Does it ever make sense to have an exclusive lock acquisition immediately followed by
a release of that same lock, that is, an empty critical section?

Answer:
Empty lock-based critical sections are rarely used, but they do have their uses. The
point is that the semantics of exclusive locks have two components: (1) The familiar
data-protection semantic and (2) A messaging semantic, where releasing a given lock
notifies a waiting acquisition of that same lock. An empty critical section uses the
messaging component without the data-protection component.
    The rest of this answer provides some example uses of empty critical sections,
however, these examples should be considered “gray magic.”11 As such, empty critical
sections are almost never used in practice. Nevertheless, pressing on into this gray area
...
    One historical use of empty critical sections appeared in the networking stack of the
2.4 Linux kernel through use of a read-side-scalable reader-writer lock called brlock
for “big reader lock”. This use case is a way of approximating the semantics of read-copy

  11 Thanks to Alexey Roytman for this description.

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
E.7. LOCKING                                                                           797

update (RCU), which is discussed in Section 9.5. And in fact this Linux-kernel use case
has been replaced with RCU.
    The empty-lock-critical-section idiom can also be used to reduce lock contention in
some situations. For example, consider a multithreaded user-space application where
each thread processes units of work maintained in a per-thread list, where threads are
prohibited from touching each others’ lists [McK12e]. There could also be updates that
require that all previously scheduled units of work have completed before the update
can progress. One way to handle this is to schedule a unit of work on each thread, so
that when all of these units of work complete, the update may proceed.
    In some applications, threads can come and go. For example, each thread might
correspond to one user of the application, and thus be removed when that user logs
out or otherwise disconnects. In many applications, threads cannot depart atomically:
They must instead explicitly unravel themselves from various portions of the application
using a specific sequence of actions. One specific action will be refusing to accept
further requests from other threads, and another specific action will be disposing of any
remaining units of work on its list, for example, by placing these units of work in a
global work-item-disposal list to be taken by one of the remaining threads. (Why not
just drain the thread’s work-item list by executing each item? Because a given work
item might generate more work items, so that the list could not be drained in a timely
fashion.)
    If the application is to perform and scale well, a good locking design is required.
One common solution is to have a global lock (call it G) protecting the entire process
of departing (and perhaps other things as well), with finer-grained locks protecting the
individual unraveling operations.
    Now, a departing thread must clearly refuse to accept further requests before
disposing of the work on its list, because otherwise additional work might arrive after
the disposal action, which would render that disposal action ineffective. So simplified
pseudocode for a departing thread might be as follows:

   1. Acquire lock G.
   2. Acquire the lock guarding communications.
   3. Refuse further communications from other threads.
   4. Release the lock guarding communications.
   5. Acquire the lock guarding the global work-item-disposal list.
   6. Move all pending work items to the global work-item-disposal list.
   7. Release the lock guarding the global work-item-disposal list.
   8. Release lock G.

    Of course, a thread that needs to wait for all pre-existing work items will need to take
departing threads into account. To see this, suppose that this thread starts waiting for all
pre-existing work items just after a departing thread has refused further communications
from other threads. How can this thread wait for the departing thread’s work items to
complete, keeping in mind that threads are not allowed to access each others’ lists of
work items?
    One straightforward approach is for this thread to acquire G and then the lock
guarding the global work-item-disposal list, then move the work items to its own list.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
798                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

The thread then release both locks, places a work item on the end of its own list, and
then wait for all of the work items that it placed on each thread’s list (including its own)
to complete.
    This approach does work well in many cases, but if special processing is required
for each work item as it is pulled in from the global work-item-disposal list, the result
could be excessive contention on G. One way to avoid that contention is to acquire G
and then immediately release it. Then the process of waiting for all prior work items
look something like the following:

   1. Set a global counter to one and initialize a condition variable to zero.

   2. Send a message to all threads to cause them to atomically increment the global
      counter, and then to enqueue a work item. The work item will atomically
      decrement the global counter, and if the result is zero, it will set a condition
      variable to one.

   3. Acquire G, which will wait on any currently departing thread to finish departing.
      Because only one thread may depart at a time, all the remaining threads will have
      already received the message sent in the preceding step.

   4. Release G.

   5. Acquire the lock guarding the global work-item-disposal list.

   6. Move all work items from the global work-item-disposal list to this thread’s list,
      processing them as needed along the way.

   7. Release the lock guarding the global work-item-disposal list.

   8. Enqueue an additional work item onto this thread’s list. (As before, this work
      item will atomically decrement the global counter, and if the result is zero, it will
      set a condition variable to one.)

   9. Wait for the condition variable to take on the value one.

    Once this procedure completes, all pre-existing work items are guaranteed to have
completed. The empty critical sections are using locking for messaging as well as for
protection of data. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.21:                                                          p.184
Is there any other way for the VAX/VMS DLM to emulate a reader-writer lock?

Answer:
There are in fact several. One way would be to use the null, protected-read, and exclusive
modes. Another way would be to use the null, protected-read, and concurrent-write
modes. A third way would be to use the null, concurrent-read, and exclusive modes. ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.7. LOCKING                                                                         799

Quick Quiz 7.22:                                                              p.187
The code in Listing 7.8 is ridiculously complicated! Why not conditionally acquire a
single global lock?

Answer:
Conditionally acquiring a single global lock does work very well, but only for relatively
small numbers of CPUs. To see why it is problematic in systems with many hundreds
of CPUs, look at Figure 5.1. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.23:                                                               p.187
Wait a minute! If we “win” the tournament on line 16 of Listing 7.8, we get to do all
the work of do_force_quiescent_state(). Exactly how is that a win, really?

Answer:
How indeed? This just shows that in concurrency, just as in life, one should take care to
learn exactly what winning entails before playing the game. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.24:                                                               p.187
Why not rely on the C language’s default initialization of zero instead of using the
explicit initializer shown on line 2 of Listing 7.9?

Answer:
Because this default initialization does not apply to locks allocated as auto variables
within the scope of a function. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.25:                                                               p.187
Why bother with the inner loop on lines 7–8 of Listing 7.9? Why not simply repeatedly
do the atomic exchange operation on line 6?

Answer:
Suppose that the lock is held and that several threads are attempting to acquire the lock.
In this situation, if these threads all loop on the atomic exchange operation, they will
ping-pong the cache line containing the lock among themselves, imposing load on the
interconnect. In contrast, if these threads are spinning in the inner loop on lines 7–8,
they will each spin within their own caches, placing negligible load on the interconnect.
❑

Quick Quiz 7.26:                                                                   p.188
Why not simply store zero into the lock word on line 14 of Listing 7.9?

Answer:
This can be a legitimate implementation, but only if this store is preceded by a memory
barrier and makes use of WRITE_ONCE(). The memory barrier is not required when the
xchg() operation is used because this operation implies a full memory barrier due to
the fact that it returns a value. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
800                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 7.27:                                                                p.190
How can you tell if one counter is greater than another, while accounting for counter
wrap?

Answer:
In the C language, the following macro correctly handles this:

  #define ULONG_CMP_LT(a, b) \
          (ULONG_MAX / 2 < (a) - (b))

    Although it is tempting to simply subtract two signed integers, this should be avoided
because signed overflow is undefined in the C language. For example, if the compiler
knows that one of the values is positive and the other negative, it is within its rights
to simply assume that the positive number is greater than the negative number, even
though subtracting the negative number from the positive number might well result in
overflow and thus a negative number.
    How could the compiler know the signs of the two numbers? It might be able to
deduce it based on prior assignments and comparisons. In this case, if the per-CPU
counters were signed, the compiler could deduce that they were always increasing in
value, and then might assume that they would never go negative. This assumption could
well lead the compiler to generate unfortunate code [McK12d, Reg10]. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.28:                                                                    p.190
Which is better, the counter approach or the flag approach?

Answer:
The flag approach will normally suffer fewer cache misses, but a better answer is to try
both and see which works best for your particular workload. ❑

Quick Quiz 7.29:                                                                    p.191
How can relying on implicit existence guarantees result in a bug?

Answer:
Here are some bugs resulting from improper use of implicit existence guarantees:

   1. A program writes the address of a global variable to a file, then a later instance of
      that same program reads that address and attempts to dereference it. This can
      fail due to address-space randomization, to say nothing of recompilation of the
      program.

   2. A module can record the address of one of its variables in a pointer located in
      some other module, then attempt to dereference that pointer after the module has
      been unloaded.

   3. A function can record the address of one of its on-stack variables into a global
      pointer, which some other function might attempt to dereference after that function
      has returned.

I am sure that you can come up with additional possibilities. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.8. DATA OWNERSHIP                                                                    801

Quick Quiz 7.30:                                                                 p.192
What if the element we need to delete is not the first element of the list on line 8 of
Listing 7.10?

Answer:
This is a very simple hash table with no chaining, so the only element in a given bucket
is the first element. The reader is invited to adapt this example to a hash table with full
chaining. ❑

E.8      Data Ownership

Quick Quiz 8.1:                                                             p.201
What form of data ownership is extremely difficult to avoid when creating shared-
memory parallel programs (for example, using pthreads) in C or C++?

Answer:
Use of auto variables in functions. By default, these are private to the thread executing
the current function. ❑

Quick Quiz 8.2:                                                                     p.202
What synchronization remains in the example shown in Section 8.1?

Answer:
The creation of the threads via the sh & operator and the joining of thread via the sh
wait command.
    Of course, if the processes explicitly share memory, for example, using the shmget()
or mmap() system calls, explicit synchronization might well be needed when acccessing
or updating the shared memory. The processes might also synchronize using any of the
following interprocess communications mechanisms:

   1. System V semaphores.

   2. System V message queues.

   3. UNIX-domain sockets.

   4. Networking protocols, including TCP/IP, UDP, and a whole host of others.

   5. File locking.

   6. Use of the open() system call with the O_CREAT and O_EXCL flags.

   7. Use of the rename() system call.

A complete list of possible synchronization mechanisms is left as an exercise to the
reader, who is warned that it will be an extremely long list. A surprising number of
unassuming system calls can be pressed into service as synchronization mechanisms. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
802                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 8.3:                                                                      p.202
Is there any shared data in the example shown in Section 8.1?

Answer:
That is a philosophical question.
  Those wishing the answer “no” might argue that processes by definition do not share
memory.
    Those wishing to answer “yes” might list a large number of synchronization
mechanisms that do not require shared memory, note that the kernel will have some
shared state, and perhaps even argue that the assignment of process IDs (PIDs) constitute
shared data.
    Such arguments are excellent intellectual exercise, and are also a wonderful way of
feeling intelligent and scoring points against hapless classmates or colleagues, but are
mostly a way of avoiding getting anything useful done. ❑

Quick Quiz 8.4:                                                                   p.202
Does it ever make sense to have partial data ownership where each thread reads only
its own instance of a per-thread variable, but writes to other threads’ instances?

Answer:
Amazingly enough, yes. One example is a simple message-passing system where threads
post messages to other threads’ mailboxes, and where each thread is responsible for
removing any message it sent once that message has been acted on. Implementation of
such an algorithm is left as an exercise for the reader, as is identifying other algorithms
with similar ownership patterns. ❑

Quick Quiz 8.5:                                                           p.203
What mechanisms other than POSIX signals may be used for function shipping?

Answer:
There is a very large number of such mechanisms, including:

   1. System V message queues.

   2. Shared-memory dequeue (see Section 6.1.2).

   3. Shared-memory mailboxes.

   4. UNIX-domain sockets.

   5. TCP/IP or UDP, possibly augmented by any number of higher-level protocols,
      including RPC, HTTP, XML, SOAP, and so on.

Compilation of a complete list is left as an exercise to sufficiently single-minded readers,
who are warned that the list will be extremely long. ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                            803

Quick Quiz 8.6:                                                                 p.203
But none of the data in the eventual() function shown on lines 17–32 of Listing 5.5 is
actually owned by the eventual() thread! In just what way is this data ownership???

Answer:
The key phrase is “owns the rights to the data”. In this case, the rights in question are
the rights to access the per-thread counter variable defined on line 1 of the listing.
This situation is similar to that described in Section 8.2.
    However, there really is data that is owned by the eventual() thread, namely the t
and sum variables defined on lines 19 and 20 of the listing.
    For other examples of designated threads, look at the kernel threads in the Linux
kernel, for example, those created by kthread_create() and kthread_run(). ❑

Quick Quiz 8.7:                                                                 p.204
Is it possible to obtain greater accuracy while still maintaining full privacy of the
per-thread data?

Answer:
Yes. One approach is for read_count() to add the value of its own per-thread variable.
This maintains full ownership and performance, but only a slight improvement in
accuracy, particularly on systems with very large numbers of threads.
    Another approach is for read_count() to use function shipping, for example, in
the form of per-thread signals. This greatly improves accuracy, but at a significant
performance cost for read_count().
    However, both of these methods have the advantage of eliminating cache thrashing
for the common case of updating counters. ❑

E.9      Deferred Processing

Quick Quiz 9.1:                                                                   p.210
Why bother with a use-after-free check?

Answer:
To greatly increase the probability of finding bugs. A small torture-test program
(routetorture.h) that allocates and frees only one type of structure can tolerate a
surprisingly large amount of use-after-free misbehavior. See Figure 11.4 on page 345
and the related discussion in Section 11.6.4 starting on page 347 for more on the
importance of increasing the probability of finding bugs. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.2:                                                               p.210
Why doesn’t route_del() in Listing 9.3 use reference counts to protect the traversal
to the element to be freed?
Answer:
Because the traversal is already protected by the lock, so no additional protection is
required. ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
804                                                            APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

                                                1x10

                                                       7                         ideal
                                                1x10

                     Lookups per Millisecond
                                                1x106

                                               100000

                                               10000                refcnt

                                                           1           10           100
                                                                 Number of CPUs (Threads)

  Figure E.4: Pre-BSD Routing Table Protected by Reference Counting, Log Scale

Quick Quiz 9.3:                                                                  p.210
Why the break in the “ideal” line at 224 CPUs in Figure 9.2? Shouldn’t it be a straight
line?

Answer:
The break is due to hyperthreading. On this particular system, the first hardware thread
in each core within a socket have consecutive CPU numbers, followed by the first
hardware threads in each core for the other sockets, and finally followed by the second
hardware thread in each core on all the sockets. On this particular system, CPU numbers
0–27 are the first hardware threads in each of the 28 cores in the first socket, numbers
28–55 are the first hardware threads in each of the 28 cores in the second socket, and so
on, so that numbers 196–223 are the first hardware threads in each of the 28 cores in the
eighth socket. Then CPU numbers 224–251 are the second hardware threads in each
of the 28 cores of the first socket, numbers 252–279 are the second hardware threads
in each of the 28 cores of the second socket, and so on until numbers 420–447 are the
second hardware threads in each of the 28 cores of the eighth socket.
    Why does this matter?
    Because the two hardware threads of a given core share resources, and this workload
seems to allow a single hardware thread to consume more than half of the relevant
resources within its core. Therefore, adding the second hardware thread of that core
adds less than one might hope. Other workloads might gain greater benefit from each
core’s second hardware thread, but much depends on the details of both the hardware
and the workload. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.4:                                                                       p.212
Shouldn’t the refcnt trace in Figure 9.2 be at least a little bit off of the x-axis???

Answer:
Define “a little bit.”
    Figure E.4 shows the same data, but on a log-log plot. As you can see, the refcnt
line drops below 5,000 at two CPUs. This means that the refcnt performance at two
CPUs is more than one thousand times smaller than the first y-axis tick of 5 × 106 in

                                                                                                      v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                             805

Figure 9.2. Therefore, the depiction of the performance of reference counting shown in
Figure 9.2 is all too accurate. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.5:                                                             p.213
If concurrency has “most definitely reduced the usefulness of reference counting”,
why are there so many reference counters in the Linux kernel?

Answer:
That sentence did say “reduced the usefulness”, not “eliminated the usefulness”, now
didn’t it?
   Please see Section 13.2, which discusses some of the techniques that the Linux
kernel uses to take advantage of reference counting in a highly concurrent environment.
❑

Quick Quiz 9.6:                                                             p.214
Given that papers on hazard pointers use the bottom bits of each pointer to mark
deleted elements, what is up with HAZPTR_POISON?

Answer:
The published implementations of hazard pointers used non-blocking synchronization
techniques for insertion and deletion. These techniques require that readers traversing
the data structure “help” updaters complete their updates, which in turn means that
readers need to look at the successor of a deleted element.
    In contrast, we will be using locking to synchronize updates, which does away with
the need for readers to help updaters complete their updates, which in turn allows us to
leave pointers’ bottom bits alone. This approach allows read-side code to be simpler
and faster. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.7:                                                         p.214
Why does hp_try_record() in Listing 9.4 take a double indirection to the data
element? Why not void * instead of void **?

Answer:
Because hp_try_record() must check for concurrent modifications. To do that job,
it needs a pointer to a pointer to the element, so that it can check for a modification to
the pointer to the element. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.8:                                                          p.214
Why bother with hp_try_record()? Wouldn’t it be easier to just use the failure-
immune hp_record() function?

Answer:
It might be easier in some sense, but as will be seen in the Pre-BSD routing example,
there are situations for which hp_record() simply does not work. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
806                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 9.9:                                                                     p.217
Readers must “typically” restart? What are some exceptions?

Answer:
If the pointer emanates from a global variable or is otherwise not subject to being freed,
then hp_record() may be used to repeatedly attempt to record the hazard pointer, even
in the face of concurrent deletions.
     In certain cases, restart can be avoided by using link counting as exemplified by
the UnboundedQueue and ConcurrentHashMap data structures implemented in Folly
open-source library.12 ❑

Quick Quiz 9.10:                                                                 p.217
But don’t these restrictions on hazard pointers also apply to other forms of reference
counting?

Answer:
Yes and no. These restrictions apply only to reference-counting mechanisms whose
reference acquisition can fail. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.11:                                                            p.219
Figure 9.3 shows no sign of hyperthread-induced flattening at 224 threads. Why is
that?
Answer:
Modern microprocessors are complicated beasts, so significant skepticism is appropriate
for any simple answer. That aside, the most likely reason is the full memory barriers
required by hazard-pointers readers. Any delays resulting from those memory barriers
would make time available to the other hardware thread sharing the core, resulting in
greater scalability at the expense of per-hardware-thread performance. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.12:                                                               p.219
The paper “Structured Deferral: Synchronization via Procrastination” [McK13] shows
that hazard pointers have near-ideal performance. Whatever happened in Figure 9.3???

Answer:
First, Figure 9.3 has a linear y-axis, while most of the graphs in the “Structured Deferral”
paper have logscale y-axes. Next, that paper uses lightly-loaded hash tables, while
Figure 9.3’s uses a 10-element simple linked list, which means that hazard pointers
face a larger memory-barrier penalty in this workload than in that of the “Structured
Deferral” paper. Finally, that paper used an older modest-sized x86 system, while a
much newer and larger system was used to generate the data shown in Figure 9.3.
    In addition, use of pairwise asymmetric barriers [Mic08, Cor10b, Cor18] has
been proposed to eliminate the read-side hazard-pointer memory barriers on systems
supporting this notion [Gol18b], which might improve the performance of hazard
pointers beyond what is shown in the figure.

  12 https://github.com/facebook/folly

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                                807

    As always, your mileage may vary. Given the difference in performance, it is clear
that hazard pointers give you the best performance either for very large data structures
(where the memory-barrier overhead will at least partially overlap cache-miss penalties)
and for data structures such as hash tables where a lookup operation needs a minimal
number of hazard pointers. ❑

 Quick Quiz 9.13:                                                        p.219
 What needs to be done to convert reference-counted code to instead use hazard
 pointers?

Answer:
You will need to:

   1. Allocate and deallocate the hazard pointers,

   2. Add a hazptr_head structure to your hazard-pointer-protected data elements,
      and

   3. Once you have removed such an element from its data structure, pass it to
      hazptr_free_later().

This last requirement is termed “deferred free” or (in the C++ standard “retire”), and
is needed because, unlike reference counters, there is no efficient and scalable way
to determine precisely when the number of hazard pointers referencing a given data
element has dropped to zero. ❑

 Quick Quiz 9.14:                                                                 p.220
 Why isn’t this sequence-lock discussion in Chapter 7, you know, the one on locking?

Answer:
The sequence-lock mechanism is really a combination of two separate synchronization
mechanisms, sequence counts and locking. In fact, the sequence-count mechanism
is available separately in the Linux kernel via the write_seqcount_begin() and
write_seqcount_end() primitives.
    However, the combined write_seqlock() and write_sequnlock() primitives
are used much more heavily in the Linux kernel. More importantly, many more people
will understand what you mean if you say “sequence lock” than if you say “sequence
count”.
    So this section is entitled “Sequence Locks” so that people will understand what it
is about just from the title, and it appears in the “Deferred Processing” because (1) of
the emphasis on the “sequence count” aspect of “sequence locks” and (2) because a
“sequence lock” is much more than merely a lock. ❑

 Quick Quiz 9.15:                                                                    p.222
 Why not have read_seqbegin() in Listing 9.10 check whether the sequence-number
 value is odd, and, if so, retry internally rather than entering a doomed read-side critical
 section?
Answer:
This would be a legitimate implementation.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
808                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

    But please keep in mind that (1) This added check is a relatively expensive conditional
branch, (2) It cannot be substituted for the later check done by read_seqretry(),
which must happen after the critical section completes, and (3) Sequence locking is
intended for read-mostly workloads, which means that this extra check would slow down
the common case.
    On the other hand, in an alternate universe having a sufficiently large fraction of up-
dates and sufficiently high-overhead readers, having this internal-to-read_seqbegin()
check might be preferable.
    Of course, the full memory barriers on lines 17 and 26 of Listing 9.10 are quite
heavyweight as instructions go, which suggests that the overhead of the added check
might be negligible. Except that, in userspace code, the membarrier() system
call [Cor10c, Des17, Cor18] can be used to eliminate that smp_mb() overhead on
the read side in exchange for the added overhead of membarrier() on the update
side. This feature is on its way into the C++ standard under the name of “asymmetric
fences” [Gol22]. Either way, this trick eliminates the update-side smp_mb() overhead,
which in turn makes eliminating the check more attractive, arriving again at the form of
the code shown in Listing 9.11.
   This same trick may be applied to Linux-kernel code using tools such as smp_call_
function(), at least in non-realtime builds of the Linux kernel. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.16:                                                                    p.222
Why is the smp_mb() on line 26 of Listing 9.10 needed?

Answer:
If it was omitted, both the compiler and the CPU would be within their rights to move the
critical section preceding the call to read_seqretry() down below this function. This
would prevent the sequence lock from protecting the critical section. The smp_mb()
primitive prevents such reordering. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.17:                                                                    p.222
Can’t weaker memory barriers be used in the code in Listing 9.10?

Answer:
In older versions of the Linux kernel, no.
    In very new versions of the Linux kernel, line 16 could use smp_load_acquire()
instead of READ_ONCE(), which in turn would allow the smp_mb() on line 17 to be
dropped. Similarly, line 41 could use an smp_store_release(), for example, as
follows:

  smp_store_release(&slp->seq, READ_ONCE(slp->seq) + 1);

      This would allow the smp_mb() on line 40 to be dropped. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                               809

Quick Quiz 9.18:                                                                    p.222
What prevents sequence-locking updaters from starving readers?

Answer:
Nothing. This is one of the weaknesses of sequence locking, and as a result, you should
use sequence locking only in read-mostly situations. Unless of course read-side starvation
is acceptable in your situation, in which case, go wild with the sequence-locking updates!
❑

Quick Quiz 9.19:                                                                    p.222
What if something else serializes writers, so that the lock is not needed?

Answer:
In this case, the ->lock field could be omitted, as it is in seqcount_t in the Linux
kernel. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.20:                                                               p.222
Why isn’t seq on line 2 of Listing 9.10 unsigned rather than unsigned long? After
all, if unsigned is good enough for the Linux kernel, shouldn’t it be good enough for
everyone?

Answer:
Not at all. The Linux kernel has a number of special attributes that allow it to ignore
the following sequence of events:
   1. Thread 0 executes read_seqbegin(), picking up ->seq in line 16, noting that
      the value is even, and thus returning to the caller.
   2. Thread 0 starts executing its read-side critical section, but is then preempted for a
      long time.
   3. Other threads repeatedly invoke write_seqlock() and write_sequnlock(),
      until the value of ->seq overflows back to the value that Thread 0 fetched.
   4. Thread 0 resumes execution, completing its read-side critical section with incon-
      sistent data.
   5. Thread 0 invokes read_seqretry(), which incorrectly concludes that Thread 0
      has seen a consistent view of the data protected by the sequence lock.
    The Linux kernel uses sequence locking for things that are updated rarely, with
time-of-day information being a case in point. This information is updated at most
once per millisecond, so that seven weeks would be required to overflow the counter. If
a kernel thread was preempted for seven weeks, the Linux kernel’s soft-lockup code
would be emitting warnings every two minutes for that entire time.
    In contrast, with a 64-bit counter, more than five centuries would be required to
overflow, even given an update every nanosecond. Therefore, this implementation uses
a type for ->seq that is 64 bits on 64-bit systems. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.21:                                                        p.222
Can this bug be fixed? In other words, can you use sequence locks as the only

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
810                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

 synchronization mechanism protecting a linked list supporting concurrent addition,
 deletion, and lookup?

Answer:
One trivial way of accomplishing this is to surround all accesses, including the read-
only accesses, with write_seqlock() and write_sequnlock(). Of course, this
solution also prohibits all read-side parallelism, resulting in massive lock contention,
and furthermore could just as easily be implemented using simple locking.
    If you do come up with a solution that uses read_seqbegin() and read_
seqretry() to protect read-side accesses, make sure that you correctly handle the
following sequence of events:
   1. CPU 0 is traversing the linked list, and picks up a pointer to list element A.
   2. CPU 1 removes element A from the list and frees it.
   3. CPU 2 allocates an unrelated data structure, and gets the memory formerly
      occupied by element A. In this unrelated data structure, the memory previously
      used for element A’s ->next pointer is now occupied by a floating-point number.
   4. CPU 0 picks up what used to be element A’s ->next pointer, gets random bits,
      and therefore gets a segmentation fault.
    One way to protect against this sort of problem requires use of “type-safe memory”,
which will be discussed in Section 9.5.4.5. Roughly similar solutions are possible using
the hazard pointers discussed in Section 9.3. But in either case, you would be using
some other synchronization mechanism in addition to sequence locks! ❑

 Quick Quiz 9.22:                                                             p.225
 RCU cannot possibly be this simple!!! And what on earth could you possibly do with
 a synchronization primitive that is nothing more than a simple delay???

Answer:
I am sorry, but the core of RCU really is exactly that simple!
    And you can do many amazing things with RCU’s simple delay. Please feel free to
continue reading this section in order to learn how. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.23:                                                            p.227
Why does Figure 9.7 use smp_store_release() given that it is storing a NULL
pointer? Wouldn’t WRITE_ONCE() work just as well in this case, given that there is
no structure initialization to order against the store of the NULL pointer?

Answer:
Yes, it would.
     Because a NULL pointer is being assigned, there is nothing to order against, so there
is no need for smp_store_release(). In contrast, when assigning a non-NULL pointer,
it is necessary to use smp_store_release() in order to ensure that initialization of
the pointed-to structure is carried out before assignment of the pointer.
     In short, WRITE_ONCE() would work, and would save a little bit of CPU time on some
architectures. However, as we will see, software-engineering concerns will motivate use
of a special rcu_assign_pointer() that is quite similar to smp_store_release().
❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                                811

Quick Quiz 9.24:                                                                p.228
Readers running concurrently with each other and with the procedure outlined in
Figure 9.7 can disagree on the value of gptr. Isn’t that just a wee bit problematic???

Answer:
Not necessarily.
     As hinted at in Sections 3.2.3 and 3.3, speed-of-light delays mean that a computer’s
data is always stale compared to whatever external reality that data is intended to model.
     Real-world algorithms therefore absolutely must tolerate inconsistancies between
external reality and the in-computer data reflecting that reality. Many of those algorithms
are also able to tolerate some degree of inconsistency within the in-computer data.
Section 10.3.4 discusses this point in more detail.
     Please note that this need to tolerate inconsistent and stale data is not limited to
RCU. It also applies to reference counting, hazard pointers, sequence locks, and even to
some locking use cases. For example, if you compute some quantity while holding a
lock, but use that quantity after releasing that lock, you might well be using stale data.
After all, the data that quantity is based on might change arbitrarily as soon as the lock
is released.
     So yes, RCU readers can see stale and inconsistent data, but no, this is not necessarily
problematic. And, when needed, there are RCU usage patterns that avoid both staleness
and inconsistency [ACMS03]. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.25:                                                                     p.228
What is an RCU-protected pointer?

Answer:
A pointer to RCU-protected data. RCU-protected data is in turn a block of dynamically
allocated memory whose freeing will be deferred such that an RCU grace period will
elapse between the time that there were no longer any RCU-reader-accessible pointers
to that block and the time that that block is freed. This ensures that no RCU readers will
have access to that block at the time that it is freed.
    RCU-protected pointers must be handled carefully. For example, any reader
that intends to dereference an RCU-protected pointer must use rcu_dereference()
(or stronger) to load that pointer. In addition, any updater must use rcu_assign_
pointer() (or stronger) to store to that pointer. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.26:                                                         p.228
What does synchronize_rcu() do if it starts at about the same time as an rcu_
read_lock()?

Answer:
If a synchronize_rcu() cannot prove that it started before a given rcu_read_lock(),
then it must wait for the corresponding rcu_read_unlock(). ❑

Quick Quiz 9.27:                                                                p.231
In Figure 9.8, the last of CPU 3’s readers that could possibly have access to the old

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
812                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

data item ended before the grace period even started! So why would anyone bother
waiting until CPU 3’s later context switch???

Answer:
Because that waiting is exactly what enables readers to use the same sequence of
instructions that is appropriate for single-theaded situations. In other words, this
additional “redundant” waiting enables excellent read-side performance, scalability, and
real-time response. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.28:                                                      p.233
What is the point of rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock() in Listing 9.13?
Why not just let the quiescent states speak for themselves?

Answer:
Recall that readers are not permitted to pass through a quiescent state. For example,
within the Linux kernel, RCU readers are not permitted to execute a context switch. Use
of rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock() enables debug checks for improperly
placed quiescent states, making it easy to find bugs that would otherwise be difficult to
find, intermittent, and quite destructive. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.29:                                                    p.233
What is the point of rcu_dereference(), rcu_assign_pointer() and RCU_
INIT_POINTER() in Listing 9.13? Why not just use READ_ONCE(), smp_store_
release(), and WRITE_ONCE(), respectively?

Answer:
The RCU-specific APIs do have similar semantics to the suggested replacements, but
also enable static-analysis debugging checks that complain if an RCU-specific API is
invoked on a non-RCU pointer and vice versa. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.30:                                                                p.233
But what if the old structure needs to be freed, but the caller of ins_route() cannot
block, perhaps due to performance considerations or perhaps because the caller is
executing within an RCU read-side critical section?

Answer:
A call_rcu() function, which is described in Section 9.5.2.2, permits asynchronous
grace-period waits. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.31:                                                        p.234
Doesn’t Section 9.4’s seqlock also permit readers and updaters to make useful
concurrent forward progress?

Answer:
Yes and no. Although seqlock readers can run concurrently with seqlock writers,
whenever this happens, the read_seqretry() primitive will force the reader to retry.
This means that any work done by a seqlock reader running concurrently with a seqlock
updater will be discarded and then redone upon retry. So seqlock readers can run
concurrently with updaters, but they cannot actually get any work done in this case.

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                              813

    In contrast, RCU readers can perform useful work even in presence of concurrent
RCU updaters.
    However, both reference counters (Section 9.2) and hazard pointers (Section 9.3)
really do permit useful concurrent forward progress for both updaters and readers, just
at somewhat greater cost. Please see Section 9.6 for a comparison of these different
solutions to the deferred-reclamation problem. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.32:                                                               p.236
Wouldn’t use of data ownership for RCU updaters mean that the updates could use
exactly the same sequence of instructions as would the corresponding single-threaded
code?

Answer:
Sometimes, for example, on TSO systems such as x86 or the IBM mainframe where
a store-release operation emits a single store instruction. However, weakly ordered
systems must also emit a memory barrier or perhaps a store-release instruction. In
addition, removing data requires quite a bit of additional work because it is necessary to
wait for pre-existing readers before freeing the removed data. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.33:                                                                 p.237
But suppose that updaters are adding and removing multiple data items from a linked
list while a reader is iterating over that same list. Specifically, suppose that a list
initially contains elements A, B, and C, and that an updater removes element A and
then adds a new element D at the end of the list. The reader might well see {A, B, C,
D}, when that sequence of elements never actually ever existed! In what alternate
universe would that qualify as “not disrupting concurrent readers”???

Answer:
In the universe where an iterating reader is only required to traverse elements that were
present throughout the full duration of the iteration. In the example, that would be
elements B and C. Because elements A and D were each present for only part of the
iteration, the reader is permitted to iterate over them, but not obliged to. Note that this
supports the common case where the reader is simply looking up a single item, and
does not know or care about the presence or absence of other items.
    If stronger consistency is required, then higher-cost synchronization mechanisms
are required, for example, sequence locking or reader-writer locking. But if stronger
consistency is not required (and it very often is not), then why pay the higher cost? ❑

Quick Quiz 9.34:                                                                    p.237
What other final values of r1 and r2 are possible in Figure 9.11?

Answer:
The r1 == 0 && r2 == 0 possibility was called out in the text. Given that r1 == 0
implies r2 == 0, we know that r1 == 0 && r2 == 1 is forbidden. The following
discussion will show that both r1 == 1 && r2 == 1 and r1 == 1 && r2 == 0 are
possible. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
814                                    APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Listing E.2: Concurrent RCU Deletion
1    spin_lock(&mylock);
2    p = search(head, key);
3    if (p == NULL)
4            spin_unlock(&mylock);
5    else {
6            list_del_rcu(&p->list);
7            spin_unlock(&mylock);
8            synchronize_rcu();
9            kfree(p);
10   }

 Quick Quiz 9.35:                                                             p.239
 What would happen if the order of P0()’s two accesses was reversed in Figure 9.12?

Answer:
Absolutely nothing would change. The fact that P0()’s loads from x and y are in the
same RCU read-side critical section suffices; their order is irrelevant. ❑

 Quick Quiz 9.36:                                                                   p.239
 What would happen if P0()’s accesses in Figures 9.11–9.13 were stores?

Answer:
The exact same ordering rules would apply, that is, (1) If any part of P0()’s RCU
read-side critical section preceded the beginning of P1()’s grace period, all of P0()’s
RCU read-side critical section would precede the end of P1()’s grace period, and (2) If
any part of P0()’s RCU read-side critical section followed the end of P1()’s grace
period, all of P0()’s RCU read-side critical section would follow the beginning of
P1()’s grace period.
     It might seem strange to have RCU read-side critical sections containing writes, but
this capability is not only permitted, but also highly useful. For example, the Linux
kernel frequently carries out an RCU-protected traversal of a linked data structure and
then acquires a reference to the destination data element. Because this data element
must not be freed in the meantime, that element’s reference counter must necessarily
be incremented within the traversal’s RCU read-side critical section. However, that
increment entails a write to memory. Therefore, it is a very good thing that memory
writes are permitted within RCU read-side critical sections.
     If having writes in RCU read-side critical sections still seems strange, please review
Section 5.4.6, which presented a use case for writes in reader-writer locking read-side
critical sections. ❑

 Quick Quiz 9.37:                                                           p.244
 How would you modify the deletion example to permit more than two versions of the
 list to be active?

Answer:
One way of accomplishing this is as shown in Listing E.2.
   Note that this means that multiple concurrent deletions might be waiting in
synchronize_rcu(). ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                             815

Quick Quiz 9.38:                                                                   p.244
How many RCU versions of a given list can be active at any given time?

Answer:
That depends on the synchronization design. If a semaphore protecting the update is
held across the grace period, then there can be at most two versions, the old and the new.
    However, suppose that only the search, the update, and the list_replace_rcu()
were protected by a lock, so that the synchronize_rcu() was outside of that lock,
similar to the code shown in Listing E.2. Suppose further that a large number of
threads undertook an RCU replacement at about the same time, and that readers are
also constantly traversing the data structure.
    Then the following sequence of events could occur, starting from the end state of
Figure 9.15:
   1. Thread A traverses the list, obtaining a reference to Element C.
   2. Thread B replaces Element C with a new Element F, then waits for its synchronize_
      rcu() call to return.
   3. Thread C traverses the list, obtaining a reference to Element F.
   4. Thread D replaces Element F with a new Element G, then waits for its synchronize_
      rcu() call to return.
   5. Thread E traverses the list, obtaining a reference to Element G.
   6. Thread F replaces Element G with a new Element H, then waits for its synchronize_
      rcu() call to return.
   7. Thread G traverses the list, obtaining a reference to Element H.
   8. And the previous two steps repeat quickly with additional new elements, so that
      all of them happen before any of the synchronize_rcu() calls return.
    Thus, there can be an arbitrary number of versions active, limited only by memory
and by how many updates could be completed within a grace period. But please note
that data structures that are updated so frequently are not likely to be good candidates
for RCU. Nevertheless, RCU can handle high update rates when necessary. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.39:                                                                   p.244
How can the per-update overhead of RCU be reduced?

Answer:
The most effective way to reduce the per-update overhead of RCU is to increase the
number of updates served by a given grace period. This works because the per-grace
period overhead is nearly independent of the number of updates served by that grace
period.
    One way to do this is to delay the start of a given grace period in the hope that
more updates requiring that grace period appear in the meantime. Another way is to
slow down execution of the grace period in the hope that more updates requiring an
additional grace period will accumulate in the meantime.
    There are many other possible optimizations, and fanatically devoted readers are
referred to the Linux-kernel RCU implementation. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
816                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 9.40:                                                         p.244
How can RCU updaters possibly delay RCU readers, given that neither rcu_read_
lock() nor rcu_read_unlock() spin or block?

Answer:
The modifications undertaken by a given RCU updater will cause the corresponding CPU
to invalidate cache lines containing the data, forcing the CPUs running concurrent RCU
readers to incur expensive cache misses. (Can you design an algorithm that changes
a data structure without inflicting expensive cache misses on concurrent readers? On
subsequent readers?) ❑

Quick Quiz 9.41:                                                                  p.246
Why do some of the cells in Table 9.2 have exclamation marks (“!”)?

Answer:
The API members with exclamation marks (rcu_read_lock(), rcu_read_unlock(),
and call_rcu()) were the only members of the Linux RCU API that Paul E. McKenney
was aware of back in the mid-90s. During this timeframe, he was under the mistaken
impression that he knew all that there is to know about RCU. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.42:                                                               p.246
How do you prevent a huge number of RCU read-side critical sections from indefinitely
blocking a synchronize_rcu() invocation?

Answer:
There is no need to do anything to prevent RCU read-side critical sections from
indefinitely blocking a synchronize_rcu() invocation, because the synchronize_
rcu() invocation need wait only for pre-existing RCU read-side critical sections. So as
long as each RCU read-side critical section is of finite duration, RCU grace periods will
also remain finite. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.43:                                                              p.246
The synchronize_rcu() API waits for all pre-existing interrupt handlers to complete,
right?

Answer:
In v4.20 and later Linux kernels, yes [McK19c, McK19a].
    But not in earlier kernels, and especially not when using preemptible RCU! You
instead want synchronize_irq(). Alternatively, you can place calls to rcu_read_
lock() and rcu_read_unlock() in the specific interrupt handlers that you want
synchronize_rcu() to wait for. But even then, be careful, as preemptible RCU
will not be guaranteed to wait for that portion of the interrupt handler preceding the
rcu_read_lock() or following the rcu_read_unlock(). ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                                817

                   Table E.3: synchronize_rcu() vs. rcu_barrier()

                                            Must Wait Until (in the snippet):

                Invoked at:            synchronize_rcu()            rcu_barrier()

           do_something_1()
           do_something_2()         rcu_read_unlock() (line 6)
           do_something_3()         rcu_read_unlock() (line 6)     f(&p->rh) (line 8)
           do_something_4()                                        f(&p->rh) (line 8)
           do_something_5()

1            do_something_1();
2            rcu_read_lock();
3            do_something_2();
4            call_rcu(&p->rh, f);
5            do_something_3();
6            rcu_read_unlock();
7            do_something_4();
8            // f(&p->rh) invoked
9            do_something_5();

    Quick Quiz 9.44:                                                                 p.246
    Given that any region of code that disables interrupts acts as an RCU read-side critical
    section, do atomic operations and single machine instructions also act as tiny RCU
    read-side critical sections?

Answer:
Yes, they do.
    But if you are tempted to use this trick, think again, and harder this time.
    And if you have absolutely no alternative to using this trick, then carefully document
your use of it. Otherwise, everyone reading the code (yourself included) will hate you
for it.
    Why so much hate?
    To see why, keep in mind that the big advantage of Jack Slingwine’s and my
invention of RCU was that we marked the RCU readers. Take it from all the people
who independently invented something kind of like RCU, but failed to mark their
read-side critical sections: You really do need to mark your RCU readers! Including
your single-instruction RCU readers. ❑

    Quick Quiz 9.45:                                                    p.249
    What is the difference between synchronize_rcu() and rcu_barrier()?

Answer:
They wait on different things. While synchronize_rcu() waits for pre-existing RCU
read-side critical sections to complete, rcu_barrier() instead waits for callbacks
from prior calls to call_rcu() to be invoked.
   This distinction is illustrated by Table E.3, in which the snippet at the bottom shows
code being executed by a given CPU. For simplicity, assume that no other CPU is
executing rcu_read_lock(), rcu_read_unlock(), or call_rcu().

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
818                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Listing E.3: Multistage SRCU Deadlocks
1   idx = srcu_read_lock(&ssa);
2   synchronize_srcu(&ssb);
3   srcu_read_unlock(&ssa, idx);
4
5   /* . . . */
6
7   idx = srcu_read_lock(&ssb);
8   synchronize_srcu(&ssa);
9   srcu_read_unlock(&ssb, idx);

    The table shows how long each primitive must wait if invoked concurrently with
each of the do_something_*() functions, with empty cells indicating that no waiting
is necessary. As you can see, synchronize_rcu() need not wait unless it is in an
RCU read-side critical section, in which case it must wait for the rcu_read_unlock()
that ends that critical section. In contrast, RCU read-side critical sections have no effect
on rcu_barrier(). However, when rcu_barrier() executes after a call_rcu()
invocation, it must wait until the corresponding RCU callback is invoked.
    All that said, there is a special case where each call to rcu_barrier() can be
replaced by a direct call to synchronize_rcu(), and that is where synchronize_
rcu() is implemented in terms of call_rcu() and where there is a single global list
of callbacks. But please do not do this in portable code!!! ❑

Quick Quiz 9.46:                                                       p.250
Under what conditions can synchronize_srcu() be safely used within an SRCU
read-side critical section?
Answer:
In principle, you can use either synchronize_srcu() or synchronize_srcu_
expedited() with a given srcu_struct within an SRCU read-side critical section
that uses some other srcu_struct. In practice, however, doing this is almost certainly
a bad idea. In particular, the code shown in Listing E.3 could still result in deadlock,
which lockdep will complain about in v6.4 and later Linux kernels. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.47:                                                            p.251
In a kernel built with CONFIG_PREEMPT_NONE=y, won’t synchronize_rcu() wait
for all trampolines, given that preemption is disabled and that trampolines never
directly or indirectly invoke schedule()?

Answer:
You are quite right!
   In fact, in nonpreemptible kernels, synchronize_rcu_tasks() is a wrapper
around synchronize_rcu(). But note that kernels with runtime-settable preemption
(CONFIG_PREEMPT_DYNAMIC=y) or with lazy preemption enabled (CONFIG_PREEMPT_
LAZY=y) are in fact preemptible. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.48:                                                             p.251
Normally, any pointer subject to rcu_dereference() must always be updated
using one of the pointer-publish functions in Table 9.6, for example, rcu_assign_
pointer().
What is an exception to this rule?

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                             819

Listing E.4: Diverse RCU Read-Side Nesting
1   rcu_read_lock();
2   preempt_disable();
3   p = rcu_dereference(global_pointer);
4
5   /* . . . */
6
7   preempt_enable();
8   rcu_read_unlock();

Answer:
One such exception is when a multi-element linked data structure is initialized as a unit
while inaccessible to other CPUs, and then a single rcu_assign_pointer() is used to
plant a global pointer to this data structure. The initialization-time pointer assignments
need not use rcu_assign_pointer(), though any such assignments that happen after
the structure is globally visible must use rcu_assign_pointer().
    However, unless this initialization code is on an impressively hot code-path, it is
probably wise to use rcu_assign_pointer() anyway, even though it is in theory
unnecessary. It is all too easy for a “minor” change to invalidate your cherished
assumptions about the initialization happening privately. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.49:                                                                p.251
Are there any downsides to the fact that these traversal and update primitives can be
used with any of the RCU API family members?

Answer:
It can sometimes be difficult for automated code checkers such as “sparse” (or indeed for
human beings) to work out which type of RCU read-side critical section a given RCU
traversal primitive corresponds to. For example, consider the code shown in Listing E.4.
     Is the rcu_dereference() primitive in a vanilla RCU critical section or an RCU
Sched critical section? What would you have to do to figure this out?
     But perhaps after the consolidation of the RCU flavors in the v4.20 Linux kernel we
no longer need to care! ❑

Quick Quiz 9.50:                                                          p.254
But what if an hlist_nulls reader gets moved to some other bucket and then back
again?

Answer:
One way to handle this is to always move nodes to the beginning of the destination
bucket, ensuring that when the reader reaches the end of the list having a matching NULL
pointer, it will have searched the entire list.
    Of course, if there are too many move operations in a hash table with many elements
per bucket, the reader might never reach the end of a list. One way of avoiding this
in the common case is to keep hash tables well-tuned, thus with short lists. One way
of detecting the problem and handling it is for the reader to terminate the search after
traversing some large number of nodes, acquire the update-side lock, and redo the search,
but this might introduce deadlocks. Another way of avoiding the problem entirely is for
readers to search within RCU read-side critical sections, and to wait for an RCU grace
period between successive updates. An intermediate position might wait for an RCU
grace period every 𝑁 updates, for some suitable value of 𝑁. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
820                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 9.51:                                                                 p.257
Why doesn’t Table 9.7 include additional list-initialization APIs such as INIT_HLIST_
HEAD()?

Answer:
Because this and similar APIs are not specific to RCU, but are also (and sometimes
mainly) used for similar lists that are protected by other synchronization mechanisms. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.52:                                                                    p.258
Why isn’t there a rcu_read_lock_tasks_held() for Tasks RCU?

Answer:
Because Tasks RCU does not have read-side markers. Instead, Tasks RCU read-side
critical sections are bounded by voluntary context switches. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.53:                                                          p.262
Wait, what??? How can RCU QSBR possibly be better than ideal? Just what rubbish
definition of ideal would fail to be the best of all possible results???

Answer:
This is an excellent question, and the answer is that modern CPUs and compilers are
extremely complex. But before getting into that, it is well worth noting that RCU QSBR’s
performance advantage appears only in the one-hardware-thread-per-core regime. Once
the system is fully loaded, RCU QSBR’s performance drops back to ideal.
    The RCU variant of the route_lookup() search loop actually has one more x86
instruction than does the sequential version, namely the lea in the sequence cmp, je,
mov, cmp, lea, and jne. This extra instruction is due to the rcu_head structure at the
beginning of the RCU variant’s route_entry structure, so that, unlike the sequential
variant, the RCU variant’s ->re_next.next pointer has a non-zero offset. Back in the
1980s, this additional lea instruction might have reliably resulted in the RCU variant
being slower, but we are now in the 21st century, and the 1980s are long gone.
      But those of you who read Section 3.1.1 carefully already knew all of this!
    These counter-intuitive results of course means that any performance result on
modern microprocessors must be subject to some skepticism. In theory, it really does
not make sense to obtain performance results that are better than ideal, but it really
can happen on modern microprocessors. Such results can be thought of as similar to
the celebrated super-linear speedups (see Section 6.5 for one such example), that is, of
interest but also of limited practical importance. Nevertheless, one of the strengths of
RCU is that its read-side overhead is so low that tiny effects such as this one are visible
in real performance measurements.
    This raises the question as to what would happen if the rcu_head structure were to
be moved so that RCU’s ->re_next.next pointer also had zero offset, just the same
as the sequential variant. And the answer, as can be seen in Figure E.5, is that this
causes RCU QSBR’s performance to decrease to where it is still very nearly ideal, but
no longer super-ideal. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                                          821

                                               2.5x107

                                                2x107                           ideal

                     Lookups per Millisecond
                                                     7
                                               1.5x10
                                                                                    RCU

                                                1x107

                                                                      seqlock
                                                5x106
                                                                                        hazptr

                                                         0   50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450
                                                              Number of CPUs (Threads)

Figure E.5: Pre-BSD Routing Table Protected by RCU QSBR With Non-Initial
    rcu_head

Quick Quiz 9.54:                                                      p.262
Given RCU QSBR’s read-side performance, why bother with any other flavor of
userspace RCU?

Answer:
Because RCU QSBR places constraints on the overall application that might not be
tolerable, for example, requiring that each and every thread in the application regularly
pass through a quiescent state. Among other things, this means that RCU QSBR is
not helpful to library writers, who might be better served by other flavors of userspace
RCU [MDJ13f]. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.55:                                                      p.265
Suppose that the nmi_profile() function was preemptible. What would need to
change to make this example work correctly?

Answer:
One approach would be to use rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock() in nmi_
profile(), and to replace the synchronize_sched() with synchronize_rcu(),
perhaps as shown in Listing E.5.
   But why on earth would an NMI handler be preemptible??? ❑

Quick Quiz 9.56:                                                               p.267
What is the point of the second call to synchronize_rcu() in function maint() in
Listing 9.17? Isn’t it OK for any cco() invocations in the clean-up phase to invoke
either cco_carefully() or cco_quickly()?

Answer:
The problem is that there is no ordering between the cco() function’s load from be_
careful and any memory loads executed by the cco_quickly() function. Because
there is no ordering, without that second call to syncrhonize_rcu(), memory ordering
could cause loads in cco_quickly() to overlap with stores by do_maint().

                                                                                                        v2025.12.18a
822                                    APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Listing E.5: Using RCU to Wait for Mythical Preemptible NMIs to Finish
1    struct profile_buffer {
2            long size;
3            atomic_t entry[0];
4    };
5    static struct profile_buffer *buf = NULL;
6
7    void nmi_profile(unsigned long pcvalue)
8    {
9            struct profile_buffer *p;
10
11           rcu_read_lock();
12           p = rcu_dereference(buf);
13           if (p == NULL) {
14                   rcu_read_unlock();
15                   return;
16           }
17           if (pcvalue >= p->size) {
18                   rcu_read_unlock();
19                   return;
20           }
21           atomic_inc(&p->entry[pcvalue]);
22           rcu_read_unlock();
23   }
24
25   void nmi_stop(void)
26   {
27           struct profile_buffer *p = buf;
28
29           if (p == NULL)
30                   return;
31           rcu_assign_pointer(buf, NULL);
32           synchronize_rcu();
33           kfree(p);
34   }

    Another alternative would be to compensate for the removal of that second call to
synchronize_rcu() by changing the READ_ONCE() to smp_load_acquire() and
the WRITE_ONCE() to smp_store_release(), thus restoring the needed ordering. ❑

 Quick Quiz 9.57:                                                             p.267
 How can you be sure that the code shown in maint() in Listing 9.17 really works?

Answer:
By one popular school of thought, you cannot.
    But in this case, those willing to jump ahead to Chapter 12 and Chapter 15 might find
a couple of LKMM litmus tests to be interesting (C-RCU-phased-state-change-
1.litmus and C-RCU-phased-state-change-2.litmus). These tests could be
argued to demonstrate that this code and a variant of it really do work. ❑

 Quick Quiz 9.58:                                                                    p.267
 But what if there is an arbitrarily long series of RCU read-side critical sections in
 multiple threads, so that at any point in time there is at least one thread in the system
 executing in an RCU read-side critical section? Wouldn’t that prevent any data from a
 SLAB_TYPESAFE_BY_RCU slab ever being returned to the system, possibly resulting
 in OOM events?

Answer:
There could certainly be an arbitrarily long period of time during which at least one

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                               823

thread is always in an RCU read-side critical section. However, the key words in the
description in Section 9.5.4.5 are “in-use” and “pre-existing”. Keep in mind that a
given RCU read-side critical section is conceptually only permitted to gain references
to data elements that were visible to readers during that critical section. Furthermore,
remember that a slab cannot be returned to the system until all of its data elements have
been freed, in fact, the RCU grace period cannot start until after they have all been freed.
    Therefore, the slab cache need only wait for those RCU read-side critical sections
that started before the freeing of the last element of the slab. This in turn means that
any RCU grace period that begins after the freeing of the last element will do—the slab
may be returned to the system after that grace period ends. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.59:                                                                 p.268
What if the element we need to delete is not the first element of the list on line 9 of
Listing 9.18?

Answer:
As with the (bug-ridden) Listing 7.10, this is a very simple hash table with no chaining,
so the only element in a given bucket is the first element. The reader is again invited to
adapt this example to a hash table with full chaining. Less energetic readers might wish
to refer to Chapter 10. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.60:                                                             p.269
Why is it OK to exit the RCU read-side critical section on line 15 of Listing 9.18
before releasing the lock on line 17?

Answer:
First, please note that the second check on line 14 is necessary because some other CPU
might have removed this element while we were waiting to acquire the lock. However,
the fact that we were in an RCU read-side critical section while acquiring the lock
guarantees that this element could not possibly have been re-allocated and re-inserted
into this hash table. Furthermore, once we acquire the lock, the lock itself guarantees
the element’s existence, so we no longer need to be in an RCU read-side critical section.
❑

Quick Quiz 9.61:                                                            p.269
Why not exit the RCU read-side critical section on line 23 of Listing 9.18 before
releasing the lock on line 22?

Answer:
Suppose we reverse the order of these two lines. Then this code is vulnerable to the
following sequence of events:

   1. CPU 0 invokes delete(), and finds the element to be deleted, executing through
      line 15. It has not yet actually deleted the element, but is about to do so.

   2. CPU 1 concurrently invokes delete(), attempting to delete this same element.
      However, CPU 0 still holds the lock, so CPU 1 waits for it at line 13.

   3. CPU 0 executes lines 16 and 17, and blocks at line 18 waiting for CPU 1 to exit
      its RCU read-side critical section.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
824                                    APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

      4. CPU 1 now acquires the lock, but the test on line 14 fails because CPU 0 has
         already removed the element. CPU 1 now executes line 22 (which we switched
         with line 23 for the purposes of this Quick Quiz) and exits its RCU read-side
         critical section.
      5. CPU 0 can now return from synchronize_rcu(), and thus executes line 19,
         sending the element to the freelist.
      6. CPU 1 now attempts to release a lock for an element that has been freed, and,
         worse yet, possibly reallocated as some other type of data structure. This is a fatal
         memory-corruption error. ❑

    Quick Quiz 9.62:                                                           p.269
    The RCU-based algorithm shown in Listing 9.18 locks very similar to that in List-
    ing 7.11, so why should the RCU-based approach be any better?

Answer:
Listing 9.18 replaces the per-element spin_lock() and spin_unlock() shown in
Listing 7.11 with a much cheaper rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock(), thus
greatly improving both performance and scalability. For more detail, please see
Section 10.3.3. ❑

    Quick Quiz 9.63:                                                           p.271
    WTF? How the heck do you expect me to believe that RCU can have less than a 300-
    picosecond overhead when the clock period at 2.10 GHz is almost 500 picoseconds?

Answer:
First, consider that the inner loop used to take this measurement is as follows:

1           for (i = nloops; i >= 0; i--) {
2                   rcu_read_lock();
3                   rcu_read_unlock();
4           }

   Next, consider the effective definitions of rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_
unlock():
1    #define rcu_read_lock()   barrier()
2    #define rcu_read_unlock() barrier()

    These definitions constrain compiler code-movement optimizations involving mem-
ory references, but emit no instructions in and of themselves. However, if the loop
variable is maintained in a register, the accesses to i will not count as memory references.
Furthermore, the compiler can do loop unrolling, allowing the resulting code to “execute”
multiple passes through the loop body simply by incrementing i by some value larger
than the value 1.
    So the “measurement” of 267 picoseconds is simply the fixed overhead of the timing
measurements divided by the number of passes through the inner loop containing the
calls to rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock(), plus the code to manipulate i
divided by the loop-unrolling factor. And therefore, this measurement really is in error,

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                                825

in fact, it exaggerates the overhead by an arbitrary number of orders of magnitude. After
all, in terms of machine instructions emitted, the actual overheads of rcu_read_lock()
and of rcu_read_unlock() are each precisely zero.
     It is not just every day that a timing measurement of 267 picoseconds turns out to
be an overestimate! ❑

Quick Quiz 9.64:                                                            p.271
Didn’t an earlier edition of this book show RCU read-side overhead way down in the
sub-picosecond range? What happened???

Answer:
Excellent memory!!! The overhead in some early releases was in fact roughly 100 fem-
toseconds.
    What happened was that RCU usage spread more broadly through the Linux
kernel, including into code that takes page faults. Back at that time, rcu_read_
lock() and rcu_read_unlock() were complete no-ops in CONFIG_PREEMPT=n
kernels. Unfortunately, that situation allowed the compiler to reorder page-faulting
memory accesses into RCU read-side critical sections. Of course, page faults can block,
which destroys those critical sections.
    Nor was this a theoretical problem: A failure actually manifested in 2019. Herbert
Xu tracked down this failure down and Linus Torvalds therefore queued a commit to
upgrade rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock() to unconditionally include a
call to barrier() [Tor19]. And although barrier() emits no code, it does constrain
compiler optimizations. And so the price of widespread RCU usage is slightly higher
rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock() overhead. As such, Linux-kernel RCU
has proven to be a victim of its own success.
    Of course, it is also the case that the older results were obtained on a different system
than were those shown in Figure 9.25. So which change had the most effect, Linus’s
commit or the change in the system? This question is left as an exercise to the reader. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.65:                                                                     p.271
Why is there such large variation for the RCU trace in Figure 9.25?

Answer:
Keep in mind that this is a log-log plot, so those large-seeming RCU variances in reality
span only a few hundred picoseconds. And that is such a short time that anything could
cause it. However, given that the variance decreases with both small and large numbers
of CPUs, one hypothesis is that the variation is due to migrations from one CPU to
another.
    Yes, these measurements were taken with interrupts disabled, but they were also
taken within a guest OS, so that preemption was still possible at the hypervisor level. In
addition, the system featured hyperthreading and a single hardware thread running this
RCU workload is able to consume more than half of the core’s resources. Therefore, the
overall throughput varies depending on how many of a given guest OS’s CPUs share
cores. Attempting to reduce these variations by running the guest OSes at real-time
priority (as suggested by Joel Fernandes) is left as an exercise for the reader. ❑

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
826                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 9.66:                                                            p.271
Given that the system had no fewer than 448 hardware threads, why only 192 CPUs?

Answer:
Because the script (rcuscale.sh) that generates this data spawns a guest operating
system for each set of points gathered, and on this particular system, both qemu and
KVM limit the number of CPUs that may be configured into a given guest OS. Yes, it
would have been possible to run a few more CPUs, but 192 is a nice round number from
a binary perspective, given that 256 is infeasible. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.67:                                                             p.273
Why the larger error ranges for the submicrosecond durations in Figure 9.27?

Answer:
Because smaller disturbances result in greater relative errors for smaller measurements.
Also, the Linux kernel’s ndelay() nanosecond-scale primitive is (as of 2020) less
accurate than is the udelay() primitive used for the data for durations of a microsecond
or more. It is instructive to compare to the zero-length case shown in Figure 9.25. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.68:                                                              p.273
Is there an exception to this deadlock immunity, and if so, what sequence of events
could lead to deadlock?

Answer:
One way to cause a deadlock cycle involving RCU read-side primitives is via the
following (illegal) sequence of statements:

  rcu_read_lock();
  synchronize_rcu();
  rcu_read_unlock();

    The synchronize_rcu() cannot return until all pre-existing RCU read-side critical
sections complete, but is enclosed in an RCU read-side critical section that cannot
complete until the synchronize_rcu() returns. The result is a classic self-deadlock—
you get the same effect when attempting to write-acquire a reader-writer lock while
read-holding it.
    Note that this self-deadlock scenario does not apply to RCU QSBR, because the
context switch performed by the synchronize_rcu() would act as a quiescent state
for this CPU, allowing a grace period to complete. However, this is if anything even
worse, because data used by the RCU read-side critical section might be freed as a result
of the grace period completing. Plus Linux kernel’s lockdep facility will yell at you.
    In short, do not invoke synchronous RCU update-side primitives, which are listed in
Table 9.2, from within an RCU read-side critical section.
    In addition, within the Linux kernel, RCU uses the scheduler and the scheduler uses
RCU. In some cases, both RCU and the scheduler must take care to avoid deadlock. ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                               827

Quick Quiz 9.69:                                                         p.273
Immunity to both deadlock and priority inversion??? Sounds too good to be true.
Why should I believe that this is even possible?

Answer:
It really does work. After all, if it didn’t work, the Linux kernel would not run. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.70:                                                                    p.275
But how many other algorithms really tolerate stale and inconsistent data?

Answer:
Quite a few!
    Please keep in mind that the finite speed of light means that data reaching a given
computer system is at least slightly stale at the time that it arrives, and extremely stale
in the case of astronomical data. The finite speed of light also places a sharp limit on
the consistency of data arriving from different sources of via different paths.
    You might as well face the fact that the laws of physics are incompatible with naive
notions of perfect freshness and consistency. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.71:                                                           p.275
If Tasks RCU Trace might someday be priority boosted, why not also Tasks RCU and
Tasks RCU Rude?

Answer:
Maybe, but these are less likely.
    In the case of Tasks RCU, recall that the quiescent state is a voluntary context switch.
Thus, all tasks not blocked after a voluntary context switch might need to be boosted,
and the mechanics of deboosting would not likely be at all pretty.
    In the case of Tasks RCU Rude, as was the case with the old RCU Sched, any
preemptible region of code is a quiescent state. Thus, the only tasks that might need
boosting are those currently running with preemption disabled. But boosting the priority
of a preemption-disabled task has no effect. It therefore seems doubly unlikely that
priority boosting will ever be introduced to Tasks RCU Rude, at least in its current form.
❑

Quick Quiz 9.72:                                                               p.279
But doesn’t the RCU grace period start sometime after the call to synchronize_rcu()
rather than in the middle of that xchg() statement?

Answer:
Which grace period, exactly?
   The updater is required to wait for at least one grace period that starts at or some
time after the removal, in this case, the xchg(). So in Figure 9.29, the indicated
grace period starts as early as theoretically possible and extends to the return from
synchronize_rcu(). This is a perfectly legal grace period corresponding to the
change carried out by that xchg() statement. ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
828                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 9.73:                                                      p.280
Is RCU the only synchronization mechanism that combines temporal and spatial
synchronization in this way?

Answer:
Not at all.
     Hazard pointers can be considered to combine temporal and spatial synchronization
in a similar manner. Referring to Listing 9.4, the hp_record() function’s acquisition of
a reference provides both spatial and temporal synchronization, subscribing to a version
and marking the start of a reference, respectively. This function therefore combines
the effects of RCU’s rcu_read_lock() and rcu_dereference(). Referring now
to Listing 9.5, the hp_clear() function’s release of a reference provides temporal
synchronization marking the end of a reference, and is thus similar to RCU’s rcu_
read_unlock(). The hazptr_free_later() function’s retiring of a hazard-pointer-
protected object provides temporal synchronization, similar to RCU’s call_rcu().
The primitives used to mutate a hazard-pointer-protected structure provide spatial
synchronization, similar to RCU’s rcu_assign_pointer().
     Alternatively, one could instead come at hazard pointers by analogy with reference
counting. And, by doing so, learn that reference counting also combines temporal and
spatial synchronization as described above for hazard pointers. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.74:                                                              p.280
But wait! This is exactly the same code that might be used when thinking of RCU as a
replacement for reader-writer locking! What gives?

Answer:
This is an effect of the Law of Toy Examples: Beyond a certain point, the code fragments
look the same. The only difference is in how we think about the code. For example,
what does an atomic_inc() operation do? It might be acquiring another explicit
reference to an object to which we already have a reference, it might be incrementing an
often-read/seldom-updated statistical counter, it might be checking into an HPC-style
barrier, or any of a number of other things.
    However, these differences can be extremely important. For but one example of
the importance, consider that if we think of RCU as a restricted reference counting
scheme, we would never be fooled into thinking that the updates would exclude the
RCU read-side critical sections.
    It nevertheless is often useful to think of RCU as a replacement for reader-writer
locking, for example, when you are replacing reader-writer locking with RCU. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.75:                                                                 p.284
Which of these use cases best describes the Pre-BSD routing example in Section 9.5.4.1?

Answer:
Pre-BSD routing could be argued to fit into either quasi reader-writer lock, quasi
reference count, or quasi multi-version concurrency control. The code is the same either
way. This is similar to things like atomic_inc(), another tool that can be put to a great
many uses. ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.9. DEFERRED PROCESSING                                                           829

Quick Quiz 9.76:                                                               p.285
Garbage collectors? Passive serialization? System reference points? Quiescent states?
Aging? Generations? Why on earth couldn’t the knuckleheads working on these early
papers bring themselves to agree on a common terminology???

Answer:
There were multiple independent inventions of mechanisms vaguely resembling RCU.
Each group of inventors was unaware of the others, so each made up its own terminology
as a matter of course. And the different terminology made it quite difficult for any one
group to find any of the others.
    Sorry, but life is like that sometimes! ❑

Quick Quiz 9.77:                                                                 p.286
Why didn’t Kung’s and Lehman’s paper result in immediate use of RCU?

Answer:
One reason is that Kung and Lehman were simply ahead of their time. Another reason
was that their approach, ground-breaking though it was, did not take a number of
software-engineering and performance issues into account.
     To see that they were ahead of their time, consider that three years after their
paper was published, Paul was working on a PDP-11 system running BSD 2.8. This
system lacked any sort of automatic configuration, which meant that any hardware
modification, including adding a new disk drive, required hand-editing and rebuilding
the kernel. Furthermore, this was a single-CPU system, which meant that full-system
synchronization was a simple matter of disabling interrupts.
     Fast-forward a number of years, and multicore systems permitting runtime changes in
hardware configuration were commonplace. This meant that the hardware configuration
data that was implicitly represented in 1980s kernel source code was now a mutable
data structure that was accessed on every I/O. Such data structures rarely change, but
could change at any time. And this read-mostly property applies to many other new-age
data structures, including those concerning networking (rare in the 1980s), security
policies (physical locks in the 1980s), software configuration (immutable at runtime in
the 1980s), and much else besides. There was thus much more opportunity for RCU to
demonstrate its benefits in the 1990s and 2000s than there was in the 1980s.
     Kung’s and Lehman’s software-engineering sins included failing to mark readers
(thus presenting debugging difficulties), failing to provide a clean RCU API (thus tying
their mechanism to a specific data structure), and failing to allow for any post-grace-
period operation other than freeing memory (thus disallowing a number of RCU use
cases).
     Kung and Lehman presented two garbage-collection strategies. The first waited for
all processes running at a given time to terminate, which represented another software-
engineering sin that ruled out their mechanism’s use in software that runs indefinitely.
The second used per-object reference counting, which greatly complicates their read-side
code (thus representing yet another software-engineering sin), and, on modern hardware,
results in severe cache-miss overhead (thus representing a performance sin, see for
example Figures 9.30 and 9.31).
     Despite this long list of software-engineering and performance sins, Kung’s and
Lehman’s paper remains a truly impressive piece of work, especially considering that

                                                                                           v2025.12.18a
830                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

much of the later work (both independent and not) committed these same sins, plus
others as well. ❑

Quick Quiz 9.78:                                                             p.288
Why not just drop the lock before waiting for the grace period, or using something
like call_rcu() instead of waiting for a grace period?

Answer:
The authors wished to support linearizable tree operations, so that concurrent additions
to, deletions from, and searches of the tree would appear to execute in some globally
agreed-upon order. In their search trees, this requires holding locks across grace
periods. (It is probably better to drop linearizability as a requirement in most cases, but
linearizability is a surprisingly popular (and costly!) requirement.) ❑

Quick Quiz 9.79:                                                             p.290
Why can’t users dynamically allocate the hazard pointers as they are needed?

Answer:
They can, but at the expense of additional reader-traversal overhead and, in some
environments, the need to handle memory-allocation failure. ❑

 Quick Quiz 9.80:                                                        p.291
 But don’t Linux-kernel kref reference counters allow guaranteed unconditional
 reference acquisition?

Answer:
Yes they do, but the guarantee only applies unconditionally in cases where a reference
is already held. With this in mind, please review the paragraph at the beginning of
Section 9.6, especially the part saying “large enough that readers do not hold references
from one traversal to another”. ❑

 Quick Quiz 9.81:                                                             p.292
 But didn’t the answer to one of the quick quizzes in Section 9.3 say that pairwise
 asymmetric barriers could eliminate the read-side smp_mb() from hazard pointers?

Answer:
Yes, it did. However, doing this could be argued to change hazard-pointers “Reclamation
Forward Progress” row (discussed later) from lock-free to blocking because a CPU
spinning with interrupts disabled in the kernel would prevent the update-side portion
of the asymmetric barrier from completing. In the Linux kernel, such blocking could
in theory be prevented by building the kernel with CONFIG_NO_HZ_FULL, designating
the relevant CPUs as nohz_full at boot time, ensuring that only one thread was ever
runnable on a given CPU at a given time, and avoiding ever calling into the kernel.
Alternatively, you could ensure that the kernel was free of any bugs that might cause
CPUs to spin with interrupts disabled.
    Given that CPUs spinning in the Linux kernel with interrupts disabled seems to be
rather rare, one might counter-argue that asymmetric-barrier hazard-pointer updates are
non-blocking in practice, if not in theory. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.10. DATA STRUCTURES                                                                 831

Quick Quiz 9.82:                                                         p.292
Wait a minute!!! Linux-kernel RCU’s rcu_read_unlock() can do lock acquisitions,
and that cannot possibly be wait-free! What are you trying to pull???

Answer:
You seem to have missed the “(QSBR & urcu)” in that cell.
   Non-preemptible Linux kernels use QSBR, in which rcu_read_lock() is not just
bounded population-oblivious wait free, but executes zero instructions.
    Userspace RCU executes a finite sequence of simple instructions, thus also qualifying
as bounded population-oblivious wait free.
    The one exception to this is the “bullet-proof” variant of userspace RCU, in which
the first call to rcu_read_lock() registers the current thread as an RCU reader. But
only the first call, so this added overhead can be rendered harmless by ensuring that each
thread invokes rcu_read_lock() before undertaking any work requiring wait-free
forward-progress guarantees.
    But what about preemptible Linux kernels?
   There, the goal is instead aggressive real-time response, which is covered in
Section 14.3.
    In the meantime, please note that the Linux kernel supports only finite numbers of
CPUs and that the lock acquisitions in rcu_preempt_deferred_qs_irqrestore(),
which is called indirectly from rcu_read_unlock(), have interrupts disabled. In
addition, those locks are replicated, so that a given lock is normally only acquired by
one of sixteen CPUs. This limits lock contention and prevents both preemption and
interrupts from delaying execution while those locks are held, in turn providing excellent
forward progrees [Bra11, dOCdO19, HL86, SM04a].
     In short, formalisms such as wait-free synchronization have their place, but the
really important thing is to figure out what your users really need and then to implement
it for them. ❑

E.10       Data Structures

Quick Quiz 10.1:                                                          p.299
But chained hash tables are but one type of many. Why the focus on chained hash
tables?

Answer:
Chained hash tables are completely partitionable, and thus well-suited to concurrent
use. There are other completely-partitionable hash tables, for example, split-ordered
list [SS06], but they are considerably more complex. We therefore focus on chained
hash tables. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
832                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

 Quick Quiz 10.2:                                                                 p.300
 But isn’t the double comparison on lines 10–13 in Listing 10.3 inefficient in the case
 where the key fits into an unsigned long?

Answer:
Indeed it is! However, hash tables quite frequently store information with keys such
as character strings that do not necessarily fit into an unsigned long. Simplifying the
hash-table implementation for the case where keys always fit into unsigned longs is left
as an exercise for the reader. ❑

 Quick Quiz 10.3:                                                           p.303
 Instead of simply increasing the number of hash buckets, wouldn’t it be better to
 cache-align the existing hash buckets?

Answer:
The answer depends on a great many things. If the hash table has a large number of
elements per bucket, it would clearly be better to increase the number of hash buckets.
On the other hand, if the hash table is lightly loaded, the answer depends on the
hardware, the effectiveness of the hash function, and the workload. Interested readers
are encouraged to experiment. ❑

 Quick Quiz 10.4:                                                                p.303
 Given the negative scalability of the Schrödinger’s Zoo application across sockets,
 why not just run multiple copies of the application, with each copy having a subset of
 the animals and confined to run on a single socket?

Answer:
You can do just that! In fact, you can extend this idea to large clustered systems,
running one copy of the application on each node of the cluster. This practice is called
“sharding”, and is heavily used in practice by large web-based retailers [DHJ+ 07].
    However, if you are going to shard on a per-socket basis within a multisocket system,
why not buy separate smaller and cheaper single-socket systems, and then run one shard
of the database on each of those systems? ❑

 Quick Quiz 10.5:                                                               p.305
 But if elements in a hash table can be removed concurrently with lookups, doesn’t
 that mean that a lookup could return a reference to a data element that was removed
 immediately after it was looked up?

Answer:
Yes it can! This is why hashtab_lookup() must be invoked within an RCU read-side
critical section, and it is why hashtab_add() and hashtab_del() must also use
RCU-aware list-manipulation primitives. Finally, this is why the caller of hashtab_
del() must wait for a grace period (e.g., by calling synchronize_rcu()) before
freeing the removed element. This will ensure that all RCU readers that might reference
the newly removed element have completed before that element is freed. ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.10. DATA STRUCTURES                                                                                833

                                                 1x108

                Total Lookups per Millisecond
                                                                                          ideal
                                                 1x107
                                                                                            unsync

                                                 1x10             QSBR,RCU,hazptr

                                                100000

                                                                         10000

                                                                                 100000

                                                                                            1x106
                                                 Hash Table Size (Buckets and Maximum Elements)

Figure E.6: Read-Only RCU-Protected Hash-Table Performance For Schrödinger’s
    Zoo at 448 CPUs, Varying Table Size

Quick Quiz 10.6:                                                         p.306
The hashtorture.h file contains more than 1,000 lines! Is that a comprehensive
test or what???
Answer:
What.
    The hashtorture.h tests are a good start and suffice for a textbook algorithm. If
this code was to be used in production, much more testing would be required:

   1. Have some subset of elements that always reside in the table, and verify that
      lookups always find these elements regardless of the number and type of concurrent
      updates in flight.

   2. Pair an updater with one or more readers, verifying that after an element is added,
      once a reader successfully looks up that element, all later lookups succeed. The
      definition of “later” will depend on the table’s consistency requirements.

   3. Pair an updater with one or more readers, verifying that after an element is deleted,
      once a reader’s lookup of that element fails, all later lookups also fail.

    There are many more tests where those came from, the exact nature of which depend
on the details of the requirements on your particular hash table. ❑

Quick Quiz 10.7:                                                                p.309
How can we be so sure that the hash-table size is at fault here, especially given that
Figure 10.4 on page 303 shows that varying hash-table size has almost no effect?
Might the problem instead be something like false sharing?

Answer:
Excellent question!
   False sharing requires writes, which are not featured in the unsynchronized and
RCU runs of this lookup-only benchmark. The problem is therefore not false sharing.

                                                                                                           v2025.12.18a
834                                    APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

     Still unconvinced? Then look at the log-log plot in Figure E.6, which shows
performance for 448 CPUs as a function of the hash-table size, that is, number of buckets
and maximum number of elements. A hash-table of size 1,024 has 1,024 buckets
and contains at most 1,024 elements, with the average occupancy being 512 elements.
Because this is a read-only benchmark, the actual occupancy is always equal to the
average occupancy.
     This figure shows near-ideal performance below about 8,000 elements, that is,
when the hash table comprises less than 1 MB of data. This near-ideal performance is
consistent with that for the pre-BSD routing table shown in Figure 9.21 on page 262,
even at 448 CPUs. However, the performance drops significantly (this is a log-log
plot) at about 8,000 elements, which is where the 1,048,576-byte L2 cache overflows.
Performance falls off a cliff (even on this log-log plot) at about 300,000 elements, where
the 40,370,176-byte L3 cache overflows. This demonstrates that the memory-system
bottleneck is profound, degrading performance by well in excess of an order of magnitude
for the large hash tables. This should not be a surprise, as the size-8,388,608 hash table
occupies about 1 GB of memory, overflowing the L3 caches by a factor of 25.
     The reason that Figure 10.4 on page 303 shows little effect is that its data was gathered
from bucket-locked hash tables, where locking overhead and contention drowned out
cache-capacity effects. In contrast, both RCU and hazard-pointers readers avoid stores
to shared data, which means that the cache-capacity effects come to the fore.
     Still not satisfied? Find a multi-socket system and run this code, making use of
whatever performance-counter hardware is available. This hardware should allow
you to track down the precise cause of any slowdowns exhibited on your particular
system. The experience gained by doing this exercise will be extremely valuable, giving
you a significant advantage over those whose understanding of this issue is strictly
theoretical.13 ❑

Quick Quiz 10.8:                                                           p.309
The memory system is a serious bottleneck on this big system. Why bother putting
448 CPUs on a system without giving them enough memory bandwidth to do something
useful???
Answer:
It would indeed be a bad idea to use this large and expensive system for a workload
consisting solely of simple hash-table lookups of small data elements. However, this
system is extremely useful for a great many workloads that feature more processing
and less memory accessing. For example, some in-memory databases run extremely
well on this class of system, albeit when running much more complex sets of queries
than performed by the benchmarks in this chapter. For example, such systems might
be processing images or video streams stored in each element, providing further
performance benefits due to the fact that the resulting sequential memory accesses will
make better use of the available memory bandwidth than will a pure pointer-following
workload.
    But let this be a lesson to you. Modern computer systems come in a great many
shapes and sizes, and great care is frequently required to select one that suits your
application. And perhaps even more frequently, significant care and work is required to
adjust your application to the specific computer systems at hand. ❑

   13 Of course, a theoretical understanding beats no understanding. Most of the time,

anyway.

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
E.10. DATA STRUCTURES                                                                835

Quick Quiz 10.9:                                                       p.312
The dangers of extrapolating from 28 CPUs to 448 CPUs was made quite clear in
Section 10.2.3. Would extrapolating up from 448 CPUs be any safer?

Answer:
In theory, no, it isn’t any safer, and a useful exercise would be to run these programs on
larger systems. In practice, there are only a very few systems with more than 448 CPUs,
in contrast to the huge number having more than 28 CPUs. This means that although it
is dangerous to extrapolate beyond 448 CPUs, there is very little need to do so.
    In addition, other testing has shown that RCU read-side primitives offer consistent
performance and scalability up to at least 1024 CPUs. However, it is useful to review
Figure E.6 and its associated commentary. You see, unlike the 448-CPU system that
provided this data, the system enjoying linear scalability up to 1024 CPUs boasted
excellent memory bandwidth. ❑

Quick Quiz 10.10:                                                             p.316
How does the code in Listing 10.10 protect against the resizing process progressing
past the selected bucket?

Answer:
It does not provide any such protection. That is instead the job of the update-side
concurrency-control functions described next. ❑

Quick Quiz 10.11:                                                             p.318
Suppose that one thread is inserting an element into the hash table during a resize
operation. What prevents this insertion from being lost due to a subsequent resize
operation completing before the insertion does?

Answer:
The second resize operation will not be able to move beyond the bucket into which
the insertion is taking place due to the insertion holding the lock(s) on one or both
of the hash buckets in the hash tables. Furthermore, the insertion operation takes
place within an RCU read-side critical section. As we will see when we examine the
hashtab_resize() function, this allows each resize operation to use synchronize_
rcu() invocations to wait for the insertion’s read-side critical section to complete.
These synchronize_rcu() invocations prevent pre-existing insertions operation from
outliving the resize operation. ❑

Quick Quiz 10.12:                                                               p.319
The hashtab_lookup() function in Listing 10.12 ignores concurrent resize opera-
tions. Doesn’t this mean that readers might miss an element that was previously added
during a resize operation?

Answer:
No. As we will see soon, the hashtab_add() and hashtab_del() functions keep the
old hash table up-to-date while a resize operation is in progress. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
836                                    APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Listing E.6: Resizable Hash-Table Access Functions (Fewer Updates)
1    struct ht_elem *
2    hashtab_lookup(struct hashtab *htp_master, void *key)
3    {
4            struct ht *htp;
5            struct ht_elem *htep;
6
7            htp = rcu_dereference(htp_master->ht_cur);
8            htep = ht_search_bucket(htp, key);
9            if (htep)
10                   return htep;
11           htp = rcu_dereference(htp->ht_new);
12           if (!htp)
13                   return NULL;
14           return ht_search_bucket(htp, key);
15   }
16
17   void hashtab_add(struct ht_elem *htep,
18                    struct ht_lock_state *lsp)
19   {
20           struct ht_bucket *htbp = lsp->hbp[0];
21           int i = lsp->hls_idx[0];
22
23           htep->hte_next[!i].prev = NULL;
24           cds_list_add_rcu(&htep->hte_next[i], &htbp->htb_head);
25   }
26
27   void hashtab_del(struct ht_elem *htep,
28                    struct ht_lock_state *lsp)
29   {
30           int i = lsp->hls_idx[0];
31
32           if (htep->hte_next[i].prev) {
33                   cds_list_del_rcu(&htep->hte_next[i]);
34                   htep->hte_next[i].prev = NULL;
35           }
36           if (lsp->hbp[1] && htep->hte_next[!i].prev) {
37                   cds_list_del_rcu(&htep->hte_next[!i]);
38                   htep->hte_next[!i].prev = NULL;
39           }
40   }

 Quick Quiz 10.13:                                                                 p.319
 The hashtab_add() and hashtab_del() functions in Listing 10.12 can update
 two hash buckets while a resize operation is progressing. This might cause poor
 performance if the frequency of resize operation is not negligible. Isn’t it possible to
 reduce the cost of updates in such cases?

Answer:
Yes, at least assuming that a slight increase in the cost of hashtab_lookup() is
acceptable. One approach is shown in Listings E.6 and E.7 (hash_resize_s.c).
    This version of hashtab_add() adds an element to either the old bucket if it
is not resized yet, or to the new bucket if it has been resized, and hashtab_del()
removes the specified element from any buckets into which it has been inserted. The
hashtab_lookup() function searches the new bucket if the search of the old bucket
fails, which has the disadvantage of adding overhead to the lookup fastpath. The
alternative hashtab_lock_mod() returns the locking state of the new bucket in ->
hbp[0] and ->hls_idx[0] if resize operation is in progress, instead of the perhaps
more natural choice of ->hbp[1] and ->hls_idx[1]. However, this less-natural
choice has the advantage of simplifying hashtab_add().
    Further analysis of the code is an exercise for the reader. ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.10. DATA STRUCTURES                                                              837

Listing E.7: Resizable Hash-Table Update-Side Locking Function (Fewer Updates)
1    static void
2    hashtab_lock_mod(struct hashtab *htp_master, void *key,
3                     struct ht_lock_state *lsp)
4    {
5            long b;
6            unsigned long h;
7            struct ht *htp;
8            struct ht_bucket *htbp;
9
10          rcu_read_lock();
11          htp = rcu_dereference(htp_master->ht_cur);
12          htbp = ht_get_bucket(htp, key, &b, &h);
13          spin_lock(&htbp->htb_lock);
14          lsp->hbp[0] = htbp;
15          lsp->hls_idx[0] = htp->ht_idx;
16          if (b > READ_ONCE(htp->ht_resize_cur)) {
17                  lsp->hbp[1] = NULL;
18                  return;
19          }
20          htp = rcu_dereference(htp->ht_new);
21          htbp = ht_get_bucket(htp, key, &b, &h);
22          spin_lock(&htbp->htb_lock);
23          lsp->hbp[1] = lsp->hbp[0];
24          lsp->hls_idx[1] = lsp->hls_idx[0];
25          lsp->hbp[0] = htbp;
26          lsp->hls_idx[0] = htp->ht_idx;
27   }

 Quick Quiz 10.14:                                                             p.321
 In the hashtab_resize() function in Listing 10.13, what guarantees that the update
 to ->ht_new on line 29 will be seen as happening before the update to ->ht_resize_
 cur on line 40 from the perspective of hashtab_add() and hashtab_del()? In
 other words, what prevents hashtab_add() and hashtab_del() from dereferencing
 a NULL pointer loaded from ->ht_new?

Answer:
The synchronize_rcu() on line 30 of Listing 10.13 ensures that all pre-existing RCU
readers have completed between the time that we install the new hash-table reference on
line 29 and the time that we update ->ht_resize_cur on line 40. This means that any
reader that sees a non-negative value of ->ht_resize_cur cannot have started before
the assignment to ->ht_new, and thus must be able to see the reference to the new hash
table.
    And this is why the update-side hashtab_add() and hashtab_del() functions
must be enclosed in RCU read-side critical sections, courtesy of hashtab_lock_mod()
and hashtab_unlock_mod() in Listing 10.11. ❑

 Quick Quiz 10.15:                                                               p.321
 Why is there a WRITE_ONCE() on line 40 in Listing 10.13?

Answer:
Together with the READ_ONCE() on line 16 in hashtab_lock_mod() of Listing 10.11,
it tells the compiler that the non-initialization accesses to ->ht_resize_cur must
remain because reads from ->ht_resize_cur really can race with writes, just not in a
way to change the “if” conditions. ❑

                                                                                          v2025.12.18a
838                                                          APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

                                                 1x107

                      Lookups per Millisecond
                                                 1x106
                                                                262,144

                                                100000

                                                10000                2,097,152

                                                         1          10           100
                                                              Number of CPUs (Threads)

          Figure E.7: Effect of Memory-System Bottlenecks on Hash Tables

Quick Quiz 10.16:                                                           p.322
How much of the difference in performance between the large and small hash tables
shown in Figure 10.18 was due to long hash chains and how much was due to
memory-system bottlenecks?

Answer:
The easy way to answer this question is to do another run with 2,097,152 elements, but
this time also with 2,097,152 buckets, thus bringing the average number of elements per
bucket back down to unity.
    The results are shown by the triple-dashed new trace in the middle of Figure E.7.
The other six traces are identical to their counterparts in Figure 10.18 on page 322.
The gap between this new trace and the lower set of three traces is a rough measure
of how much of the difference in performance was due to hash-chain length, and the
gap between the new trace and the upper set of three traces is a rough measure of how
much of that difference was due to memory-system bottlenecks. The new trace starts
out slightly below its 262,144-element counterpart at a single CPU, showing that cache
capacity is degrading performance slightly even on that single CPU.14 This is to be
expected, given that unlike its smaller counterpart, the 2,097,152-bucket hash table
does not fit into the L3 cache. This new trace rises just past 28 CPUs, which is also to
be expected. This rise is due to the fact that the 29th CPU is on another socket, which
brings with it an additional 39 MB of cache as well as additional memory bandwidth.
    But the large hash table’s advantage over that of the hash table with 524,288 buckets
(but still 2,097,152 elements) decreases with additional CPUs, which is consistent
with the bottleneck residing in the memory system. Above about 400 CPUs, the
2,097,152-bucket hash table is actually outperformed slightly by the 524,288-bucket
hash table. This should not be a surprise because the memory system is the bottleneck
and the larger number of buckets increases this workload’s memory footprint.
    The alert reader will have noted the word “rough” above and might be interested
in a more detailed analysis. Such readers are invited to run similar benchmarks, using
whatever performance counters or hardware-analysis tools they might have available.
  14 Yes, as far as hardware architects are concerned, caches are part of the memory system.

                                                                                                    v2025.12.18a
E.11. VALIDATION                                                                     839

This can be a long and complex journey, but those brave enough to embark on it will be
rewarded with detailed knowledge of hardware performance and its effect on software.
❑

E.11      Validation

Quick Quiz 11.1:                                                                   p.331
When in computing is it necessary to follow a fragmentary plan?

Answer:
There are any number of situations, but perhaps the most important situation is when no
one has ever created anything resembling the program to be developed. In this case, the
only way to create a credible plan is to implement the program, create the plan, and
implement it a second time. But whoever implements the program for the first time
has no choice but to follow a fragmentary plan because any detailed plan created in
ignorance cannot survive first contact with the real world.
    And perhaps this is one reason why evolution has favored insanely optimistic human
beings who are happy to follow fragmentary plans! ❑

Quick Quiz 11.2:                                                                  p.331
Who cares about the organization? After all, it is the project that is important!

Answer:
Yes, projects are important, but if you like being paid for your work, you need
organizations as well as projects. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.3:                                                               p.332
Suppose that you are writing a script that processes the output of the time command,
which looks as follows:
                                 real    0m0.132s
                                 user    0m0.040s
                                 sys     0m0.008s

The script is required to check its input for errors, and to give appropriate diagnostics
if fed erroneous time output. What test inputs should you provide to this program to
test it for use with time output generated by single-threaded programs?

Answer:
Can you say “Yes” to all the following questions?

   1. Do you have a test case in which all the time is consumed in user mode by a
      CPU-bound program?

   2. Do you have a test case in which all the time is consumed in system mode by a
      CPU-bound program?

   3. Do you have a test case in which all three times are zero?

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
840                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

   4. Do you have a test case in which the “user” and “sys” times sum to more than the
      “real” time? (This would of course be completely legitimate in a multithreaded
      program.)

   5. Do you have a set of tests cases in which one of the times uses more than one
      second?

   6. Do you have a set of tests cases in which one of the times uses more than ten
      seconds?

   7. Do you have a set of test cases in which one of the times has non-zero minutes?
      (For example, “15m36.342s”.)

   8. Do you have a set of test cases in which one of the times has a seconds value of
      greater than 60?

   9. Do you have a set of test cases in which one of the times overflows 32 bits of
      milliseconds? 64 bits of milliseconds?

  10. Do you have a set of test cases in which one of the times is negative?

  11. Do you have a set of test cases in which one of the times has a positive minutes
      value but a negative seconds value?

  12. Do you have a set of test cases in which one of the times omits the “m” or the “s”?

  13. Do you have a set of test cases in which one of the times is non-numeric? (For
      example, “Go Fish”.)

  14. Do you have a set of test cases in which one of the lines is omitted? (For example,
      where there is a “real” value and a “sys” value, but no “user” value.)

  15. Do you have a set of test cases where one of the lines is duplicated? Or duplicated,
      but with a different time value for the duplicate?

  16. Do you have a set of test cases where a given line has more than one time value?
      (For example, “real 0m0.132s 0m0.008s”.)

  17. Do you have a set of test cases containing random characters?

  18. In all test cases involving invalid input, did you generate all permutations?

  19. For each test case, do you have an expected outcome for that test?

    If you did not generate test data for a substantial number of the above cases, you
will need to cultivate a more destructive attitude in order to have a chance of generating
high-quality tests.
    Of course, one way to economize on destructiveness is to generate the tests with
the to-be-tested source code at hand, which is called white-box testing (as opposed to
black-box testing). However, this is no panacea: You will find that it is all too easy to
find your thinking limited by what the program can handle, thus failing to generate truly
destructive inputs. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.11. VALIDATION                                                                       841

Quick Quiz 11.4:                                                            p.334
You are asking me to do all this validation BS before I even start coding??? That
sounds like a great way to never get started!!!

Answer:
If it is your project, for example, a hobby, do what you like. Any time you waste will
be your own, and you have no one else to answer to for it. And there is a good chance
that the time will not be completely wasted. For example, if you are embarking on a
first-of-a-kind project, the requirements are in some sense unknowable anyway. In this
case, the best approach might be to quickly prototype a number of rough solutions, try
them out, and see what works best.
     On the other hand, if you are being paid to produce a system that is broadly similar
to existing systems, you owe it to your users, your employer, and your future self to
validate early and often. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.5:                                                               p.334
Are you actually suggesting that it is possible to test correctness into software???
Everyone knows that is impossible!!!

Answer:
Please note that the text used the word “validation” rather than the word “testing”. The
word “validation” includes formal methods as well as testing, for more on which please
see Chapter 12.
     But as long as we are bringing up things that everyone should know, let’s remind
ourselves that Darwinian evolution is not about correctness, but rather about survival.
As is software. My goal as a developer is not that my software be attractive from a
theoretical viewpoint, but rather that it survive whatever its users throw at it.
     Although the notion of correctness does have its uses, its fundamental limitation
is that the specification against which correctness is judged will also have bugs. This
means nothing more nor less than that traditional correctness proofs prove that the code
in question contains the intended set of bugs!
     Alternative definitions of correctness instead focus on the lack of problematic
properties, for example, proving that the software has no use-after-free bugs, no NULL
pointer dereferences, no array-out-of-bounds references, and so on. Make no mistake,
finding and eliminating such classes of bugs can be highly useful. But the fact remains
that the lack of certain classes of bugs does nothing to demonstrate fitness for any
specific purpose.
     Therefore, usage-driven validation remains critically important.
     Besides, it is also impossible to verify correctness into your software, especially
given the problematic need to verify both the verifier and the specification. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.6:                                                                     p.337
How can you implement WARN_ON_ONCE()?

Answer:
If you don’t mind WARN_ON_ONCE() sometimes warning more than once, simply
maintain a static variable that is initialized to zero. If the condition triggers, check the
variable, and if it is non-zero, return. Otherwise, set it to one, print the message, and
return.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
842                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

    If you really need the message to never appear more than once, you can use an
atomic exchange operation in place of “set it to one” above. Print the message only if
the atomic exchange operation returns zero. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.7:                                                              p.339
Just what invalid assumptions are you accusing Linux kernel hackers of harboring???

Answer:
Those wishing a complete answer to this question are encouraged to search the Linux
kernel git repository for commits containing the string “Fixes:”. There were many
thousands of them just in the year 2020, including fixes for the following invalid
assumptions:

   1. Testing for a non-zero denominator will prevent divide-by-zero errors. (Hint:
      Suppose that the test uses 64-bit arithmetic but that the division uses 32-bit
      arithmetic.)
   2. Userspace can be trusted to zero out versioned data structures used to communicate
      with the kernel. (Hint: Sometimes userspace has no idea how large the data
      structure is.)
   3. Outdated TCP duplicate selective acknowledgement (D-SACK) packets can be
      completely ignored. (Hint: These packets might also contain other information.)
   4. All CPUs are little-endian.
   5. Once a data structure is no longer needed, all of its memory may be immediately
      freed.
   6. All devices can be initialized while in standby mode.
   7. Developers can be trusted to consistently do correct hexidecimal arithmetic.

    Those who look at these commits in greater detail will conclude that invalid
assumptions are the rule, not the exception. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.8:                                                            p.341
Why would anyone bother copying existing code in pen on paper??? Doesn’t that just
increase the probability of transcription errors?

Answer:
If you are worried about transcription errors, please allow me to be the first to introduce
you to a really cool tool named diff. In addition, carrying out the copying can be quite
valuable:
   1. If you are copying a lot of code, you are probably failing to take advantage of an
      opportunity for abstraction. The act of copying code can provide great motivation
      for abstraction.
   2. Copying the code gives you an opportunity to think about whether the code really
      works in its new setting. Is there some non-obvious constraint, such as the need
      to disable interrupts or to hold some lock?

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.11. VALIDATION                                                                      843

   3. Copying the code also gives you time to consider whether there is some better
      way to get the job done.
So, yes, copy the code! ❑

Quick Quiz 11.9:                                                                 p.341
This procedure is ridiculously over-engineered! How can you expect to get a reasonable
amount of software written doing it this way???

Answer:
Indeed, repeatedly copying code by hand is laborious and slow. However, when
combined with heavy-duty stress testing and proofs of correctness, this approach is also
extremely effective for complex parallel code where ultimate performance and reliability
are required and where debugging is difficult. The Linux-kernel RCU implementation
is a case in point.
     On the other hand, if you are writing a simple single-threaded shell script, then you
would be best-served by a different methodology. For example, enter each command
one at a time into an interactive shell with a test data set to make sure that it does what
you want, then copy-and-paste the successful commands into your script. Finally, test
the script as a whole.
     If you have a friend or colleague who is willing to help out, pair programming can
work very well, as can any number of formal design- and code-review processes.
     And if you are writing code as a hobby, then do whatever you like.
     In short, different types of software need different development methodologies. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.10:                                                               p.341
What do you do if, after all the pen-on-paper copying, you find a bug while typing in
the resulting code?

Answer:
The answer, as is often the case, is “it depends”. If the bug is a simple typo, fix that
typo and continue typing. However, if the bug indicates a design flaw, go back to pen
and paper. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.11:                                                            p.342
Wait! Why on earth would an abstract piece of software fail only sometimes???

Answer:
Because complexity and concurrency can produce results that are indistinguishable
from randomness [MOZ09]. For example, a bug in Linux-kernel RCU required the
following to hold before that bug would manifest:
   1. The kernel was built for HPC or real-time use, so that a given CPU’s RCU work
      could be offloaded to some other CPU.
   2. An offloaded CPU went offline just after generating a large quantity of RCU work.
   3. A special rcu_barrier() API was invoked just at this time.
   4. The RCU work from the newly offlined CPU was still being processed after
      rcu_barrier() returned.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
844                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

   5. One of these remaining RCU work items was related to the code invoking the
      rcu_barrier().

Making this bug manifest therefore required considerable luck or great testing skill. But
the testing skill could be effective only if the bug was known, which of course it was
not. Therefore, the manifesting of this bug was very well modeled as a probabilistic
process. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.12:                                                                p.342
Suppose that you had a very large number of systems at your disposal. For example, at
current cloud prices, you can purchase a huge amount of CPU time at low cost. Why
not use this approach to get close enough to certainty for all practical purposes?

Answer:
This approach might well be a valuable addition to your validation arsenal. But it does
have limitations that rule out “for all practical purposes”:

   1. Some bugs have extremely low probabilities of occurrence, but nevertheless need
      to be fixed. For example, suppose that the Linux kernel’s RCU implementation
      had a bug that is triggered only once per million years of machine time on average.
      A million years of CPU time is hugely expensive even on the cheapest cloud
      platforms, but we could expect this bug to result in more than 50 failures per day
      on the more than 20 billion Linux instances in the world as of 2017.

   2. The bug might well have zero probability of occurrence on your particular cloud-
      computing test setup, which means that you won’t see it no matter how much
      machine time you burn testing it. For but one example, there have been (and
      likely still are) Linux-kernel RCU bugs that appear only in preemptible kernels,
      others that appear only if callbacks are offloaded, still others that appear only in
      the presence of closely spaced CPU-hotplug operations, and even more that can
      be provoked only on systems with weak memory ordering.

Of course, if your code is small enough, formal validation may be helpful, as discussed
in Chapter 12. But beware: Formal validation of your code will not find errors in your
assumptions, misunderstanding of the requirements, misunderstanding of the software
or hardware primitives you use, or errors that you did not think to construct a proof for.
❑

Quick Quiz 11.13:                                                          p.344
Say what??? When I plug the earlier five-test 10 %-failure-rate example into the
formula, I get 59,050 % and that just doesn’t make sense!!!

Answer:
You are right, that makes no sense at all.
    Remember that a probability is a number between zero and one, so that you need to
divide a percentage by 100 to get a probability. So 10 % is a probability of 0.1, which
gets a probability of 0.4095, which rounds to 41 %, which quite sensibly matches the
earlier result. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.11. VALIDATION                                                                     845

Quick Quiz 11.14:                                                                 p.344
In Eq. 11.6, are the logarithms base-10, base-2, or base-e?

Answer:
It does not matter. You will get the same answer no matter what base of logarithms you
use because the result is a pure ratio of logarithms. The only constraint is that you use
the same base for both the numerator and the denominator. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.15:                                                              p.346
Suppose that a bug causes a test failure three times per hour on average. How long
must the test run error-free to provide 99.9 % confidence that the fix significantly
reduced the probability of failure by at least a little bit?

Answer:
We set 𝑛 to 3 and 𝑃 to 99.9 in Eq. 11.11, resulting in:

                                  1 100 − 99.9
                             𝑇 = − ln          = 2.3                               (E.9)
                                  3    100
   If the test runs without failure for 2.3 hours, we can be 99.9 % certain that the fix
reduced (by at least some small amount) the probability of failure. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.16:                                                                p.347
Doing the summation of all the factorials and exponentials is a real pain. Isn’t there
an easier way?

Answer:
One approach is to use the open-source symbolic manipulation program named “max-
ima”. Once you have installed this program, which is a part of many Linux distributions,
you can run it and give the load(distrib); command followed by any number of
bfloat(cdf_poisson(m,lambda)); commands, where the m is replaced by the value
of 𝑚 (the actual number of failures in actual test of the alleged fix, usually zero) and
the lambda is replaced by the value of 𝜆 (the expected number of failures in that same
test prior to applying the alleged fix). You can adjust for the desired improvement,
for example, if the run prior to the fix had 24 failures and you are looking for an
improvement of at least an order of magnitude, then set 𝜆 to 2.4 instead of 24.
    In particular, the bfloat(cdf_poisson(2,24)); command results in 1.181617112359357b-8,
which matches the value given by Eq. 11.13. Similarly, referring to Eq. 11.14, the
bfloat(1-cdf_poisson(m,lambda)); command results in 9.092820467105875b-1,
which is again a match.
    Another approach is to recognize that in this real world, it is not all that useful
to compute (say) the duration of a test having two or fewer errors that would give a
76.8 % confidence of a 349.2x improvement in reliability. Instead, human beings tend to
focus on specific values, for example, a 95 % confidence of a 10x improvement. People
also greatly prefer error-free test runs, and so should you because doing so reduces
your required test durations. Therefore, it is quite possible that the values in Table E.4
will suffice. Simply look up the desired confidence and degree of improvement, and
the resulting number will give you the required error-free test duration in terms of the
expected time for a single error to appear. So if your pre-fix testing suffered one failure

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
846                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

                 Table E.4: Human-Friendly Poisson-Function Display

                                                Improvement

                            Certainty (%)     Any         10x    100x

                                    90.0      2.3         23.0   230.0
                                    95.0      3.0         30.0   300.0
                                    99.0      4.6         46.1   460.5
                                    99.9      6.9         69.1   690.7

per hour, and the powers that be require a 95 % confidence of a 10x improvement, you
need a 30-hour error-free run.
    Alternatively, you can use the rough-and-ready method described in Section 11.6.2.
❑

Quick Quiz 11.17:                                                                  p.347
But wait!!! Given that there has to be some number of failures (including the possibility
of zero failures), shouldn’t Eq. 11.13 approach the value 1 as 𝑚 goes to infinity?

Answer:
Indeed it should. And it does.
    To see this, note that e−𝜆 does not depend on 𝑖, which means that it can be pulled
out of the summation as follows:
                                               ∞
                                              ∑︁ 𝜆𝑖
                                        e−𝜆                                        (E.10)
                                              𝑖=0
                                                     𝑖!

      The remaining summation is exactly the Taylor series for e𝜆 , yielding:

                                            e−𝜆 e𝜆                                 (E.11)
   The two exponentials are reciprocals, and therefore cancel, resulting in exactly 1, as
required. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.18:                                                         p.348
How is this approach supposed to help if the corruption affected some unrelated
pointer, which then caused the corruption???

Answer:
Indeed, that can happen. Many CPUs have hardware-debugging facilities that can help
you locate that unrelated pointer. Furthermore, if you have a core dump, you can search
the core dump for pointers referencing the corrupted region of memory. You can also
look at the data layout of the corruption, and check pointers whose type matches that
layout.
    You can also step back and test the modules making up your program more intensively,
which will likely confine the corruption to the module responsible for it. If this makes
the corruption vanish, consider adding additional argument checking to the functions
exported from each module.

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.11. VALIDATION                                                                       847

    Nevertheless, this is a hard problem, which is why I used the words “a bit of a dark
art”. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.19:                                                           p.349
But I did the bisection, and ended up with a huge commit. What do I do now?

Answer:
A huge commit? Shame on you! This is but one reason why you are supposed to keep
the commits small.
    And that is your answer: Break up the commit into bite-sized pieces and bisect the
pieces. In my experience, the act of breaking up the commit is often sufficient to make
the bug painfully obvious. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.20:                                                              p.350
Why don’t conditional-locking primitives provide this spurious-failure functionality?

Answer:
There are locking algorithms that depend on conditional-locking primitives telling them
the truth. For example, if conditional-lock failure signals that some other thread is
already working on a given job, spurious failure might cause that job to never get done,
possibly resulting in a hang.
    However, this is a design choice. You could create a conditional-locking primitive
that was subject to spurious failure, and some have. Therefore, when moving to a new
software environment, check your assumptions! ❑

Quick Quiz 11.21:                                                                    p.354
That is ridiculous!!! After all, isn’t getting a late but correct answer always better than
getting an incorrect answer???

Answer:
This question fails to consider the option of choosing not to compute the answer at all,
and in doing so, also fails to consider the costs of computing the answer. For example,
consider short-term weather forecasting, for which accurate models exist, but which
require large (and expensive) clustered supercomputers, at least if you want to actually
run the model faster than the weather.
    And in this case, any performance bug that prevents the model from running faster
than the actual weather prevents any forecasting. Given that the whole purpose of
purchasing the large clustered supercomputers was to forecast weather, if you cannot run
the model faster than the weather, you would be better off not running the model at all.
    More severe examples may be found in the area of safety-critical real-time computing.
❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
848                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 11.22:                                                               p.354
But if you are going to put in all the hard work of parallelizing an application, why
not do it right? Why settle for anything less than optimal performance and linear
scalability?

Answer:
Although I do heartily salute your spirit and aspirations, you are forgetting that there
may be high costs due to delays in the program’s completion. For an extreme example,
suppose that a 30 % performance shortfall from a single-threaded application is causing
one person to die each day. Suppose further that in a day you could hack together a
quick and dirty parallel program that ran 50 % faster on an eight-CPU system. This is
of course horrible scalability, given that the seven additional CPUs provide only half a
CPU’s worth of additional performance.
    But it might well be that constructing an optimal parallel program would require
four months of painstaking design, coding, debugging, and tuning. I would guess that
more than 100 people would prefer the quick and dirty version.
    Once that is done, maybe it is worth creating an optimal version. But that depends
on what else could be accomplished with this same four months of effort. For example,
us carbon-based lifeforms just might feel that saving more lives is more important than
saving 6.5 CPUs.
    Fortunately, most developers of low-level concurrent code play for much lower
stakes, allowing much greater freedom to choose. In addition, small improvements in
low-level code can benefit huge numbers of users, in many cases justifying considerable
investments in performance, scalability, and real-time response. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.23:                                                                p.356
But what about other sources of error, for example, due to interactions between caches
and memory layout?

Answer:
Changes in memory layout can indeed result in unrealistic decreases in execution time.
For example, suppose that a given microbenchmark almost always overflows the L0
cache’s associativity, but with just the right memory layout, it all fits. If this is a real
concern, consider running your microbenchmark using huge pages (or within the kernel
or on bare metal) in order to completely control the memory layout.
     But note that there are many different possible memory-layout bottlenecks. Bench-
marks sensitive to memory bandwidth (such as those involving matrix arithmetic) should
spread the running threads across the available cores and sockets to maximize memory
parallelism. They should also spread the data across NUMA nodes, memory controllers,
and DRAM chips to the extent possible. In contrast, benchmarks sensitive to memory
latency (including most poorly scaling applications) should instead maximize locality,
filling each core and socket in turn before adding another one. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.24:                                                                  p.357
Wouldn’t the techniques suggested to isolate the code under test also affect that code’s
performance, particularly if it is running within a larger application?

Answer:
Indeed it might, although in most microbenchmarking efforts you would extract the

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.12. FORMAL VERIFICATION                                                              849

code under test from the enclosing application. Nevertheless, if for some reason you
must keep the code under test within the application, you will very likely need to use
the techniques discussed in Section 11.7.6. ❑

Quick Quiz 11.25:                                                           p.361
This approach is just plain weird! Why not use means and standard deviations, like
we were taught in our statistics classes?

Answer:
Because mean and standard deviation were not designed to do this job. To see this, try
applying mean and standard deviation to the following data set, given a 1 % relative
error in measurement:

      49,548.4 49,549.4 49,550.2 49,550.9 49,550.9 49,551.0 49,551.5 49,552.1
      49,899.0 49,899.3 49,899.7 49,899.8 49,900.1 49,900.4 52,244.9 53,333.3
      53,333.3 53,706.3 53,706.3 54,084.5

    The problem is that mean and standard deviation do not rest on any sort of
measurement-error assumption, and they will therefore see the difference between the
values near 49,500 and those near 49,900 as being statistically significant, when in fact
they are well within the bounds of estimated measurement error.
    Of course, it is possible to create a script similar to that in Listing 11.2 that uses
standard deviation rather than absolute difference to get a similar effect, and this is left
as an exercise for the interested reader. Be careful to avoid divide-by-zero errors arising
from strings of identical data values! ❑

Quick Quiz 11.26:                                                               p.361
But what if all the y-values in the trusted group of data are exactly zero? Won’t that
cause the script to reject any non-zero value?

Answer:
Indeed it will! But if your performance measurements often produce a value of exactly
zero, perhaps you need to take a closer look at your performance-measurement code.
    Note that many approaches based on mean and standard deviation will have similar
problems with this sort of dataset. ❑

E.12       Formal Verification

Quick Quiz 12.1:                                                                  p.375
Why is there an unreached statement in locker? After all, isn’t this a full state-space
search?

Answer:
The locker process is an infinite loop, so control never reaches the end of this process.
However, since there are no monotonically increasing variables, Promela is able to
model this infinite loop with a small number of states. ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
850                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 12.2:                                                                  p.375
What are some Promela code-style issues with this example?

Answer:
There are several:

   1. The declaration of sum should be moved to within the init block, since it is not
      used anywhere else.

   2. The assertion code should be moved outside of the initialization loop. The
      initialization loop can then be placed in an atomic block, greatly reducing the
      state space (by how much?).

   3. The atomic block covering the assertion code should be extended to include the
      initialization of sum and j, and also to cover the assertion. This also reduces the
      state space (again, by how much?). ❑

Quick Quiz 12.3:                                                                  p.378
Is there a more straightforward way to code the do-od statement?

Answer:
Yes. Replace it with if-fi and remove the two break statements. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.4:                                                             p.378
Why are there atomic blocks at lines 12–21 and lines 44–56, when the operations
within those atomic blocks have no atomic implementation on any current production
microprocessor?

Answer:
Because those operations are for the benefit of the assertion only. They are not part of
the algorithm itself. There is therefore no harm in marking them atomic, and so marking
them greatly reduces the state space that must be searched by the Promela model. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.5:                                                                  p.378
Is the re-summing of the counters on lines 24–27 really necessary?

Answer:
Yes. To see this, delete these lines and run the model.
   Alternatively, consider the following sequence of steps:

   1. One process is within its RCU read-side critical section, so that the value of
      ctr[0] is zero and the value of ctr[1] is two.

   2. An updater starts executing, and sees that the sum of the counters is two so that
      the fastpath cannot be executed. It therefore acquires the lock.

   3. A second updater starts executing, and fetches the value of ctr[0], which is zero.

   4. The first updater adds one to ctr[0], flips the index (which now becomes zero),
      then subtracts one from ctr[1] (which now becomes one).

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.12. FORMAL VERIFICATION                                                        851

Listing E.8: Spin Output Diff of -DCOLLAPSE and -DMA=88
@@ -1,6 +1,6 @@
 (Spin Version 6.4.6 -- 2 December 2016)
         + Partial Order Reduction
-        + Compression
+        + Graph Encoding (-DMA=88)

 Full statespace search for:
         never claim             - (none specified)
@@ -9,27 +9,22 @@
         invalid end states      +

 State-vector 88 byte, depth reached 328014, errors: 0
+MA stats: -DMA=77 is sufficient
+Minimized Automaton:    2084798 nodes and 6.38445e+06 edges
 1.8620286e+08 states, stored
 1.7759831e+08 states, matched
 3.6380117e+08 transitions (= stored+matched)
 1.3724093e+08 atomic steps
-hash conflicts: 1.1445626e+08 (resolved)

 Stats on memory usage (in Megabytes):
 20598.919       equivalent memory usage for states
                   (stored*(State-vector + overhead))
- 8418.559       actual memory usage for states
-                  (compression: 40.87%)
-                state-vector as stored =
-                  19 byte + 28 byte overhead
- 2048.000       memory used for hash table (-w28)
+ 204.907        actual memory usage for states
+                  (compression: 0.99%)
    17.624       memory used for DFS stack (-m330000)
-    1.509       memory lost to fragmentation
-10482.675       total actual memory usage
+ 222.388        total actual memory usage

-nr of templates: [ 0:globals 1:chans 2:procs ]
-collapse counts: [ 0:1021 2:32 3:1869 4:2 ]
 unreached in proctype qrcu_reader
         (0 of 18 states)
 unreached in proctype qrcu_updater
@@ -38,5 +33,5 @@
 unreached in init
         (0 of 23 states)

-pan: elapsed time 369 seconds
-pan: rate 505107.58 states/second
+pan: elapsed time 2.68e+03 seconds
+pan: rate 69453.282 states/second

   5. The second updater fetches the value of ctr[1], which is now one.

   6. The second updater now incorrectly concludes that it is safe to proceed on the
      fastpath, despite the fact that the original reader has not yet completed. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.6:                                                             p.381
A compression rate of 0.48 % corresponds to a 200-to-1 decrease in memory occupied
by the states! Is the state-space search really exhaustive???

Answer:
According to Spin’s documentation, yes, it is.
    As an indirect evidence, let’s compare the results of runs with -DCOLLAPSE and
with -DMA=88 (two readers and three updaters). The diff of outputs from those runs is

                                                                                        v2025.12.18a
852                                  APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

shown in Listing E.8. As you can see, they agree on the numbers of states (stored and
matched). ❑

Quick Quiz 12.7:                                                                  p.384
But different formal-verification tools are often designed to locate particular classes
of bugs. For example, very few formal-verification tools will find an error in the
specification. So isn’t this “clearly untrustworthy” judgment a bit harsh?

Answer:
It is certainly true that many formal-verification tools are specialized in some way.
For example, Promela does not handle realistic memory models (though they can be
programmed into Promela [DMD13]), CBMC [CKL04] does not detect probabilistic
hangs and deadlocks, and Nidhugg [LSLK14] does not detect bugs involving data
nondeterminism. But this means that these tools cannot be trusted to find bugs that they
are not designed to locate.
     And therefore people creating formal-verification tools should “tell the truth on
the label”, clearly calling out what classes of bugs their tools can and cannot detect.
Otherwise, the first time a practitioner finds a tool failing to detect a bug, that practitioner
is likely to make extremely harsh and extremely public denunciations of that tool. Yes,
yes, there is something to be said for putting your best foot forward, but putting it too
far forward without appropriate disclaimers can easily trigger a land mine of negative
reaction that your tool might or might not be able to recover from.
     You have been warned! ❑

Quick Quiz 12.8:                                                                p.384
Given that we have two independent proofs of correctness for the QRCU algorithm
described herein, and given that the proof of incorrectness covers what is known to be
a different algorithm, why is there any room for doubt?

Answer:
There is always room for doubt. In this case, it is important to keep in mind that the
two proofs of correctness preceded the formalization of real-world memory models,
raising the possibility that these two proofs are based on incorrect memory-ordering
assumptions. Furthermore, since both proofs were constructed by the same person, it is
quite possible that they contain a common error. Again, there is always room for doubt.
❑

Quick Quiz 12.9:                                                                  p.385
Yeah, that’s just great! Now, just what am I supposed to do if I don’t happen to have a
machine with 40 GB of main memory???

Answer:
Relax, there are a number of lawful answers to this question:

   1. Try compiler flags -DCOLLAPSE and -DMA=N to reduce memory consumption.
      See Section 12.1.4.1.

   2. Further optimize the model, reducing its memory consumption.

                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
E.12. FORMAL VERIFICATION                                                          853

   3. Work out a pencil-and-paper proof, perhaps starting with the comments in the
      code in the Linux kernel.

   4. Devise careful torture tests, which, though they cannot prove the code correct,
      can find hidden bugs.

   5. There is some movement towards tools that do model checking on clusters of
      smaller machines. However, please note that we have not actually used such tools
      myself, courtesy of some large machines that Paul has occasional access to.

   6. Wait for memory sizes of affordable systems to expand to fit your problem.

   7. Use one of a number of cloud-computing services to rent a large system for a
      short time period. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.10:                                                      p.387
Why not simply increment rcu_update_flag, and then only increment dynticks_
progress_counter if the old value of rcu_update_flag was zero???

Answer:
This fails in presence of NMIs. To see this, suppose an NMI was received just
after rcu_irq_enter() incremented rcu_update_flag, but before it incremented
dynticks_progress_counter. The instance of rcu_irq_enter() invoked by the
NMI would see that the original value of rcu_update_flag was non-zero, and would
therefore refrain from incrementing dynticks_progress_counter. This would leave
the RCU grace-period machinery no clue that the NMI handler was executing on this
CPU, so that any RCU read-side critical sections in the NMI handler would lose their
RCU protection.
   The possibility of NMI handlers, which, by definition cannot be masked, does
complicate this code. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.11:                                                             p.387
But if line 7 finds that we are the outermost interrupt, wouldn’t we always need to
increment dynticks_progress_counter?

Answer:
Not if we interrupted a running task! In that case, dynticks_progress_counter
would have already been incremented by rcu_exit_nohz(), and there would be no
need to increment it again. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.12:                                                              p.389
Can you spot any bugs in any of the code in this section?

Answer:
Read the next section to see if you were correct. ❑

                                                                                         v2025.12.18a
854                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 12.13:                                                   p.390
Why isn’t the memory barrier in rcu_exit_nohz() and rcu_enter_nohz() mod-
eled in Promela?

Answer:
Promela assumes sequential consistency, so it is not necessary to model memory barriers.
In fact, one must instead explicitly model lack of memory barriers, for example, as
shown in Listing 12.13 on page 377. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.14:                                                        p.390
Isn’t it a bit strange to model rcu_exit_nohz() followed by rcu_enter_nohz()?
Wouldn’t it be more natural to instead model entry before exit?

Answer:
It probably would be more natural, but we will need this particular order for the liveness
checks that we will add later. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.15:                                                       p.391
Wait a minute! In the Linux kernel, both dynticks_progress_counter and rcu_
dyntick_snapshot are per-CPU variables. So why are they instead being modeled
as single global variables?

Answer:
Because the grace-period code processes each CPU’s dynticks_progress_counter
and rcu_dyntick_snapshot variables separately, we can collapse the state onto a
single CPU. If the grace-period code were instead to do something special given
specific values on specific CPUs, then we would indeed need to model multiple CPUs.
But fortunately, we can safely confine ourselves to two CPUs, the one running the
grace-period processing and the one entering and leaving dynticks-idle mode. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.16:                                                          p.392
Given there are a pair of back-to-back changes to grace_period_state on lines 25
and 26, how can we be sure that line 25’s changes won’t be lost?

Answer:
Recall that Promela and Spin trace out every possible sequence of state changes.
Therefore, timing is irrelevant: Promela/Spin will be quite happy to jam the entire
rest of the model between those two statements unless some state variable specifically
prohibits doing so. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.17:                                                            p.397
But what would you do if you needed the statements in a single EXECUTE_MAINLINE()
group to execute non-atomically?

Answer:
The easiest thing to do would be to put each such statement in its own EXECUTE_
MAINLINE() statement. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.12. FORMAL VERIFICATION                                                          855

Quick Quiz 12.18:                                                                p.397
But what if the dynticks_nohz() process had “if” or “do” statements with condi-
tions, where the statement bodies of these constructs needed to execute non-atomically?

Answer:
One approach, as we will see in a later section, is to use explicit labels and “goto”
statements. For example, the construct:

         if
         :: i == 0 -> a = -1;
         :: else -> a = -2;
         fi;

could be modeled as something like:

         EXECUTE_MAINLINE(stmt1,
                          if
                          :: i == 0 -> goto stmt1_then;
                          :: else -> goto stmt1_else;
                          fi)
         stmt1_then: skip;
         EXECUTE_MAINLINE(stmt1_then1, a = -1; goto stmt1_end)
         stmt1_else: skip;
         EXECUTE_MAINLINE(stmt1_then1, a = -2)
         stmt1_end: skip;

    However, it is not clear that the macro is helping much in the case of the “if”
statement, so these sorts of situations will be open-coded in the following sections. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.19:                                                     p.398
Why are lines 46 and 47 (the “in_dyntick_irq = 0;” and the “i++;”) executed
atomically?

Answer:
These lines of code pertain to controlling the model, not to the code being modeled, so
there is no reason to model them non-atomically. The motivation for modeling them
atomically is to reduce the size of the state space. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.20:                                                          p.398
What property of interrupts is this dynticks_irq() process unable to model?

Answer:
One such property is nested interrupts, which are handled in the following section. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.21:                                                                p.404
Does Paul always write his code in this painfully incremental manner?

Answer:
Not always, but more and more frequently. In this case, Paul started with the smallest
slice of code that included an interrupt handler, because he was not sure how best to
model interrupts in Promela. Once he got that working, he added other features. (But if
he was doing it again, he would start with a “toy” handler. For example, he might have

                                                                                          v2025.12.18a
856                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

the handler increment a variable twice and have the mainline code verify that the value
was always even.)
    Why the incremental approach? Consider the following, attributed to Brian W.
Kernighan:

      Debugging is twice as hard as writing the code in the first place. Therefore,
      if you write the code as cleverly as possible, you are, by definition, not
      smart enough to debug it.

    This means that any attempt to optimize the production of code should place at
least 66 % of its emphasis on optimizing the debugging process, even at the expense of
increasing the time and effort spent coding. Incremental coding and testing is one way
to optimize the debugging process, at the expense of some increase in coding effort.
Paul uses this approach because he rarely has the luxury of devoting full days (let alone
weeks) to coding and debugging. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.22:                                                            p.406
But what happens if an NMI handler starts running before an IRQ handler completes,
and if that NMI handler continues running until a second IRQ handler starts?

Answer:
This cannot happen within the confines of a single CPU. The first IRQ handler cannot
complete until the NMI handler returns. Therefore, if each of the dynticks and
dynticks_nmi variables have taken on an even value during a given time interval, the
corresponding CPU really was in a quiescent state at some time during that interval. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.23:                                                              p.409
This is still pretty complicated. Why not just have a cpumask_t with per-CPU bits,
clearing the bit when entering an IRQ or NMI handler, and setting it upon exit?

Answer:
Although this approach would be functionally correct, it would result in excessive IRQ
entry/exit overhead on large machines. In contrast, the approach laid out in this section
allows each CPU to touch only per-CPU data on IRQ and NMI entry/exit, resulting in
much lower IRQ entry/exit overhead, especially on large machines. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.24:                                                                 p.411
But x86 has strong memory ordering, so why formalize its memory model?

Answer:
Actually, academics consider the x86 memory model to be weak because it can allow
prior stores to be reordered with subsequent loads. From an academic viewpoint, a
strong memory model is one that allows absolutely no reordering, so that all threads
agree on the order of all operations visible to them.
    Plus it really is the case that developers are sometimes confused about x86 memory
ordering. ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.12. FORMAL VERIFICATION                                                            857

Quick Quiz 12.25:                                                              p.411
Why does line 8 of Listing 12.23 initialize the registers? Why not instead initialize
them on lines 4 and 5?

Answer:
Either way works. However, in general, it is better to use initialization than explicit
instructions. The explicit instructions are used in this example to demonstrate their use.
In addition, many of the litmus tests available on the tool’s web site (https://www.cl.
cam.ac.uk/~pes20/ppcmem/) were automatically generated, which generates explicit
initialization instructions. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.26:                                                                p.412
But whatever happened to line 17 of Listing 12.23, the one that is the Fail1: label?

Answer:
The implementation of PowerPC version of atomic_add_return() loops when the
stwcx instruction fails, which it communicates by setting non-zero status in the
condition-code register, which in turn is tested by the bne instruction. Because actually
modeling the loop would result in state-space explosion, we instead branch to the
Fail1: label, terminating the model with the initial value of 2 in P0’s r3 register, which
will not trigger the exists assertion.
    There is some debate about whether this trick is universally applicable, but I have
not seen an example where it fails. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.27:                                                                  p.413
Does the Arm Linux kernel have a similar bug?

Answer:
Arm does not have this particular bug because it places smp_mb() before and after the
atomic_add_return() function’s assembly-language implementation. PowerPC no
longer has this bug; it has long since been fixed [Her11]. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.28:                                                                  p.413
Does the lwsync on line 10 in Listing 12.23 provide sufficient ordering?

Answer:
It depends on the semantics required. The rest of this answer assumes that the assembly
language for P0 in Listing 12.23 is supposed to implement a value-returning atomic
operation.
    As is discussed in Chapter 15, Linux kernel’s memory consistency model requires
value-returning atomic RMW operations to be fully ordered on both sides. The ordering
provided by lwsync is insufficient for this purpose, and so sync should be used instead.
This change has since been made [Fen15] in response to an email thread discussing a
couple of other litmus tests [McK15g]. Finding any other bugs that the Linux kernel
might have is left as an exercise for the reader.
    In other enviroments providing weaker semantics, lwsync might be sufficient. But
not for the Linux kernel’s value-returning atomic operations! ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
858                                   APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

                Table E.5: Locking: Modeling vs. Emulation Time (s)

                           Model                  Emulate

                 # Proc.
                                       filter               exists
                                   cmpxchg      xchg   cmpxchg       xchg
                  2        0.004     0.022    0.027      0.039     0.058
                  3        0.041     0.743    0.968      1.653     3.203
                  4        0.374    59.565   74.818    151.962   500.960
                  5        4.905

Quick Quiz 12.29:                                                              p.417
What do you have to do to run herd on litmus tests like that shown in Listing 12.29?

Answer:
Get version v4.17 (or later) of the Linux-kernel source code, then follow the instructions
in tools/memory-model/README to install the needed tools. Then follow the further
instructions to run these tools on the litmus test of your choice. ❑

Quick Quiz 12.30:                                                          p.418
Why bother modeling locking directly? Why not simply emulate locking with atomic
operations?

Answer:
In a word, performance, as can be seen in Table E.5. The first column shows the number
of herd processes modeled. The second column shows the herd runtime when modeling
spin_lock() and spin_unlock() directly in herd’s cat language. The third column
shows the herd runtime when emulating spin_lock() with cmpxchg_acquire()
and spin_unlock() with smp_store_release(), using the herd filter clause
to reject executions that fail to acquire the lock. The fourth column is like the third,
but using xchg_acquire() instead of cmpxchg_acquire(). The fifth and sixth
columns are like the third and fourth, but instead using the herd exists clause to reject
executions that fail to acquire the lock.
    Note also that use of the filter clause is about twice as fast as is use of the exists
clause. This is no surprise because the filter clause allows early abandoning of
excluded executions, where the executions that are excluded are the ones in which the
lock is concurrently held by more than one process.
    More important, modeling spin_lock() and spin_unlock() directly ranges
from five times faster to more than two orders of magnitude faster than modeling
emulated locking. This should also be no surprise, as direct modeling raises the level
of abstraction, thus reducing the number of events that herd must model. Because
almost everything that herd does is of exponential computational complexity, modest
reductions in the number of events produces exponentially large reductions in runtime.
   Thus, in formal verification even more than in parallel programming itself, divide
and conquer!!! ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.12. FORMAL VERIFICATION                                                             859

Quick Quiz 12.31:                                                                   p.420
Wait!!! Isn’t leaking pointers out of an RCU read-side critical section a critical bug???

Answer:
Yes, it usually is a critical bug. However, in this case, the updater has been cleverly
constructed to properly handle such pointer leaks. But please don’t make a habit of
doing this sort of thing, and especially don’t do this without having put a lot of thought
into making some more conventional approach work. ❑

 Quick Quiz 12.32:                                                                   p.420
 In Listing 12.32, why couldn’t a reader fetch c just before P1() zeroed it on line 45,
 and then later store this same value back into c just after it was zeroed, thus defeating
 the zeroing operation?

Answer:
Because the reader advances to the next element on line 24, thus avoiding storing a
pointer to the same element as was fetched. ❑

 Quick Quiz 12.33:                                                      p.420
 In Listing 12.32, why not have just one call to synchronize_rcu() immediately
 before line 48?
Answer:
Because this results in P0() accessing a freed element. But don’t take my word for this,
try it out in herd! ❑

Quick Quiz 12.34:                                                     p.420
Also in Listing 12.32, can’t line 48 be WRITE_ONCE() instead of smp_store_
release()?

Answer:
That is an excellent question. As of late 2021, the answer is “no one knows”. Much
depends on the semantics of Armv8’s conditional-move instruction. While awaiting
clarity on these semantics, smp_store_release() is the safe choice. ❑

 Quick Quiz 12.35:                                                                 p.424
 But shouldn’t sufficiently low-level software be for all intents and purposes immune to
 being exploited by black hats?

Answer:
Unfortunately, no.
    At one time, Paul E. McKenny felt that Linux-kernel RCU was immune to such
exploits, but the advent of Row Hammer showed him otherwise. After all, if the black
hats can hit the system’s DRAM, they can hit any and all low-level software, even
including RCU.
    And in 2018, this possibility passed from the realm of theoretical speculation into
the hard and fast realm of objective reality [McK19a]. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
860                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 12.36:                                                                    p.424
In light of the full verification of the L4 microkernel, isn’t this limited view of formal
verification just a little bit obsolete?

Answer:
Unfortunately, no.
    The first full verification of the L4 microkernel was a tour de force, with a large
number of Ph.D. students hand-verifying code at a very slow per-student rate. This level
of effort could not be applied to most software projects because the rate of change is
just too great. Furthermore, although the L4 microkernel is a large software artifact
from the viewpoint of formal verification, it is tiny compared to a great number of
projects, including LLVM, GCC, the Linux kernel, Hadoop, MongoDB, and a great
many others. In addition, this verification did have limits, as the researchers freely ad-
mit, to their credit: https://docs.sel4.systems/projects/sel4/frequently-
asked-questions.html#does-sel4-have-zero-bugs.
    Although formal verification is finally starting to show some promise, including
more-recent L4 verifications involving greater levels of automation, it currently has no
chance of completely displacing testing in the foreseeable future. And although I would
dearly love to be proven wrong on this point, please note that such proof will be in the
form of a real tool that verifies real software, not in the form of a large body of rousing
rhetoric.
    Perhaps someday formal verification will be used heavily for validation, including
for what is now known as regression testing. Section 17.4 looks at what would be
required to make this possibility a reality. ❑

E.13       Putting It All Together

Quick Quiz 13.1:                                                           p.431
Why not implement reference-acquisition using a simple compare-and-swap operation
that only acquires a reference if the reference counter is non-zero?

Answer:
Although this can resolve the race between the release of the last reference and acquisition
of a new reference, it does absolutely nothing to prevent the data structure from being
freed and reallocated, possibly as some completely different type of structure. It is quite
likely that the “simple compare-and-swap operation” would give undefined results if
applied to the differently typed structure.
    In short, use of atomic operations such as compare-and-swap absolutely requires
either type-safety or existence guarantees.
    But what if it is absolutely necessary to let the type change?
    One approach is for each such type to have the reference counter at the same location,
so that as long as the reallocation results in an object from this group of types, all is
well. If you do this in C, make sure you comment the reference counter in each structure
in which it appears. In C++, use inheritance and templates. ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.13. PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER                                                        861

Quick Quiz 13.2:                                                               p.433
Why isn’t it necessary to guard against cases where one CPU acquires a reference just
after another CPU releases the last reference?

Answer:
Because a CPU must already hold a reference in order to legally acquire another
reference. Therefore, if one CPU releases the last reference, there had better not be any
CPU acquiring a new reference! ❑

Quick Quiz 13.3:                                                             p.434
Suppose that just after the atomic_sub_and_test() on line 22 of Listing 13.2 is
invoked, that some other CPU invokes kref_get(). Doesn’t this result in that other
CPU now having an illegal reference to a released object?

Answer:
This cannot happen if these functions are used correctly. It is illegal to invoke kref_
get() unless you already hold a reference, in which case the kref_sub() could not
possibly have decremented the counter to zero. ❑

Quick Quiz 13.4:                                                               p.434
Suppose that kref_sub() returns zero, indicating that the release() function was
not invoked. Under what conditions can the caller rely on the continued existence of
the enclosing object?

Answer:
The caller cannot rely on the continued existence of the object unless it knows that at
least one reference will continue to exist. Normally, the caller will have no way of
knowing this, and must therefore carefully avoid referencing the object after the call to
kref_sub().
    Interested readers are encouraged to work around this limitation using RCU, in
particular, call_rcu(). ❑

Quick Quiz 13.5:                                                                   p.434
Why not just pass kfree() as the release function?

Answer:
Because the kref structure normally is embedded in a larger structure, and it is necessary
to free the entire structure, not just the kref field. This is normally accomplished by
defining a wrapper function that does a container_of() and then a kfree(). ❑

Quick Quiz 13.6:                                                             p.435
Why can’t the check for a zero reference count be made in a simple “if” statement
with an atomic increment in its “then” clause?

Answer:
Suppose that the “if” condition completed, finding the reference counter value equal
to one. Suppose that a release operation executes, decrementing the reference counter
to zero and therefore starting cleanup operations. But now the “then” clause can

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
862                                  APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

increment the counter back to a value of one, allowing the object to be used after it has
been cleaned up.
    This use-after-cleanup bug is every bit as bad as a full-fledged use-after-free bug. ❑

Quick Quiz 13.7:                                                                      p.438
Why don’t all sequence-locking use cases replicate the data in this fashion?

Answer:
Such replication is impractical if the data is too large, as it might be in the Schrödinger’s-
zoo example described in Section 13.4.2.
     Such replication is unnecessary if delays are prevented, for example, when updaters
disable interrupts when running on bare-metal hardware (that is, without the use of a
vCPU-preemption-prone hypervisor).
     Alternatively, if readers can tolerate the occasional delay, then replication is again
unnecessary. Consider the example of reader-writer locking, where writers always delay
readers and vice versa.
     However, if the data to be replicated is reasonably small, if delays are possible, and
if readers cannot tolerate these delays, replicating the data is an excellent approach. ❑

 Quick Quiz 13.8:                                                                     p.441
 Is it possible to write-acquire the sequence lock on the new element before it is inserted
 instead of acquiring that of the old element before it is removed?

Answer:
Yes, and the details are left as an exercise to the reader.
    The term tombstone is sometimes used to refer to the element with the old name
after its sequence lock is acquired. Similarly, the term birthstone is sometimes used to
refer to the element with the new name while its sequence lock is still held. ❑

 Quick Quiz 13.9:                                                                     p.441
 Is it possible to avoid the global lock?

Answer:
Yes, and one way to do this would be to use per-hash-chain locks. The updater could
acquire lock(s) corresponding to both the old and the new element, acquiring them in
address order. In this case, the insertion and removal operations would of course need to
refrain from acquiring and releasing these same per-hash-chain locks. This complexity
can be worthwhile if rename operations are frequent, and of course can allow rename
operations to execute concurrently. ❑

Quick Quiz 13.10:                                                                     p.441
Why on earth did we need that global lock in the first place?

Answer:
A given thread’s __thread variables vanish when that thread exits. It is therefore
necessary to synchronize any operation that accesses other threads’ __thread variables
with thread exit. Without such synchronization, accesses to __thread variable of a
just-exited thread will result in segmentation faults. ❑

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
E.13. PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER                                                         863

 Quick Quiz 13.11:                                                             p.442
 Hey!!! Line 48 of Listing 13.5 modifies a value in a pre-existing countarray
 structure! Didn’t you say that this structure, once made available to read_count(),
 remained constant???

Answer:
Indeed I did say that. And it would be possible to make count_register_thread()
allocate a new structure, much as count_unregister_thread() currently does.
    But this is unnecessary. Recall the derivation of the error bounds of read_count()
that was based on the snapshots of memory. Because new threads start with initial
counter values of zero, the derivation holds even if we add a new thread partway
through read_count()’s execution. So, interestingly enough, when adding a new
thread, this implementation gets the effect of allocating a new structure, but without
actually having to do the allocation. ❑

 Quick Quiz 13.12:                                                             p.444
 Given the fixed-size counterp array, exactly how does this code avoid a fixed upper
 bound on the number of threads???

Answer:
You are quite right, that array does in fact reimpose the fixed upper limit. This limit may
be avoided by tracking threads with a linked list, as is done in userspace RCU [DMS+ 12a].
Doing something similar for this code is left as an exercise for the reader. ❑

Quick Quiz 13.13:                                                            p.444
Wow! Listing 13.5 contains 70 lines of code, compared to only 42 in Listing 5.4. Is
this extra complexity really worth it?

Answer:
This of course needs to be decided on a case-by-case basis. If you need an implementation
of read_count() that scales linearly, then the lock-based implementation shown in
Listing 5.4 simply will not work for you. On the other hand, if calls to read_count()
are sufficiently rare, then the lock-based version is simpler and might thus be better,
although much of the size difference is due to the structure definition, memory allocation,
and NULL return checking.
    Of course, a better question is “Why doesn’t the language implement cross-thread
access to __thread variables?” After all, such an implementation would make both the
locking and the use of RCU unnecessary. This would in turn enable an implementation
that was even simpler than the one shown in Listing 5.4, but with all the scalability and
performance benefits of the implementation shown in Listing 13.5! ❑

 Quick Quiz 13.14:                                                             p.447
 But cant’t the approach shown in Listing 13.9 result in extra cache misses, in turn
 resulting in additional read-side overhead?

Answer:
Indeed it can.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
864                                    APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Listing E.9: Localized Correlated Measurement Fields
1    struct measurement {
2            double meas_1;
3            double meas_2;
4            double meas_3;
5    };
6
7    struct animal {
8            char name[40];
9            double age;
10           struct measurement *mp;
11           struct measurement meas;
12           char photo[0]; /* large bitmap. */
13   };

    One way to avoid this cache-miss overhead is shown in Listing E.9: Simply embed
an instance of a measurement structure named meas into the animal structure, and
point the ->mp field at this ->meas field.
    Measurement updates can then be carried out as follows:

     1. Allocate a new measurement structure and place the new measurements into it.

     2. Use rcu_assign_pointer() to point ->mp to this new structure.

     3. Wait for a grace period to elapse, for example using either synchronize_rcu()
        or call_rcu().

     4. Copy the measurements from the new measurement structure into the embedded
        ->meas field.

     5. Use rcu_assign_pointer() to point ->mp back to the old embedded ->meas
        field.

     6. After another grace period elapses, free up the new measurement structure.

    This approach uses a heavier weight update procedure to eliminate the extra cache
miss in the common case. The extra cache miss will be incurred only while an update is
actually in progress. ❑

 Quick Quiz 13.15:                                                                p.447
 But how does this scan work while a resizable hash table is being resized? In that
 case, neither the old nor the new hash table is guaranteed to contain all the elements
 in the hash table!

Answer:
True, resizable hash tables as described in Section 10.4 cannot be fully scanned while
being resized. One simple way around this is to acquire the hashtab structure’s
->ht_lock while scanning, but this prevents more than one scan from proceeding
concurrently.
    Another approach is for updates to mutate the old hash table as well as the new one
while resizing is in progress. This would allow scans to find all elements in the old hash
table. Implementing this is left as an exercise for the reader. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.13. PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER                                                            865

 Quick Quiz 13.16:                                                           p.452
 But how would this work with a resizable hash table, such as the one described in
 Section 10.4?
Answer:
In this case, more care is required because the hash table might well be resized during
the time that we momentarily exited the RCU read-side critical section. Worse yet, the
resize operation can be expected to free the old hash buckets, leaving us pointing to the
freelist.
     But it is not sufficient to prevent the old hash buckets from being freed. It is also
necessary to ensure that those buckets continue to be updated.
     One way to handle this is to have a reference count on each set of buckets, which is
initially set to the value one. A full-table scan would acquire a reference at the beginning
of the scan (but only if the reference is non-zero) and release it at the end of the scan.
The resizing would populate the new buckets, release the reference, wait for a grace
period, and then wait for the reference to go to zero. Once the reference was zero, the
resizing could let updaters forget about the old hash buckets and then free it.
     Actual implementation is left to the interested reader, who will gain much insight
from this task. ❑

Quick Quiz 13.17:                                                              p.453
Wait!!! Isn’t it necessary for lines 17 and 27 of Listing 13.11 to check for a NULL
pointer returned from lines 15 and 25?

Answer:
In this textbook example, no.
     This is because line 7 initialized pointer p to point to variable a, so that this pointer
will never be NULL. However, this is a very good question to ask because in most
production-quality code, a NULL check would indeed be necessary. On top of that, the
first sentence of this section suggested that the pointer might in fact be NULL. Adding
the NULL checks is left as an exercise for the reader. ❑

 Quick Quiz 13.18:                                                        p.453
 Do we really need xchg() in Listing 13.11? Why not a simple load followed by a
 simple store?

Answer:
Yes, we really do need that xchg(). If we used a simple load followed by a simple store,
then another process could update the pointer between that load and that store, resulting
in that other process’s element being overwritten and leaked.
    But don’t take my word for it. Try it with herd!!! (C-MP+o-o-rcusync-o+o-o-
rcusync-o+rl-o-o-rul.litmus) ❑

 Quick Quiz 13.19:                                                             p.455
 But wouldn’t memory allocation also be forbidden in such a low-latency environment?

Answer:
It might well be. In which case, preallocation might be necessary, for example, in the
Linux kernel, each CPU might be provided with a preallocated element. ❑

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
866                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 13.20:                                                             p.456
Doesn’t that READ_ONCE() on line 14 Listing 13.13 need to be smp_load_acquire()
in order to prevent early readers running concurrently with the initialization from
seeing pre-initialization garbage?

Answer:
No, because READ_ONCE() is a volatile operation and therefore can head address
dependency chains. In theory, another alternative is rcu_dereference_raw(). Except
that this could be misleading because the element is never freed, not protected by rcu_
read_lock(), and thus not really an RCU-protected pointer.
    For more information on address dependencies, please refer to Section 15.4.2 starting
on page 550. ❑

Quick Quiz 13.21:                                                           p.456
Given an algorithm like that shown in Listing 13.13, why would anyone use double-
checked locking?

Answer:
If the flag and data are carefully placed into the same cache line, then double-checked
locking can offer better cache locality than can double-checked CAS. This is because in
the double-checked CAS case, the pointer and the pointed-to element will almost always
be in separate cache lines, potential resulting in two cache misses to double-checked
locking’s single cache miss.
     However, as the element grows in size, this advantage diminishes. ❑

Quick Quiz 13.22:                                                                     p.457
How much do these specializations really save? Are they really worth it?

Answer:
The answer to the first question is left as an exercise to the reader. Try specializing the
resizable hash table and see how much performance improvement results. The second
question cannot be answered in general, but must instead be answered with respect to a
specific use case. Some use cases are extremely sensitive to performance and scalability,
while others are less so. ❑

E.14       Advanced Synchronization

Quick Quiz 14.1:                                                        p.463
Given that there will always be a sharply limited number of CPUs available, is
population obliviousness really useful?

Answer:
Given the surprisingly limited scalability of any number of NBS algorithms, population
obliviousness can be surprisingly useful. Nevertheless, the overall point of the question
is valid. It is not normally helpful for an algorithm to scale beyond the size of the largest
system it is ever going to run on. ❑

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
E.14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION                                                           867

Quick Quiz 14.2:                                                             p.464
Wait! In order to dequeue all elements, both the ->head and ->tail pointers must
be changed, which cannot be done atomically on typical computer systems. So how is
this supposed to work???

Answer:
One pointer at a time!
    First, atomically exchange the ->head pointer with NULL. If the return value from
the atomic exchange operation is NULL, the queue was empty and you are done. And if
someone else attempts a dequeue-all at this point, they will get back a NULL pointer.
    Otherwise, atomically exchange the ->tail pointer with a pointer to the now-NULL
->head pointer. The return value from the atomic exchange operation is a pointer to
the ->next field of the eventual last element on the list.
    Producing and testing actual code is left as an exercise for the interested and
enthusiastic reader, as are strategies for handling half-enqueued elements. ❑

Quick Quiz 14.3:                                                          p.466
So why not ditch antique languages like C and C++ for something more modern?

Answer:
That won’t help unless the more-modern languages proponents are energetic enough to
write their own compiler backends. The usual practice of re-using existing backends
also reuses charming properties such as refusal to support pointers to lifetime-ended
objects. ❑

Quick Quiz 14.4:                                                                       p.467
Why does anyone care about demonic schedulers?

Answer:
A demonic scheduler is one way to model an insanely overloaded system. After all, if
you have an algorithm that you can prove runs reasonably given a demonic scheduler,
mere overload should be no problem, right?
    On the other hand, it is only reasonable to ask if a demonic scheduler is really the
best way to model overload conditions. And perhaps it is time for more accurate models.
For one thing, a system might be overloaded in any of a number of ways. After all, an
NBS algorithm that works fine on a demonic scheduler might or might not do well in
out-of-memory conditions, when mass storage fills, or when the network is congested.
    Except that systems’ core counts have been increasing, which means that an
overloaded system is quite likely to be running more than one concurrent program.15 In
that case, even if a demonic scheduler is not so demonic as to inject idle cycles while
there are runnable tasks, it is easy to imagine such a scheduler consistently favoring the
other program over yours. If both programs could consume all available CPU, then this
scheduler might not run your program at all.
    One way to avoid these issues is to simply avoid overload conditions. This is often
the preferred approach in production, where load balancers direct traffic away from
overloaded systems. And if all systems are overloaded, it is not unheard of to simply

   15 As a point of reference, back in the mid-1990s, Paul witnessed a 16-CPU system

running about 20 instances of a certain high-end proprietary database.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
868                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

shed load, that is, to drop the low-priority incoming requests. Nor is this approach
limited to computing, as those who have suffered through a rolling blackout can attest.
But load-shedding is often considered a bad thing by those whose load is being shed.
    As always, choose wisely! ❑

 Quick Quiz 14.5:                                                             p.471
 It seems like the various members of the NBS hierarchy are rather useless. So why
 bother with them at all???

Answer:
One advantage of the members of the NBS hierarchy is that they are reasonably simple
to define and use from a theoretical viewpoint. We can hope that work done in the
NBS arena will help lay the groundwork for analysis of real-world forward-progress
guarantees for concurrent real-time programs. However, as of 2022 it appears that
trace-based methodologies are in the lead [dOCdO19].
    So why bother learning about NBS at all?
    Because a great many people know of it, and are vaguely aware that it is somehow
related to real-time computing. Their response to your carefully designed real-time
constraints might well be of the form “Bah, just use wait-free algorithms!”. In the
all-too-common case where they are very convincing to your management, you will
need to understand NBS in order to bring the discussion back to reality. I hope that this
section has provided you with the required depth of understanding.
    Another thing to note is that learning about the NBS hierarchy is probably no
more harmful than learning about transfinite numbers of the computational-complexity
hierarchy. In all three cases, it is important to avoid over-applying the theory. Which is
in and of itself good practice! ❑

 Quick Quiz 14.6:                                                            p.475
 But what about battery-powered systems? They don’t require energy flowing into the
 system as a whole.

Answer:
Sooner or later, the battery must be recharged, which requires energy to flow into the
system. ❑

Quick Quiz 14.7:                                                              p.476
But given the results from queueing theory, won’t low utilization merely improve the
average response time rather than improving the worst-case response time? And isn’t
worst-case response time all that most real-time systems really care about?

Answer:
Yes, but . . .
    Those queueing-theory results assume infinite “calling populations”, which in the
Linux kernel might correspond to an infinite number of tasks. As of early 2021, no
real system supports an infinite number of tasks, so results assuming infinite calling
populations should be expected to have less-than-infinite applicability.
    Other queueing-theory results have finite calling populations, which feature sharply
bounded response times [HL86]. These results better model real systems, and these

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.14. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION                                                         869

models do predict reductions in both average and worst-case response times as utiliza-
tions decrease. These results can be extended to model concurrent systems that use
synchronization mechanisms such as locking [Bra11, SM04a].
    In short, queueing-theory results that accurately describe real-world real-time
systems show that worst-case response time decreases with decreasing utilization. ❑

Quick Quiz 14.8:                                                                    p.478
Formal verification is already quite capable, benefiting from decades of intensive
study. Are additional advances really required, or is this just a practitioner’s excuse to
continue to lazily ignore the awesome power of formal verification?

Answer:
Perhaps this situation is just a theoretician’s excuse to avoid diving into the messy world
of real software? Perhaps more constructively, the following advances are required:

   1. Formal verification needs to handle larger software artifacts. The largest verifica-
      tion efforts have been for systems of only about 10,000 lines of code, and those
      have been verifying much simpler properties than real-time latencies.

   2. Hardware vendors will need to publish formal timing guarantees. This used to be
      common practice back when hardware was much simpler, but today’s complex
      hardware results in excessively complex expressions for worst-case performance.
      Unfortunately, energy-efficiency concerns are pushing vendors in the direction of
      even more complexity.

   3. Timing analysis needs to be integrated into development methodologies and IDEs.

    All that said, there is hope, given recent work formalizing the memory models of
real computer systems [AMP+ 11, AKNT13]. On the other hand, formal verification
has just as much trouble as does testing with the astronomical number of variants of
the Linux kernel that can be constructed from different combinations of its tens of
thousands of Kconfig options. Sometimes life is hard! ❑

Quick Quiz 14.9:                                                                 p.478
Differentiating real-time from non-real-time based on what can “be achieved straight-
forwardly by non-real-time systems and applications” is a travesty! There is absolutely
no theoretical basis for such a distinction!!! Can’t we do better than that???

Answer:
This distinction is admittedly unsatisfying from a strictly theoretical perspective. But
on the other hand, it is exactly what the developer needs in order to decide whether the
application can be cheaply and easily developed using standard non-real-time approaches,
or whether the more difficult and expensive real-time approaches are required. In other
words, although theory is quite important, for those of us called upon to complete
practical projects, theory supports practice, never the other way around. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
870                                  APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

 Quick Quiz 14.10:                                                              p.490
 But if you only allow one reader at a time to read-acquire a reader-writer lock, isn’t
 that the same as an exclusive lock???
Answer:
Indeed it is, other than the API. And the API is important because it allows the Linux
kernel to offer real-time capabilities without having the -rt patchset grow to ridiculous
sizes.
    However, this approach clearly and severely limits read-side scalability. The Linux
kernel’s -rt patchset was long able to live with this limitation for several reasons:
(1) Real-time systems have traditionally been relatively small, (2) Real-time systems
have generally focused on process control, thus being unaffected by scalability limitations
in the I/O subsystems, and (3) Many of the Linux kernel’s reader-writer locks have been
converted to RCU.
    However, the day came when it was absolutely necessary to permit concurrent
readers, as described in the text following this quiz. ❑

 Quick Quiz 14.11:                                                              p.492
 Suppose that preemption occurs just after the load from t->rcu_read_unlock_
 special.s on line 12 of Listing 14.3. Mightn’t that result in the task failing to
 invoke rcu_read_unlock_special(), thus failing to remove itself from the list of
 tasks blocking the current grace period, in turn causing that grace period to extend
 indefinitely?

Answer:
That is a real problem, and it is solved in RCU’s scheduler hook. If that scheduler
hook sees that the value of t->rcu_read_lock_nesting is negative, it invokes rcu_
read_unlock_special() if needed before allowing the context switch to complete.
❑

 Quick Quiz 14.12:                                                                 p.496
 But isn’t correct operation despite fail-stop bugs a valuable fault-tolerance property?

Answer:
Yes and no.
     Yes in that non-blocking algorithms can provide fault tolerance in the face of
fail-stop bugs, but no in that this is grossly insufficient for practical fault tolerance. For
example, suppose you had a wait-free queue, and further suppose that a thread has just
dequeued an element. If that thread now succumbs to a fail-stop bug, the element it
has just dequeued is effectively lost. True fault tolerance requires way more than mere
non-blocking properties, and is beyond the scope of this book. ❑

 Quick Quiz 14.13:                                                                   p.497
 I couldn’t help but spot the word “include” before this list. Are there other constraints?

Answer:
Indeed there are, and lots of them. However, they tend to be specific to a given situation,

                                                                                                 v2025.12.18a
E.15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING                                     871

and many of them can be thought of as refinements of some of the constraints listed
above. For example, the many constraints on choices of data structure will help meeting
the “Bounded time spent in any given critical section” constraint. ❑

Quick Quiz 14.14:                                                                 p.499
Given that real-time systems are often used for safety-critical applications, and given
that runtime memory allocation is forbidden in many safety-critical situations, what is
with the call to malloc()???

Answer:
In early 2016, projects forbidding runtime memory allocation were also not at all
interested in multithreaded computing. So the runtime memory allocation is not an
additional obstacle to safety criticality.
    However, by 2020 runtime memory allocation in multi-core real-time systems was
gaining some traction. ❑

Quick Quiz 14.15:                                                                p.499
Don’t you need some kind of synchronization to protect update_cal()?

Answer:
Indeed you do, and you could use any of a number of techniques discussed earlier in
this book. One of those techniques is use of a single updater thread, which would result
in exactly the code shown in update_cal() in Listing 14.6. ❑

E.15      Advanced Synchronization: Memory Ordering

Quick Quiz 15.1:                                                                p.503
This chapter has been rewritten since the first edition, and heavily edited since the
second edition. Did memory ordering change all that since 2014, let alone since 2021?

Answer:
The earlier memory-ordering section had its roots in a pair of Linux Journal arti-
cles [McK05a, McK05b] dating back to 2005. Since then, the C and C++ memory
models [Bec11] have been formalized (and critiqued [BS14, BD14, VBC+ 15, BMN+ 15,
LVK+ 17, BGV17]), executable formal memory models for computer systems have
become the norm [MSS12, McK11d, SSA+ 11, AMP+ 11, AKNT13, AKT13, AMT14,
MS14, FSP+ 17, ARM17], and there is even a memory model for the Linux ker-
nel [AMM+ 17a, AMM+ 17b, AMM+ 18], along with a paper describing differences
between the C11 and Linux memory models [MWPF18].
    The kernel concurrency sanitizer (KCSAN) [EMV+ 20a, EMV+ 20b], based in part
on RacerD [BGOS18] and implementing LKMM, has also been added to the Linux
kernel and is now heavily used.
    Finally, there are now better ways of describing the Linux-kernel memory model
(LKMM).
    Given all this progress, substantial change was required. ❑

                                                                                           v2025.12.18a
872                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 15.2:                                                                     p.506
But what about reader-writer locking?

Answer:
Reader-writer locking works the same as does exclusive locking, with the proviso that
ordering is guaranteed only between a pair of conflicting critical sections. This means
that a read-side critical section will be ordered before a later write-side critical section
and vice versa. But this also means that there is no guarantee of ordering between a pair
of read-side critical sections unless there is an intervening write-side critical section.
    As of mid-2023, LKMM does not yet model reader-writer locking, but this is on the
to-do list. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.3:                                                                 p.510
Why is it necessary to use heavier-weight ordering for load-to-store and store-to-store
links, but not for store-to-load links? What on earth makes store-to-load links so
special???

Answer:
Recall that load-to-store and store-to-store links can be counter-temporal, as illustrated
by Figures 15.15 and 15.16 in Section 15.3.7.2. This counter-temporal nature of
load-to-store and store-to-store links necessitates strong ordering.
   In constrast, store-to-load links are temporal, as illustrated by Listings 15.12
and 15.13. This temporal nature of store-to-load links permits use of minimal ordering.
❑

Quick Quiz 15.4:                                                          p.512
The compiler can also reorder Thread P0()’s and Thread P1()’s memory accesses in
Listing 15.1, right?

Answer:
In general, compiler optimizations carry out more extensive and profound reorderings
than CPUs can. However, in this case, the volatile accesses in READ_ONCE() and
WRITE_ONCE() prevent the compiler from reordering. And also from doing much else
as well, so the examples in this chapter will be making heavy use of READ_ONCE() and
WRITE_ONCE(). See Section 15.4 for more detail on the need for READ_ONCE() and
WRITE_ONCE(). ❑

Quick Quiz 15.5:                                                              p.515
But wait!!! On row 2 of Table 15.1 both x0 and x1 each have two values at the same
time, namely zero and two. How can that possibly work???

Answer:
There is an underlying cache-coherence protocol that straightens things out, which are
discussed in Appendix C.2. But if you think that a given variable having two values at
the same time is surprising, just wait until you get to Section 15.3.1! ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING                                        873

 Quick Quiz 15.6:                                                            p.515
 But don’t the values also need to be flushed from the cache to main memory?

Answer:
Perhaps surprisingly, not necessarily! On some systems, if the two variables are being
used heavily, they might be bounced back and forth between the CPUs’ caches and
never land in main memory. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.7:                                                            p.518
 The rows in Table 15.3 seem quite random and confused. Whatever is the conceptual
 basis of this table???

Answer:
The rows correspond roughly to hardware mechanisms of increasing power and overhead.
    The WRITE_ONCE() row captures the fact that accesses to a single variable are
always fully ordered, as indicated by the “SV” column. Note that all other operations
providing ordering against accesses to multiple variables also provide this same-variable
ordering.
    The READ_ONCE() row captures the fact that (as of 2021) compilers and CPUs do
not indulge in user-visible speculative stores, so that any store whose address, data, or
execution depends on a prior load is guaranteed to happen after that load completes.
However, this guarantee assumes that these dependencies have been constructed carefully,
as described in Sections 15.4.2 and 15.4.3.
    The “_relaxed() RMW operation” row captures the fact that a value-returning
_relaxed() RMW has done a load and a store, which are every bit as good as a
READ_ONCE() and a WRITE_ONCE(), respectively.
    The *_dereference() row captures the address and data dependency ordering
provided by rcu_dereference() and friends. Again, these dependencies must been
constructed carefully, as described in Section 15.4.2.
    The “Successful *_acquire()” row captures the fact that many CPUs have special
“acquire” forms of loads and of atomic RMW instructions, and that many other CPUs
have lightweight memory-barrier instructions that order prior loads against subsequent
loads and stores.
    The “Successful *_release()” row captures the fact that many CPUs have special
“release” forms of stores and of atomic RMW instructions, and that many other CPUs
have lightweight memory-barrier instructions that order prior loads and stores against
subsequent stores.
    The smp_rmb() row captures the fact that many CPUs have lightweight memory-
barrier instructions that order prior loads against subsequent loads. Similarly, the
smp_wmb() row captures the fact that many CPUs have lightweight memory-barrier
instructions that order prior stores against subsequent stores.
    None of the ordering operations thus far require prior stores to be ordered against
subsequent loads, which means that these operations need not interfere with store buffers,
whose main purpose in life is in fact to reorder prior stores against subsequent loads.
The lightweight nature of these operations is precisely due to their policy of store-buffer
non-interference. However, as noted earlier, it is sometimes necessary to interfere with
the store buffer in order to prevent prior stores from being reordered against later stores,
which brings us to the remaining rows in this table.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
874                                  APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

    The smp_mb() row corresponds to the full memory barrier available on most
platforms, with Itanium being the exception that proves the rule. However, even on
Itanium, smp_mb() provides full ordering with respect to READ_ONCE() and WRITE_
ONCE(), as discussed in Section 15.6.4.
    The “Successful full-strength non-void RMW” row captures the fact that on some
platforms (such as x86) atomic RMW instructions provide full ordering both before and
after. The Linux kernel therefore requires that full-strength non-void atomic RMW
operations provide full ordering in cases where these operations succeed. (Full-strength
atomic RMW operation’s names do not end in _relaxed, _acquire, or _release.)
As noted earlier, the case where these operations do not succeed is covered by the
“_relaxed() RMW operation” row.
    However, the Linux kernel does not require that either void or _relaxed() atomic
RMW operations provide any ordering whatsoever, with the canonical example being
atomic_inc(). Therefore, these operations, along with failing non-void atomic
RMW operations may be preceded by smp_mb__before_atomic() and followed by
smp_mb__after_atomic() to provide full ordering for any accesses preceding or
following both. No ordering need be provided for accesses between the smp_mb__
before_atomic() (or, similarly, the smp_mb__after_atomic()) and the atomic
RMW operation, as indicated by the “a” entries on the smp_mb__before_atomic()
and smp_mb__after_atomic() rows of the table.
    In short, the structure of this table is dictated by the properties of the underlying
hardware, which are constrained by nothing other than the laws of physics, which were
covered back in Chapter 3. That is, the table is not random, although it is quite possible
that you are confused. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.8:                                                    p.518
 Why is Table 15.3 missing smp_mb__after_unlock_lock() and smp_mb__after_
 spinlock()?

Answer:
These two primitives are rather specialized, and at present seem difficult to fit into
Table 15.3. The smp_mb__after_unlock_lock() primitive is intended to be placed
immediately after a lock acquisition, and ensures that all CPUs see all accesses in
prior critical sections as happening before all accesses following the smp_mb__after_
unlock_lock() and also before all accesses in later critical sections. Here “all CPUs”
includes those CPUs not holding that lock, and “prior critical sections” includes all
prior critical sections for the lock in question as well as all prior critical sections for all
other locks that were released by the same CPU that executed the smp_mb__after_
unlock_lock().
    The smp_mb__after_spinlock() provides the same guarantees as does smp_
mb__after_unlock_lock(), but also provides additional visibility guarantees for
other accesses performed by the CPU that executed the smp_mb__after_spinlock().
Given any store S performed prior to any earlier lock acquisition and any load L
performed after the smp_mb__after_spinlock(), all CPUs will see S as happening
before L. In other words, if a CPU performs a store S, acquires a lock, executes
an smp_mb__after_spinlock(), then performs a load L, all CPUs will see S as
happening before L. ❑

                                                                                                  v2025.12.18a
E.15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING                                       875

Quick Quiz 15.9:                                                               p.518
But how can I know that a given project can be designed and coded within the confines
of these rules of thumb?

Answer:
Much of the purpose of the remainder of this chapter is to answer exactly that question!
❑

Quick Quiz 15.10:                                                           p.519
How can you tell which memory barriers are strong enough for a given use case?

Answer:
Ah, that is a deep question whose answer requires most of the rest of this chapter. But
the short answer is that smp_mb() is almost always strong enough, albeit at some cost.
❑

Quick Quiz 15.11:                                                                p.520
Wait!!! Where do I find this tooling that automatically analyzes litmus tests???

Answer:
Get version v4.17 (or later) of the Linux-kernel source code, then follow the instructions
in tools/memory-model/README to install the needed tools. Then follow the further
instructions to run these tools on the litmus test of your choice. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.12:                                                            p.521
What assumption is the code fragment in Listing 15.3 making that might not be valid
on real hardware?

Answer:
The code assumes that as soon as a given CPU stops seeing its own value, it will
immediately see the final agreed-upon value. On real hardware, some of the CPUs
might well see several intermediate results before converging on the final value. The
actual code used to produce the data in the figures discussed later in this section was
therefore somewhat more complex. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.13:                                                              p.522
How could CPUs possibly have different views of the value of a single variable at the
same time?

Answer:
As discussed in Section 15.2.1, many CPUs have store buffers that record the values
of recent stores, which do not become globally visible until the corresponding cache
line makes its way to the CPU. Therefore, it is quite possible for each CPU to see its
own value for a given variable (in its own store buffer) at a single point in time—and for
main memory to hold yet another value. One of the reasons that memory barriers were
invented was to allow software to deal gracefully with situations like this one.
    Fortunately, software rarely cares about the fact that multiple CPUs might see
multiple values for the same variable. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
876                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 15.14:                                                            p.522
Why do CPUs 2 and 3 come to agreement so quickly, when it takes so long for CPUs 1
and 4 to come to the party?

Answer:
CPUs 2 and 3 are a pair of hardware threads on the same core, sharing the same cache
hierarchy, and therefore have very low communications latencies. This is a NUMA, or,
more accurately, a NUCA effect.
    This leads to the question of why CPUs 2 and 3 ever disagree at all. One possible
reason is that they each might have a small amount of private cache in addition to a
larger shared cache. Another possible reason is instruction reordering, given the short
10-nanosecond duration of the disagreement and the total lack of memory-ordering
operations in the code fragment. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.15:                                                            p.524
 But why make load-load reordering visible to the user? Why not just use speculative
 execution to allow execution to proceed in the common case where there are no
 intervening stores, in which case the reordering cannot be visible anyway?

Answer:
They can and many do, otherwise systems containing strongly ordered CPUs would
be slow indeed. However, speculative execution does have its downsides, especially if
speculation must be rolled back frequently, particularly on battery-powered systems.
Speculative execution can also introduce side channels, which might in turn be exploited
to exfiltrate information. But perhaps future systems will be able to overcome these
disadvantages. Until then, we can expect vendors to continue producing weakly ordered
CPUs. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.16:                                                                     p.525
Why should it be rare for systems to reorder prior loads with later stores?

Answer:
Keep in mind that conventional computer systems are not permitted to make a given
CPU’s speculative stores visible to other CPUs.
    This constraint has consequences.
    For example, suppose that address translation has not yet completed for that prior
load. In that case, it is quite possible that this address translation will result in a
segmentation violation, which might in turn mean that the later store would never
execute. Therefore, a given store cannot make its value visible to other CPUs until
address translation has completed for each and every prior load.
    Of course, memory latencies can be quite long compared to address-translation
delays, especially if all the information required for a given address translation is already
present in the translation lookaside buffer (TLB). Although these long memory latencies
should provide ample opportunity for store-to-load reordering, the fact its that such
reordering is demonstrably rare, especially on the large systems that would be expected
to have the longest memory latencies.
    And the reason for that is that large systems are most likely to have parity or
error-correcting code (ECC) checking on memory.

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
E.15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING                                        877

    An uncorrectable parity or ECC error would cause a load to take a fault, which would
prevent subsequent stores from ever executing just as surely as would a segmentation
violation. Therefore, on systems featuring parity or ECC, a subsequent store cannot
expose its value to other CPUs until after parity or ECC checking has completed for
all prior loads. A given load’s checking clearly cannot be carried out until that load’s
value has been returned (check bits and all), which has the side effect of prohibiting
reordering of prior loads with later stores.
    So the only systems that can exhibit load-to-store reordering are those lacking both
parity and ECC, for example, small embedded systems and GPGPUs.
    Given that load-to-store reordering is not possible on common-case computer
systems, why do hardware memory models continue to permit it? Only CPU architects
know for sure, but here are some possible reasons:

   1. There might be increased demand for small systems that do not require parity or
      ECC.

   2. Memory might become more reliable, so that larger systems no longer require
      parity or ECC.

   3. Systems having multiple hardware threads per core might permit cross-hardware-
      thread speculation, which would permit speculative stores to make their values
      visible to other threads in that core.

   4. Operating systems and hardware might work together to terminate any processes
      affected by an uncorrectable parity or ECC error. This might allow speculative
      stores to make their values visible to other CPUs, give or take things like debuggers
      and assertions.

   In all of these cases, there might well be compelling performance advantages to
once again permitting load-to-store reordering. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.17:                                                        p.526
Why should strongly ordered systems pay the performance price of unnecessary
smp_rmb() and smp_wmb() invocations? Shouldn’t weakly ordered systems shoulder
the full cost of their misordering choices???

Answer:
That is in fact exactly what happens. On strongly ordered systems, smp_rmb() and
smp_wmb() emit no instructions, but instead just constrain the compiler. Thus, in this
case, weakly ordered systems do in fact shoulder the full cost of their memory-ordering
choices. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.18:                                                         p.526
Must an address dependency begin with a load instruction? Why not something like
xchg_relaxed(), which also loads a value from memory?

Answer:
Yes, pretty much any instruction that loads a value from memory can start an address
dependency, including certain atomic operations such as xchg_relaxed(). The same
is true of the control and data dependencies discussed in Sections 15.3.5 and 15.3.4.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
878                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

    However, in all three cases, it is often the case that if you are going to start your
dependency with an atomic operation, it will be more convenient and maintainable
to instead use an atomic operation with acquire semantics, in this example, xchg_
acquire() or maybe even just the fully ordered xchg(). ❑

Quick Quiz 15.19:                                                            p.528
But how do we know that all platforms really avoid triggering the exists clauses in
Listings 15.10 and 15.11?

Answer:
Answering this requires identifying three major groups of platforms: (1) Total-store-order
(TSO) platforms, (2) Weakly ordered platforms, and (3) DEC Alpha.
    The TSO platforms order all pairs of memory references except for prior stores
against later loads. Because the address dependency on lines 18 and 19 of Listing 15.10 is
instead a load followed by another load, TSO platforms preserve this address dependency.
They also preserve the address dependency on lines 17 and 18 of Listing 15.11 because
this is a load followed by a store. Because address dependencies must start with a
load, TSO platforms implicitly but completely respect them, give or take compiler
optimizations, hence the need for READ_ONCE().
    Weakly ordered platforms don’t necessarily maintain ordering of unrelated accesses.
However, the address dependencies in Listings 15.10 and 15.11 are not unrelated: There
is an address dependency. The hardware tracks dependencies and maintains the needed
ordering.
    There is one (famous) exception to this rule for weakly ordered platforms, and that
exception is DEC Alpha for load-to-load address dependencies. And this is why, in
Linux kernels predating v4.15, DEC Alpha requires the explicit memory barrier supplied
for it by the now-obsolete lockless_dereference() on line 18 of Listing 15.10.
However, DEC Alpha does track load-to-store address dependencies, which is why
line 17 of Listing 15.11 does not need a lockless_dereference(), even in Linux
kernels predating v4.15.
    To sum up, current platforms either respect address dependencies implicitly, as is
the case for TSO platforms (x86, mainframe, SPARC, . . .), have hardware tracking for
address dependencies (Arm, PowerPC, MIPS, . . .), have the required memory barriers
supplied by READ_ONCE() (DEC Alpha in Linux kernel v4.15 and later), or supplied by
rcu_dereference() (DEC Alpha in Linux kernel v4.14 and earlier). ❑

Quick Quiz 15.20:                                                    p.528
Why the use of smp_wmb() in Listings 15.10 and 15.11? Wouldn’t smp_store_
release() be a better choice?

Answer:
In most cases, smp_store_release() is indeed a better choice. However, smp_wmb()
was there first in the Linux kernel, so it is still good to understand how to use it. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.21:                                                           p.528
SP, MP, LB, and now S. Where do all these litmus-test abbreviations come from and
how can anyone keep track of them?

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING                                      879

Answer:
The best scorecard is the infamous test6.pdf [SSA+ 11]. Unfortunately, not all of the
abbreviations have catchy expansions like SB (store buffering), MP (message passing),
and LB (load buffering), but at least the list of abbreviations is readily available. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.22:                                                                p.529
But wait!!! Line 17 of Listing 15.12 uses READ_ONCE(), which marks the load as
volatile, which means that the compiler absolutely must emit the load instruction even
if the value is later multiplied by zero. So how can the compiler possibly break this
data dependency?

Answer:
Yes, the compiler absolutely must emit a load instruction for a volatile load. But if you
multiply the value loaded by zero, the compiler is well within its rights to substitute a
constant zero for the result of that multiplication, which will break the data dependency
on many platforms.
    Worse yet, if the dependent store does not use WRITE_ONCE(), the compiler could
hoist it above the load, which would cause even TSO platforms to fail to provide ordering.
❑

Quick Quiz 15.23:                                                         p.530
Wouldn’t control dependencies be more robust if they were mandated by language
standards???
Answer:
But of course! And perhaps in the fullness of time they will be so mandated. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.24:                                                                 p.531
 But in Listing 15.15, wouldn’t be just as bad if P2()’s r1 and r2 obtained the values 2
 and 1, respectively, while P3()’s r3 and r4 obtained the values 1 and 2, respectively?

Answer:
Yes, it would. Feel free to modify the exists clause to check for that outcome and see
what happens. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.25:                                                            p.532
 Can you give a specific example showing different behavior for multicopy atomic on
 the one hand and other-multicopy atomic on the other?

Answer:
Listing E.10 (C-MP-OMCA+o-o-o+o-rmb-o.litmus) shows such a test.
    On a multicopy-atomic platform, P0()’s store to x on line 9 must become visible
to both P0() and P1() simultaneously. Because this store becomes visible to P0()
on line 10, before P0()’s store to y on line 11, P0()’s store to x must become visible
before its store to y everywhere, including P1(). Therefore, if P1()’s load from y on
line 19 returns the value 1, so must its load from x on line 21, given that the smp_rmb()
on line 20 forces these two loads to execute in order. Therefore, the exists clause on
line 24 cannot trigger on a multicopy-atomic platform.

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
880                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Listing E.10: Litmus Test Distinguishing Multicopy Atomic From Other Multicopy Atomic
1    C C-MP-OMCA+o-o-o+o-rmb-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x, int *y)
6    {
7            int r0;
8
9            WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
10           r0 = READ_ONCE(*x);
11           WRITE_ONCE(*y, r0);
12   }
13
14   P1(int *x, int *y)
15   {
16           int r1;
17           int r2;
18
19           r1 = READ_ONCE(*y);
20           smp_rmb();
21           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x);
22   }
23
24   exists (1:r1=1 /\ 1:r2=0)

    In contrast, on an other-multicopy-atomic platform, P0() could see its own store
early, so that there would be no constraint on the order of visibility of the two stores
from P1(), which in turn allows the exists clause to trigger. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.26:                                                            p.533
 Then who would even think of designing a system with shared store buffers???

Answer:
This is in fact a very natural design for any system having multiple hardware threads per
core. Natural from a hardware point of view, that is! ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.27:                                                              p.534
 But just how is it fair that P0() and P1() must share a store buffer and a cache, but
 P2() gets one each of its very own???

Answer:
Presumably there is a P3(), as is in fact shown in Figure 15.13, that shares P2()’s
store buffer and cache. But not necessarily. Some platforms allow different cores to
disable different numbers of threads, allowing the hardware to adjust to the needs of the
workload at hand. For example, a single-threaded critical-path portion of the workload
might be assigned to a core with only one thread enabled, thus allowing the single
thread running that portion of the workload to use the entire capabilities of that core.
Other more highly parallel but cache-miss-prone portions of the workload might be
assigned to cores with all hardware threads enabled to provide improved throughput.
This improved throughput could be due to the fact that while one hardware thread is
stalled on a cache miss, the other hardware threads can make forward progress.
    In such cases, performance requirements override quaint human notions of fairness.
❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING                                        881

Listing E.11: R Litmus Test With Write Memory Barrier (No Ordering)
1    C C-R+o-wmb-o+o-mb-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 1);
8            smp_wmb();
9            WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 1);
10   }
11
12   P1(int *x0, int *x1)
13   {
14           int r2;
15
16           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
17           smp_mb();
18           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
19   }
20
21   exists (1:r2=0 /\ x1=2)

 Quick Quiz 15.28:                                                           p.535
 Referring to Table 15.4, why on earth would P0()’s store take so long to complete
 when P1()’s store complete so quickly? In other words, does the exists clause on
 line 28 of Listing 15.16 really trigger on real systems?

Answer:
You need to face the fact that it really can trigger. Akira Yokosawa used the litmus7
tool to run this litmus test on a POWER8 system. Out of 1,000,000,000 runs, 4 triggered
the exists clause. Thus, triggering the exists clause is not merely a one-in-a-million
occurrence, but rather a one-in-a-hundred-million occurrence. But it nevertheless really
does trigger on real systems. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.29:                                                                    p.536
 But it is not necessary to worry about propagation unless there are at least three threads
 in the litmus test, right?

Answer:
Wrong.
    Listing E.11 (C-R+o-wmb-o+o-mb-o.litmus) shows a two-thread litmus test that
requires propagation due to the fact that it only has store-to-store and load-to-store links
between its pair of threads. Even though P0() is fully ordered by the smp_wmb() and
P1() is fully ordered by the smp_mb(), the counter-temporal nature of the links means
that the exists clause on line 21 really can trigger. To prevent this triggering, the
smp_wmb() on line 8 must become an smp_mb(), bringing propagation into play twice,
once for each non-temporal link. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.30:                                                           p.537
 But given that smp_mb() has the propagation property, why doesn’t the smp_mb() on
 line 25 of Listing 15.18 prevent the exists clause from triggering?

Answer:
As a rough rule of thumb, the smp_mb() barrier’s propagation property is sufficient to

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
882                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Listing E.12: 2+2W Litmus Test (No Ordering)
1    C C-2+2W+o-o+o-o
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
6    {
7            WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 1);
8            WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 2);
9    }
10
11   P1(int *x0, int *x1)
12   {
13           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, 1);
14           WRITE_ONCE(*x0, 2);
15   }
16
17   exists (x0=1 /\ x1=1)

maintain ordering through only one load-to-store link between processes. Unfortunately,
Listing 15.18 has not one but two load-to-store links, with the first being from the
READ_ONCE() on line 17 to the WRITE_ONCE() on line 24 and the second being from
the READ_ONCE() on line 26 to the WRITE_ONCE() on line 7. Therefore, preventing the
exists clause from triggering should be expected to require not one but two instances
of smp_mb().
    As a special exception to this rule of thumb, a release-acquire chain can have one
load-to-store link between processes and still prohibit the cycle. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.31:                                                        p.538
 But for litmus tests having only ordered stores, as shown in Listing 15.20 (C-
 2+2W+o-wmb-o+o-wmb-o.litmus), research shows that the cycle is prohibited,
 even in weakly ordered systems such as Arm and Power [SSA+ 11]. Given that, is
 store-to-store ordering really always counter-temporal???

Answer:
This litmus test is indeed a very interesting curiosity. Its ordering apparently occurs
naturally given typical weakly ordered hardware design, which would normally be
considered a great gift from the relevant laws of physics and cache-coherency-protocol
mathematics.
    Unfortunately, no one has been able to come up with a software use case for this
gift that does not have a much better alternative implementation. Therefore, neither
the C11 nor the Linux kernel memory models provide any guarantee corresponding to
Listing 15.20. This means that the exists clause on line 19 can trigger.
    Of course, without the barrier, there are no ordering guarantees, even on real weakly
ordered hardware, as shown in Listing E.12 (C-2+2W+o-o+o-o.litmus). ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.32:                                                           p.539
 Why don’t we just stick to sanely ordered CPU families like x86, so that time will
 always be on our side???

Answer:
Sorry to be the one to break it to you, but x86 CPUs have store buffers and they are not
afraid to use them.

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING                                                                     883

                  Number of Simultaneous Values
                                                  50

                                                       0   1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000
                                                                            Time (Timestamp Periods)

                                                           Figure E.8: x86 CPUs Can Disagree

                                                              Winning                  Older         Old    Final
                                                   CPU 0       Store                   Value        Value   Value

                                                                      t

                                                                          Other
                                                   CPU 1                  Store

                                                                 co               -t
                                                                                        Counter-
                                                   CPU 2                                Intuitive
                                                                                          Store

                                                                                          Time

                 Figure E.9: Is Store-to-Store Counter-Temporal on x86?

     The data shown in Figures E.8–E.14 was obtained from a series of torture tests
(perftemporal.sh) running on a two-socket x86 system having a total of 80 hardware
threads.16
     Figure E.8 is from a torture-test run similar to the one that generated Figure 15.10
on page 523, but showing the number of distinct opinions per unit time, where each
timestamp period is 0.5 nanoseconds.17 As you can see, there is a significant period of
time during which there are more than 40 distinct opinions as to the value of a single
shared variable. Even on x86.
     But perhaps we might hope that on x86, the last CPU to execute its store in global
time order would “win”, that is, the final value of the shared variable would be that of that
last store. If so, any store starting after the “winning” store finished would overwrite the
winning store. In contrast, we know that on weakly ordered systems, a counter-intuitive
store such as that shown at the bottom of Figure E.9 could be overwritten by the old value,
despite the fact that it started 𝑡 timestamp periods after the winning store completed, as
depicted in the figure by the time interval that is labelled −𝑡.18
   16 Intel(R)Xeon(R) Gold 6138 CPU @ 2.00GHz, for those wanting more details.
  17 Recall that each CPU writes its own number to a single shared variable, which each

CPU repeatedly polls, recording time and value at each change in value.
  18 That is completed from the viewpoint of the instruction stream containing that store.

The value stored might well remain in the store buffer long afterwards.

                                                                                                                          v2025.12.18a
884                                                        APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

                                        0.4

                                       0.35

                                        0.3

               Frequency (arb. unit)
                                       0.25

                                        0.2

                                       0.15

                                        0.1

                                       0.05

                                         -2500     -2000     -1500               -1000       -500        0   500
                                                    Store-to-Store Latency (Timestamp Periods)

               Figure E.10: Store-to-Store is Counter-Temporal on x86

                                                               Load Gets
                                                 CPU 0         Old Value

                                                                   t
                                                                       fr

                                                                                    Old          New
                                                 CPU 1     Store
                                                                                   Value         Value

                                                                            fr

                                                                            -t      Counter-Intuitive
                                                 CPU 2                               Load Still Gets
                                                                                       Old Value

                                                                                 Time

              Figure E.11: Is Load-to-Store Counter-Temporal on x86?

    However, Figure E.10 dashes any fond hope of x86 refusing to indulge in counter-
intuitive counter-temporal stores. The data in this figure summarizes the results from
79,000 torture-test runs of the type that generated Figure E.8, and is a histogram of
the minimum time elapsed between the start of a non-winning CPU’s store and the
end of the winning CPU’s store. Of course, if this value is negative, the winning store
completed (though its value might not have propagated past the store buffer) before the
other store even started. And the negative-time data points in that figure show that this
counter-temporal behavior really can be made to happen most of the time, even on x86.
    But perhaps we could instead hope that once a store had executed, any future load
from that same variable might be guaranteed to return the new value. In contrast, we
know that on weakly ordered systems, a counter-intuitive load such as that shown at the
bottom of Figure E.11 could return the old value, despite having started 𝑡 timestamp
periods after the end of the store, again, as depicted in the figure by the −𝑡.
    However, Figure E.12 dashes any fond hopes that loads executing after a given store
would see that store’s value (or some later value). This data is generated by 1,000 runs
of a program in which the parent thread spawns the children, each of which polls a
shared variable. After all the children are running, the parent writes a new value to the
shared variable. The quantity histogrammed in the figure is the time from just after the
store until just before the last load of the old value. And most of these data points lie

                                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
E.15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING                                                                      885

                                       0.35

                                        0.3

               Frequency (arb. unit)
                                       0.25

                                        0.2

                                       0.15

                                        0.1

                                       0.05

                                          -200           -150          -100          -50            0           50
                                                        Load-to-Store Latency (Timestamp Periods)

               Figure E.12: Load-to-Store is Counter-Temporal on x86

                                              Counter-Intuitive
                   CPU 0                         Load Gets
                                                New Value
                                                                  -t
                                                          rf

                                                                                             Old        New
                    CPU 1                                               Store
                                                                                            Value       Value

                                                                                 rf

                                                                                      Load Gets
                    CPU 2                                                             New Value

                                                                                 t

                                                                              Time

              Figure E.13: Is Store-to-Load Counter-Temporal on x86?

on the negative x axis, clearly demonstrating that a torture test can easily provoke the
counter-temporal nature of cross-thread load-to-store.
    It is only reasonable to assume that a load that ends before a store starts will be
unable to load that store’s value, as shown in Figure E.13, even on weakly ordered
systems. And the data points from all 1,000 runs shown in Figure E.14, lie on the
positive x axis, so in at least this case, our temporal intuitions, hopes, and dreams have
been fulfilled.
    These results should be no surprise. Even on x86, the cache line shuttles between
cores and sockets, and Figure E.8 indicates that a given store can remain in its CPU’s
store buffer for more than a microsecond, which is quite enough time for today’s
multi-GHz CPUs to detect the resulting counter-temporal behavior.
    However, for the store-to-load case, the laws of physics guarantee temporal ordering
because the finite speed of light and the non-zero size of atoms work together to
guarantee that some time will pass between a store on one CPU and a load of that store’s
value on some other CPU.
    Alert readers may have noticed that the distribution shown in Figure E.10 is nearly
monomodal, which those in Figure E.12 and Figure E.14 are decidedly trimodal.
Such readers are encouraged to consider why that might be, perhaps referring to
CodeSamples/cpu/perftemporal.sh and the scripts and programs that it invokes.

                                                                                                                           v2025.12.18a
886                                                    APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

                                        0.4

                                       0.35

                                        0.3

               Frequency (arb. unit)
                                       0.25

                                        0.2

                                       0.15

                                        0.1

                                       0.05

                                              0   50    100     150      200     250     300   350
                                                  Store-to-Load Latency (Timestamp Periods)

                                       Figure E.14: Store-to-Load is Temporal on x86

   And all readers are encouraged to note that even on relatively strongly ordered CPUs
such as x86, store-to-store and load-to-store IPC links can be strongly counter-temporal.
❑

Quick Quiz 15.33:                                                                 p.539
Can you construct a litmus test like that in Listing 15.21 that uses only dependencies?

Answer:
Listing E.13 shows a somewhat nonsensical but very real example. Creating a more
useful (but still real) litmus test is left as an exercise for the reader. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.34:                                                                 p.541
Suppose we have a short release-acquire chain along with one load-to-store link and
one store-to-store link, like that shown in Listing 15.25. Given that there is only one
of each type of non-store-to-load link, the exists cannot trigger, right?

Answer:
Wrong. It is the number of non-store-to-load links that matters. If there is only one
non-store-to-load link, a release-acquire chain can prevent the exists clause from
triggering. However, if there is more than one non-store-to-load link, be they store-
to-store, load-to-store, or any combination thereof, it is necessary to have at least one
full barrier (smp_mb() or better) between each non-store-to-load link. In Listing 15.25,
preventing the exists clause from triggering therefore requires an additional full barrier
between either P0()’s or P1()’s accesses. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.35:                                                                p.541
There are store-to-load links, load-to-store links, and store-to-store links. But what
about load-to-load links?
Answer:
The problem with the concept of load-to-load links is that if the two loads from the
same variable return the same value, there is no way to determine their ordering. The
only way to determine their ordering is if they return different values, in which case

                                                                                                     v2025.12.18a
E.15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING                                        887

Listing E.13: LB Litmus Test With No Acquires
1    C C-LB+o-data-o+o-data-o+o-data-o
2
3    {
4    x1=1;
5    x2=2;
6    }
7
8    P0(int *x0, int *x1)
9    {
10           int r2;
11
12           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x0);
13           WRITE_ONCE(*x1, r2);
14   }
15
16   P1(int *x1, int *x2)
17   {
18           int r2;
19
20           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x1);
21           WRITE_ONCE(*x2, r2);
22   }
23
24   P2(int *x2, int *x0)
25   {
26           int r2;
27
28           r2 = READ_ONCE(*x2);
29           WRITE_ONCE(*x0, r2);
30   }
31
32   exists (0:r2=2 /\ 1:r2=0 /\ 2:r2=1)

there had to have been an intervening store. And that intervening store means that there
is no load-to-load link, but rather a load-to-store link followed by a store-to-load link. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.36:                                                                   p.548
 What happens if that lwsync instruction is instead a sync instruction?

Answer:
The counter-intuitive outcome cannot happen. (Try it!) ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.37:                                                       p.549
 Why not place a barrier() call immediately before a plain store to prevent the
 compiler from inventing stores?

Answer:
Because it would not work. Although the compiler would be prevented from inventing a
store prior to the barrier(), nothing would prevent it from inventing a store between
that barrier() and the plain store. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.38:                                                           p.551
 Why can’t you simply dereference the pointer before comparing it to &reserve_int
 on line 6 of Listing 15.28?

Answer:
For first, it might be necessary to invoke handle_reserve() before do_something_
with().

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
888                                        APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Listing E.14: Breakable Dependencies With Non-Constant Comparisons
1    int *gp1;
2    int *p;
3    int *q;
4
5    p = rcu_dereference(gp1);
6    q = get_a_pointer();
7    if (p == q)
8            handle_equality(p);
9    do_something_with(*p);

Listing E.15: Broken Dependencies With Non-Constant Comparisons
1    int *gp1;
2    int *p;
3    int *q;
4
5    p = rcu_dereference(gp1);
6    q = get_a_pointer();
7    if (p == q) {
8             handle_equality(q);
9             do_something_with(*q);
10   } else {
11            do_something_with(*p);
12   }

    But more relevant to memory ordering, the compiler is often within its rights to
hoist the comparison ahead of the dereferences, which would allow the compiler to use
&reserve_int instead of the variable p that the hardware has tagged with a dependency.
❑

 Quick Quiz 15.39:                                                                p.551
 But it should be safe to compare two pointer variables, right? After all, the compiler
 doesn’t know the value of either, so how can it possibly learn anything from the
 comparison?

Answer:
Unfortunately, the compiler really can learn enough to break your dependency chain,
for example, as shown in Listing E.14. The compiler is within its rights to transform
this code into that shown in Listing E.15, and might well make this transformation due
to register pressure if handle_equality() was inlined and needed a lot of registers.
Line 9 of this transformed code uses q, which although equal to p, is not necessarily
tagged by the hardware as carrying a dependency. Therefore, this transformed code
does not necessarily guarantee that line 9 is ordered after line 5.19 ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.40:                                                          p.553
 But doesn’t the condition in line 35 supply a control dependency that would keep
 line 36 ordered after line 34?
Answer:
Yes, but no. Yes, there is a control dependency, but control dependencies do not order
later loads, only later stores. If you really need ordering, you could place an smp_rmb()
between lines 35 and 36. Or better yet, have updater() allocate two structures instead
of reusing the structure. For more information, see Section 15.4.3. ❑

     19 Kudos to Linus Torvalds for providing this example.

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING                                         889

 Quick Quiz 15.41:                                                            p.554
 But there is a READ_ONCE(), so how can the compiler prove anything about the value
 of q?

Answer:
Given the simple if statement comparing against zero, it is hard to imagine the compiler
proving anything. But suppose that later code executed a division by q. Because division
by zero is undefined behavior, as of 2023, many compilers will assume that the value
of q must be non-zero, and will thus remove that if statement, thus unconditionally
executing the WRITE_ONCE(), in turn destroying the control dependency.
    There are some who argue (correctly, in Paul’s view) that back-propagating undefined
behavior across volatile accesses constitutes a compiler bug, but many compiler writers
insist that this is not a bug, but rather a valuable optimization. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.42:                                                                    p.558
 Can’t you instead add an smp_mb() to P1() in Listing 15.32?

Answer:
Not given the Linux kernel memory model. (Try it!) However, you can instead replace
P0()’s WRITE_ONCE() with smp_store_release(), which usually has less overhead
than does adding an smp_mb(). ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.43:                                                                   p.559
 But doesn’t PowerPC have weak unlock-lock ordering properties within the Linux
 kernel, allowing a write before the unlock to be reordered with a read after the lock?

Answer:
Yes, but only from the perspective of a third thread not holding that lock. In contrast,
memory allocators need only concern themselves with the two threads migrating the
memory. It is after all the developer’s responsibility to properly synchronize with any
other threads that need access to the newly migrated block of memory. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.44:                                                                    p.563
 But if there are three critical sections, isn’t it true that CPUs not holding the lock will
 observe the accesses from the first and the third critical section as being ordered?

Answer:
No.
    Listing E.16 shows an example three-critical-section chain (Lock-across-unlock-
lock-3.litmus). Running this litmus test shows that the exists clause can still be
satisfied, so this additional critical section is still not sufficient to force ordering.
    However, as the reader can verify, placing an smp_mb__after_spinlock() after
either P1()’s or P2()’s lock acquisition does suffice to force ordering. ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
890                                       APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Listing E.16: Accesses Between Multiple Different-CPU Critical Sections
1    C Lock-across-unlock-lock-3
2
3    {}
4
5    P0(int *x, spinlock_t *sp)
6    {
7            spin_lock(sp);
8            WRITE_ONCE(*x, 1);
9            spin_unlock(sp);
10   }
11
12   P1(int *x, int *y, int *z, spinlock_t *sp)
13   {
14           int r1;
15
16           spin_lock(sp);
17           r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
18           WRITE_ONCE(*z, 1);
19           spin_unlock(sp);
20   }
21
22   P2(int *x, int *y, int *z, spinlock_t *sp)
23   {
24           int r1;
25           int r2;
26
27           spin_lock(sp);
28           r1 = READ_ONCE(*z);
29           r2 = READ_ONCE(*y);
30           spin_unlock(sp);
31   }
32
33   P3(int *x, int *y, spinlock_t *sp)
34   {
35           int r1;
36
37           WRITE_ONCE(*y, 1);
38           smp_mb();
39           r1 = READ_ONCE(*x);
40   }
41
42   exists (1:r1=1 /\ 2:r1=1 /\ 2:r2=0 /\ 3:r1=0)

 Quick Quiz 15.45:                                                        p.564
 But if spin_is_locked() returns false, don’t we also know that no other CPU or
 thread is holding the corresponding lock?

Answer:
No. By the time that the code inspects the return value from spin_is_locked(), some
other CPU or thread might well have acquired the corresponding lock. ❑

 Quick Quiz 15.46:                                                                p.571
 Wait a minute! In QSBR implementations of RCU, no code is emitted for rcu_
 read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock(). This means that the RCU read-side critical
 section in Listing 15.45 isn’t just empty, it is completely nonexistent!!! So how can
 something that doesn’t exist at all possibly have any effect whatsoever on ordering???

Answer:
Because in QSBR, RCU read-side critical sections don’t actually disappear. Instead, they
are extended in both directions until a quiescent state is encountered. For example, in the

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING                                       891

Linux kernel, the critical section might be extended back to the most recent schedule()
call and ahead to the next schedule() call. Of course, in non-QSBR implementations,
rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock() really do emit code, which can clearly
provide ordering. And within the Linux kernel, even the QSBR implementation has
a compiler barrier() in rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock(), which is
necessary to prevent the compiler from moving memory accesses that might result in
page faults into the RCU read-side critical section.
    Therefore, strange though it might seem, empty RCU read-side critical sections
really can and do provide some degree of ordering. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.47:                                                             p.571
Can P1()’s accesses be reordered in the litmus tests shown in Listings 15.43, 15.44,
and 15.45 in the same way that they were reordered going from Listing 15.38 to
Listing 15.39?

Answer:
No, because none of these later litmus tests have more than one access within their
RCU read-side critical sections. But what about swapping the accesses, for example,
in Listing 15.43, placing P1()’s WRITE_ONCE() within its critical section and the
READ_ONCE() before its critical section?
   Swapping the accesses allows both instances of r2 to have a final value of zero, in
other words, although RCU read-side critical sections’ ordering properties can extend
outside of those critical sections, the same is not true of their reordering properties.
Checking this with herd and explaining why is left as an exercise for the reader. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.48:                                                       p.575
What would happen if the smp_mb() was instead added between P2()’s accesses in
Listing 15.47?

Answer:
The cycle would again be forbidden. Further analysis is left as an exercise for the reader.
❑

Quick Quiz 15.49:                                                 p.578
What happens to code between an atomic operation and an smp_mb__after_
atomic()?

Answer:
First, please don’t do this!
    But if you do, this intervening code will either be ordered after the atomic operation
or before the smp_mb__after_atomic(), depending on the architecture, but not both.
This also applies to smp_mb__before_atomic() and smp_mb__after_spinlock(),
that is, both the uncertain ordering of the intervening code and the plea to avoid such
code. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
892                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 15.50:                                                                   p.580
Why does Alpha’s READ_ONCE() include an mb() rather than rmb()?

Answer:
Alpha has only mb and wmb instructions, so smp_rmb() would be implemented by the
Alpha mb instruction in either case. In addition, at the time that the Linux kernel started
relying on dependency ordering, it was not clear that Alpha ordered dependent stores,
and thus smp_mb() was therefore the safe choice.
    However, given the aforementioned v5.9 changes to READ_ONCE() and a few of
Alpha’s atomic read-modify-write operations, no Linux-kernel core code need concern
itself with DEC Alpha, thus greatly reducing Paul E. McKenney’s incentive to remove
Alpha support from the kernel. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.51:                                                           p.580
Isn’t DEC Alpha significant as having the weakest possible memory ordering?

Answer:
Although DEC Alpha does take considerable flak, it does avoid reordering reads from
the same CPU to the same variable. It also avoids the out-of-thin-air problem that
plagues the Java and C11 memory models [BD14, BMN+ 15, BS14, Boe20, Gol19,
Jef14, MB20, MJST16, Š11, VBC+ 15]. ❑

Quick Quiz 15.52:                                                          p.583
Given that hardware can have a half memory barrier, why don’t locking primitives
allow the compiler to move memory-reference instructions into lock-based critical
sections?

Answer:
In fact, as we saw in Section 15.6.3 and will see in Section 15.6.6, hardware really
does implement partial memory-ordering instructions and it also turns out that these
really are used to construct locking primitives. However, these locking primitives use
full compiler barriers, thus preventing the compiler from reordering memory-reference
instructions both out of and into the corresponding critical section.
     To see why the compiler is forbidden from doing reordering that is permitted by
hardware, consider the following sample code in Listing E.17. This code is based on
the userspace RCU update-side code [DMS+ 12a, Supplementary Materials Figure 5].
     Suppose that the compiler reordered lines 27 and 28 into the critical section starting
at line 29. Now suppose that two updaters start executing synchronize_rcu() at
about the same time. Then consider the following sequence of events:

   1. CPU 0 acquires the lock at line 29.

   2. Line 27 determines that CPU 0 was online, so it clears its own counter at line 28.
      (Recall that lines 27 and 28 have been reordered by the compiler to follow line 29).

   3. CPU 0 invokes update_counter_and_wait() from line 30.

   4. CPU 0 invokes rcu_gp_ongoing() on itself at line 16, and line 5 sees that
      CPU 0 is in a quiescent state. Control therefore returns to update_counter_
      and_wait(), and line 15 advances to CPU 1.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.15. ADVANCED SYNCHRONIZATION: MEMORY ORDERING                                       893

Listing E.17: Userspace RCU Code Reordering
1    static inline int rcu_gp_ongoing(unsigned long *ctr)
2    {
3            unsigned long v;
4
5            v = LOAD_SHARED(*ctr);
6            return v && (v != rcu_gp_ctr);
7    }
8
9    static void update_counter_and_wait(void)
10   {
11           struct rcu_reader *index;
12
13           STORE_SHARED(rcu_gp_ctr, rcu_gp_ctr + RCU_GP_CTR);
14           barrier();
15           list_for_each_entry(index, &registry, node) {
16                   while (rcu_gp_ongoing(&index->ctr))
17                           msleep(10);
18           }
19   }
20
21   void synchronize_rcu(void)
22   {
23           unsigned long was_online;
24
25           was_online = rcu_reader.ctr;
26           smp_mb();
27           if (was_online)
28                   STORE_SHARED(rcu_reader.ctr, 0);
29           mutex_lock(&rcu_gp_lock);
30           update_counter_and_wait();
31           mutex_unlock(&rcu_gp_lock);
32           if (was_online)
33                   STORE_SHARED(rcu_reader.ctr, LOAD_SHARED(rcu_gp_ctr));
34           smp_mb();
35   }

     5. CPU 1 invokes synchronize_rcu(), but because CPU 0 already holds the lock,
        CPU 1 blocks waiting for this lock to become available. Because the compiler
        reordered lines 27 and 28 to follow line 29, CPU 1 does not clear its own counter,
        despite having been online.

     6. CPU 0 invokes rcu_gp_ongoing() on CPU 1 at line 16, and line 5 sees that
        CPU 1 is not in a quiescent state. The while loop at line 16 therefore never exits.

     So the compiler’s reordering results in a deadlock. In contrast, hardware reordering
is temporary, so that CPU 1 might undertake its first attempt to acquire the mutex on
line 29 before executing lines 27 and 28, but it will eventually execute lines 27 and 28.
Because hardware reordering only results in a short delay, it can be tolerated. On the
other hand, because compiler reordering results in a deadlock, it must be prohibited.

    Some research efforts have used hardware transactional memory to allow compilers
to safely reorder more aggressively, but the overhead of hardware transactions has thus
far made such optimizations unattractive. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
894                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

E.16       Ease of Use

 Quick Quiz 16.1:                                                                  p.592
 Can a similar algorithm be used when deleting elements?

Answer:
Yes. However, since each thread must hold the locks of three consecutive elements to
delete the middle one, if there are 𝑁 threads, there must be 2𝑁 + 1 elements (rather than
just 𝑁 + 1) in order to avoid deadlock. ❑

Quick Quiz 16.2:                                                          p.593
Yetch! What ever possessed someone to come up with an algorithm that deserves to
be shaved as much as this one does???

Answer:
That would be Paul.
     He was considering the Dining Philosopher’s Problem, which involves a rather
unsanitary spaghetti dinner attended by five philosophers. Given that there are five
plates and but five forks on the table, and given that each philosopher requires two forks
at a time to eat, one is supposed to come up with a fork-allocation algorithm that avoids
deadlock. Paul’s response was “Sheesh! Just get five more forks!”
     This in itself was OK, but Paul then applied this same solution to circular linked
lists.
     This would not have been so bad either, but he had to go and tell someone about it!
❑

 Quick Quiz 16.3:                                                                  p.593
 Give an exception to this rule.

Answer:
One exception would be a difficult and complex algorithm that was the only one known
to work in a given situation. Another exception would be a difficult and complex
algorithm that was nonetheless the simplest of the set known to work in a given situation.
However, even in these cases, it may be very worthwhile to spend a little time trying to
come up with a simpler algorithm! After all, if you managed to invent the first algorithm
to do some task, it shouldn’t be that hard to go on to invent a simpler one. ❑

E.17       Conflicting Visions of the Future

 Quick Quiz 17.1:                                                         p.606
 But suppose that an application exits while holding a pthread_mutex_lock() that
 happens to be located in a file-mapped region of memory?

Answer:
Indeed, in this case the lock would persist, much to the consternation of other processes
attempting to acquire this lock that is held by a process that no longer exists. Which is

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.17. CONFLICTING VISIONS OF THE FUTURE                                                895

why great care is required when using pthread_mutex objects located in file-mapped
memory regions. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.2:                                                                p.608
What about non-persistent primitives represented by data structures in mmap() regions
of memory? What happens when there is an exec() within a critical section of such
a primitive?

Answer:
If the exec()ed program maps those same regions of memory, then this program could
in principle simply release the lock. The question as to whether this approach is sound
from a software-engineering viewpoint is left as an exercise for the reader. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.3:                                                                     p.616
MV-RLU looks pretty good! Doesn’t it beat RCU hands down?

Answer:
One might get that impression from a quick read of the abstract, but more careful readers
will notice the “for a wide range of workloads” phrase in the last sentence. It turns out
that this phrase is quite important:

   1. Their RCU evaluation uses synchronous grace periods, which needlessly throttle
      updates, as noted in their Section 6.2.1. See Figure 10.10 page 310 of this book
      to see that the venerable asynchronous call_rcu() primitive enables RCU to
      perform and scale quite well with large numbers of updaters. Furthermore, in
      Section 3.7 of their paper, the authors admit that asynchronous grace periods are
      important to MV-RLU scalability. A fair comparison would also allow RCU the
      benefits of asynchrony.

   2. They use a poorly tuned 1,000-bucket hash table containing 10,000 elements. In
      addition, their 448 hardware threads need considerably more than 1,000 buckets
      to avoid the lock contention that they correctly state limits RCU performance
      in their benchmarks. A useful comparison would feature a properly tuned hash
      table.

   3. Their RCU hash table used per-bucket locks, which they call out as a bottleneck,
      which is not a surprise given the long hash chains and small ratio of buckets to
      threads. A number of their competing mechanisms instead use lockfree techniques,
      thus avoiding the per-bucket-lock bottleneck, which cynics might claim sheds
      some light on the authors’ otherwise inexplicable choice of poorly tuned hash
      tables. The first graph in the middle row of the authors’ Figure 4 show what RCU
      can achieve if not hobbled by artificial bottlenecks, as does the first portion of the
      second graph in that same row.

   4. Their linked-list operation permits RLU to do concurrent modifications of different
      elements in the list, while RCU is forced to serialize updates. Again, RCU has
      always worked just fine in conjunction with lockless updaters, a fact that has
      been set forth in academic literature that the authors cited [DMS+ 12a]. A fair
      comparison would use the same style of update for RCU as it does for MV-RLU.

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
896                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

   5. The authors fail to consider combining RCU and sequence locking, which is used
      in the Linux kernel to give readers coherent views of multi-pointer updates.

   6. The authors fail to consider RCU-based solutions to the Issaquah Challenge [McK16a],
      which also gives readers a coherent view of multi-pointer updates, albeit with a
      weaker view of “coherent”.

    It is surprising that the anonymous reviewers of this paper did not demand an
apples-to-apples comparison of MV-RLU and RCU. Nevertheless, the authors should
be congratulated on producing an academic paper that presents an all-too-rare example
of good scalability combined with strong read-side coherence. They are also to be
congratulated on overcoming the traditional academic prejudice against asynchronous
grace periods, which greatly aided their scalability.
    Interestingly enough, RLU and RCU take different approaches to avoid the inherent
limitations of STM noted by Hagit Attiya et al. [AHM09]. RCU avoids providing strict
serializability and RLU avoids providing invisible read-only transactions, both thus
avoiding the limitations. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.4:                                                            p.618
Why not get with the times and apply machine learning to contention management?

Answer:
Many transactions have sub-microsecond overheads, so it would be all too easy to burn
more CPU on machine learning than was saved by more efficiently executing transactions.
Machine learning might nevertheless have a role to play in tuning contention managers
to specific workloads. It would of course be even better to not need the tuning, but
sometimes “better” is unattainable. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.5:                                                            p.619
Given things like spin_trylock(), how does it make any sense at all to claim that
TM introduces the concept of failure???

Answer:
When using locking, spin_trylock() is a choice, with a corresponding failure-free
choice being spin_lock(), which is used in the common case, as in there are more
than 100 times as many calls to spin_lock() than to spin_trylock() in the v5.11
Linux kernel. When using TM, the only failure-free choice is the irrevocable transaction,
which is not used in the common case. In fact, the irrevocable transaction is not even
available in all TM implementations. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.6:                                                                     p.620
What is to learn? Why not just use TM for memory-based data structures and locking
for those rare cases featuring the many silly corner cases listed in this silly section???

Answer:
The year 2005 just called, and it wants its incandescent TM marketing hype back.
   In the year 2023, TM still has significant proving to do, even with the advent of
HTM, which is covered in the upcoming Section 17.3. ❑

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.17. CONFLICTING VISIONS OF THE FUTURE                                                     897

    Quick Quiz 17.7:                                                             p.623
    Why would it matter that oft-written variables shared the cache line with the lock
    variable?
Answer:
If the lock is in the same cacheline as some of the variables that it is protecting, then
writes to those variables by one CPU will invalidate that cache line for all the other
CPUs. These invalidations will generate large numbers of conflicts and retries, perhaps
even degrading performance and scalability compared to locking. ❑

    Quick Quiz 17.8:                                                            p.624
    Why are relatively small updates important to HTM performance and scalability?

Answer:
The larger the updates, the greater the probability of conflict, and thus the greater
probability of retries, which degrade performance. ❑

    Quick Quiz 17.9:                                                            p.626
    How could a red-black tree possibly efficiently enumerate all elements of the tree
    regardless of choice of synchronization mechanism???

Answer:
In many cases, the enumeration need not be exact. In these cases, hazard pointers or
RCU may be used to protect readers, which provides low probability of conflict with
any given insertion or deletion. ❑

    Quick Quiz 17.10:                                                                      p.627
    But why can’t a debugger emulate single stepping by setting breakpoints at successive
    lines of the transaction, relying on the retry to retrace the steps of the earlier instances
    of the transaction?
Answer:
This scheme might work with reasonably high probability, but it can fail in ways that
would be quite surprising to most users. To see this, consider the following transaction:

1    begin_trans();
2    if (a) {
3             do_one_thing();
4             do_another_thing();
5    } else {
6             do_a_third_thing();
7             do_a_fourth_thing();
8    }
9    end_trans();

    Suppose that the user sets a breakpoint at line 4, which triggers, aborting the
transaction and entering the debugger. Suppose that between the time that the breakpoint
triggers and the debugger gets around to stopping all the threads, some other thread
sets the value of a to zero. When the poor user attempts to single-step the program,
surprise! The program is now in the else-clause instead of the then-clause.
    This is not what I call an easy-to-use debugger. ❑

                                                                                                   v2025.12.18a
898                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz 17.11:                                                                    p.628
But why would anyone need an empty lock-based critical section???

Answer:
See the answer to Quick Quiz 7.20 in Section 7.2.1.
    However, it is claimed that given a strongly atomic HTM implementation without
forward-progress guarantees, any memory-based locking design based on empty critical
sections will operate correctly in the presence of transactional lock elision. Although I
have not seen a proof of this statement, there is a straightforward rationale for this claim.
The main idea is that in a strongly atomic HTM implementation, the results of a given
transaction are not visible until after the transaction completes successfully. Therefore,
if you can see that a transaction has started, it is guaranteed to have already completed,
which means that a subsequent empty lock-based critical section will successfully “wait”
on it—after all, there is no waiting required.
    This line of reasoning does not apply to weakly atomic systems (including many
STM implementation), and it also does not apply to lock-based programs that use
means other than memory to communicate. One such means is the passage of time (for
example, in hard real-time systems) or flow of priority (for example, in soft real-time
systems).
    Locking designs that rely on priority boosting are of particular interest. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.12:                                                             p.628
Can’t transactional lock elision trivially handle locking’s time-based messaging
semantics by simply choosing not to elide empty lock-based critical sections?

Answer:
It could do so, but this would be both unnecessary and insufficient.
    It would be unnecessary in cases where the empty critical section was due to
conditional compilation. Here, it might well be that the only purpose of the lock was to
protect data, so eliding it completely would be the right thing to do. In fact, leaving the
empty lock-based critical section would degrade performance and scalability.
    On the other hand, it is possible for a non-empty lock-based critical section to be
relying on both the data-protection and time-based messaging semantics of locking.
Using transactional lock elision in such a case would be incorrect, and would result in
bugs. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.13:                                                         p.628
Given modern hardware [MOZ09], how can anyone possibly expect parallel software
relying on timing to work?

Answer:
The short answer is that on commonplace commodity hardware, synchronization designs
based on any sort of fine-grained timing are foolhardy and cannot be expected to operate
correctly under all conditions.
    That said, there are systems designed for hard real-time use that are much more
deterministic. In the (very unlikely) event that you are using such a system, here is
a toy example showing how time-based synchronization can work. Again, do not try
this on commodity microprocessors, as they have highly nondeterministic performance
characteristics.

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
 E.17. CONFLICTING VISIONS OF THE FUTURE                                               899

     This example uses multiple worker threads along with a control thread. Each worker
 thread corresponds to an outbound data feed, and records the current time (for example,
 from the clock_gettime() system call) in a per-thread my_timestamp variable after
 executing each unit of work. The real-time nature of this example results in the following
 set of constraints:

     1. It is a fatal error for a given worker thread to fail to update its timestamp for a
        time period of more than MAX_LOOP_TIME.

     2. Locks are used sparingly to access and update global state.

     3. Locks are granted in strict FIFO order within a given thread priority.

     When worker threads complete their feed, they must disentangle themselves from
 the rest of the application and place a status value in a per-thread my_status variable
 that is initialized to -1. Threads do not exit; they instead are placed on a thread pool to
 accommodate later processing requirements. The control thread assigns (and re-assigns)
 worker threads as needed, and also maintains a histogram of thread statuses. The control
 thread runs at a real-time priority no higher than that of the worker threads.
     Worker threads’ code is as follows:

 1         int my_status = -1;   /* Thread local. */
 2
 3         while (continue_working()) {
 4                 enqueue_any_new_work();
 5                 wp = dequeue_work();
 6                 do_work(wp);
 7                 my_timestamp = clock_gettime(...);
 8         }
 9
10         acquire_lock(&departing_thread_lock);
11
12         /*
13          * Disentangle from application, might
14          * acquire other locks, can take much longer
15          * than MAX_LOOP_TIME, especially if many
16          * threads exit concurrently.
17          */
18         my_status = get_return_status();
19         release_lock(&departing_thread_lock);
20
21         /* thread awaits repurposing. */

     The control thread’s code is as follows:

 1         for (;;) {
 2                 for_each_thread(t) {
 3                         ct = clock_gettime(...);
 4                         d = ct - per_thread(my_timestamp, t);
 5                         if (d >= MAX_LOOP_TIME) {
 6                                 /* thread departing. */
 7                                 acquire_lock(&departing_thread_lock);
 8                                 release_lock(&departing_thread_lock);
 9                                 i = per_thread(my_status, t);
10                                 status_hist[i]++; /* Bug if TLE! */
11                         }
12                 }
13                 /* Repurpose threads as needed. */
14         }

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
900                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

     Line 5 uses the passage of time to deduce that the thread has exited, executing lines 6
and 10 if so. The empty lock-based critical section on lines 7 and 8 guarantees that any
thread in the process of exiting completes (remember that locks are granted in FIFO
order!).
     Once again, do not try this sort of thing on commodity microprocessors. After all,
it is difficult enough to get this right on systems specifically designed for hard real-time
use! ❑

 Quick Quiz 17.14:                                                                p.629
 But the boostee() function in Listing 17.1 alternatively acquires its locks in reverse
 order! Won’t this result in deadlock?
Answer:
No deadlock will result. To arrive at deadlock, two different threads must each acquire
the two locks in opposite orders, which does not happen in this example. However,
deadlock detectors such as lockdep [Cor06a] will flag this as a false positive. ❑

 Quick Quiz 17.15:                                                                  p.630
 So a bunch of people set out to supplant locking, and they mostly end up just optimizing
 locking???

Answer:
At least they accomplished something useful! And perhaps there will continue to be
additional HTM progress over time [SNGK17, SBN+ 20, GGK18, PMDY20]. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.16:                                                            p.633
Tables 17.1 and 17.2 state that hardware is only starting to become available. But
hasn’t HTM hardware support been widely available for almost a full decade?

Answer:
Yes and no. It appears that implementing even the HTM subset of TM in real hardware
is a bit trickier than it appears [JSG12, Was14, Int20a, Int21, Lar21]. Therefore, the sad
fact is that “starting to become available” is all too accurate as of 2021. In fact, vendors
are beginning to deprecate their HTM implementations [Int20c, Book III Appendix A].
❑

 Quick Quiz 17.17:                                                               p.638
 But given continued work, isn’t it inevitable that HTM will eventually deliver on the
 full TM vision?
Answer:
Maybe?
    Please review Chapter 3, especially the discussion of Table 3.1 that outlines the cost
of fine-grained global agreement. Also please review the discussion of Figure 9.22,
which shows the scalability benefits of avoiding the need for global agreement.
    TM is primarily intended for fine-grained synchronization, and, for each group of
concurrent transactions, requires global agreement that either: (1) The transactions
are ordered, or (2) The transactions do not conflict. It is of course possible for only
some transactions in a concurrent group to conflict, in which case only those conflicting

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.17. CONFLICTING VISIONS OF THE FUTURE                                                901

transactions must be ordered. Therefore, the material covered in Chapter 3 and in the
discussion of Figure 9.22 both apply directly to TM.
    It is of course true that very smart people continue working on transactional memory,
and they can be expected to continue to make advances. However, TM’s requirements
for global agreement conflict with the laws of physics that were discussed in Chapter 3,
and this conflict will likely continue to impose hard limits on TM performance and
scalability in the general case. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.18:                                                              p.639
This list is ridiculously utopian! Why not stick to the current state of the formal-
verification art?

Answer:
You are welcome to your opinion on what is and is not utopian, but I will be paying more
attention to people actually making progress on the items in that list than to anyone who
might be objecting to them. This might have something to do with my long experience
with people attempting to talk me out of specific things that their favorite tools cannot
handle.
    In the meantime, please feel free to read the papers written by the people who are
actually making progress, for example, this one [DFLO19]. ❑

 Quick Quiz 17.19:                                                                p.640
 Given the groundbreaking nature of the various verifiers used in the seL4 project, why
 doesn’t this chapter cover them in more depth?

Answer:
There can be no doubt that the verifiers used by the seL4 project are quite capable.
However, seL4 started as a single-CPU project. And although seL4 has gained multi-
processor capabilities, it is currently using very coarse-grained locking that is similar to
the Linux kernel’s old Big Kernel Lock (BKL). There will hopefully come a day when
it makes sense to add seL4’s verifiers to a book on parallel programming, but this is not
yet that day. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.20:                                                           p.642
Why bother with a separate filter command on line 27 of Listing 17.2 instead of
just adding the condition to the exists clause? And wouldn’t it be simpler to use
xchg_acquire() instead of cmpxchg_acquire()?

Answer:
The filter clause causes the herd tool to discard executions at an earlier stage of
processing than does the exists clause, which provides significant speedups.
    As for xchg_acquire(), this atomic operation will do a write whether or not
lock acquisition succeeds, which means that a model using xchg_acquire() will
have more operations than one using cmpxchg_acquire(), which won’t do a write
in the failed-acquisition case. More writes means more combinatorial to explode,
as shown in Table E.6 (C-SB+l-o-o-u+l-o-o-*u.litmus, C-SB+l-o-o-u+l-o-
o-u*-C.litmus, C-SB+l-o-o-u+l-o-o-u*-CE.litmus, C-SB+l-o-o-u+l-o-
o-u*-X.litmus, and C-SB+l-o-o-u+l-o-o-u*-XE.litmus). This table clearly

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
902                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

            Table E.6: Emulating Locking: Performance Comparison (s)

                              cmpxchg_acquire()       xchg_acquire()
                 #   Lock     filter      exists      filter    exists
                 2   0.004     0.022       0.039       0.027      0.058
                 3   0.041     0.743       1.653       0.968      3.203
                 4   0.374    59.565     151.962      74.818    500.96
                 5   4.905

shows that cmpxchg_acquire() outperforms xchg_acquire() and that use of the
filter clause outperforms use of the exists clause. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.21:                                                        p.644
How do we know that the MTBFs of known bugs is a good estimate of the MTBFs of
bugs that have not yet been located?

Answer:
We don’t, but it does not matter.
    To see this, note that the 7 % figure only applies to injected bugs that were
subsequently located: It necessarily ignores any injected bugs that were never found.
Therefore, the MTBF statistics of known bugs is likely to be a good approximation of
that of the injected bugs that are subsequently located.
    A key point in this whole section is that we should be more concerned about bugs that
inconvenience users than about other bugs that never actually manifest. This of course
is not to say that we should completely ignore bugs that have not yet inconvenienced
users, just that we should properly prioritize our efforts so as to fix the most important
and urgent bugs first. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.22:                                                              p.644
But the formal-verification tools should immediately find all the bugs introduced by
the fixes, so why is this a problem?

Answer:
It is a problem because real-world formal-verification tools (as opposed to those that
exist only in the imaginations of the more vociferous proponents of formal verification)
are not omniscient, and thus are only able to locate certain types of bugs. For but
one example, formal-verification tools are unlikely to spot a bug corresponding to an
omitted assertion or, equivalently, a bug corresponding to an undiscovered portion of
the specification. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.23:                                                                  p.644
But many formal-verification tools can only find one bug at a time, so that each bug
must be fixed before the tool can locate the next. How can bug-fix efforts be prioritized
given such a tool?

Answer:
One approach is to provide a simple fix that might not be suitable for a production

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.18. IMPORTANT QUESTIONS                                                             903

environment, but which allows the tool to locate the next bug. Another approach is to
restrict configuration or inputs so that the bugs located thus far cannot occur. There
are a number of similar approaches, but the common theme is that fixing the bug
from the tool’s viewpoint is usually much easier than constructing and validating a
production-quality fix, and the key point is to prioritize the larger efforts required to
construct and validate the production-quality fixes. ❑

Quick Quiz 17.24:                                                                  p.645
How would testing stack up in the scorecard shown in Table 17.5?

Answer:
It would be blue all the way down, with the possible exception of the third row (overhead)
which might well be marked down for testing’s difficulty finding improbable bugs.
    On the other hand, improbable bugs are often also irrelevant bugs, so your mileage
may vary.
    Much depends on the size of your installed base. If your code is only ever going to
run on (say) 10,000 systems, Murphy can actually be a really nice guy. Everything that
can go wrong, will. Eventually. Perhaps in geologic time.
    But if your code is running on 20 billion systems, like the Linux kernel was said to
be by late 2017, Murphy can be a real jerk! Everything that can go wrong, will, and it
can go wrong really quickly!!! ❑

Quick Quiz 17.25:                                                          p.645
But aren’t there a great many more formal-verification systems than are shown in
Table 17.5?
Answer:
Indeed there are! This table focuses on those that Paul has used, but others are proving
to be useful. Formal verification has been heavily used in the seL4 project [SM13], and
its tools can now handle modest levels of concurrency. More recently, Catalin Marinas
used Lamport’s TLA tool [Lam02] to locate some forward-progress bugs in the Linux
kernel’s queued spinlock implementation. Will Deacon fixed these bugs [Dea18], and
Catalin verified Will’s fixes [Mar18].
     Lighter-weight formal verification tools have been used heavily in production [LBD+ 04,
BBC+ 10, Coo18, SAE+ 18, DFLO19]. ❑

E.18       Important Questions

Quick Quiz A.1:                                                         p.655
Wait!!! Why should reading out of a timestamp register be more expensive than
reading out of any other machine register???

Answer:
One problem is that software developers have this annoying habit of expecting time to
advance predictably, and to be synchronized across the system. Such predictability and
synchronization does not fit well with the need to change CPU core clock frequencies in
order to provide adequate user experience on the one hand and to conserve energy on

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
904                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

the other. Most solutions to these conflicting requirements have the timestamp registers
in a different clock domain than the CPU core, and reliably crossing an clock-domain
boundary between two unrelated clocks requires at least three clock periods of the
slower of the two clocks.
    As a result, reading a timestamp can easily consume tens or even hundreds of
nanoseconds on a system with multi-GHz CPU core clock frequencies. ❑

Quick Quiz A.2:                                                             p.657
What SMP coding errors can you see in these examples? See time.c for full code.

Answer:
Here are errors you might have found:

   1. Missing barrier() or volatile on tight loops.

   2. Missing memory barriers on update side.

   3. Lack of synchronization between producer and consumer. ❑

Quick Quiz A.3:                                                       p.659
How could there be such a large gap between successive consumer reads? See
timelocked.c for full code.
Answer:
Here are a few reasons for such gaps:

   1. The consumer might be preempted for long time periods.

   2. A long-running interrupt might delay the consumer.

   3. Cache misses might delay the consumer.

   4. The producer might also be running on a faster CPU than is the consumer (for
      example, one of the CPUs might have had to decrease its clock frequency due to
      heat-dissipation or power-consumption constraints). ❑

Quick Quiz A.4:                                                                p.661
But if fully ordered implementations cannot offer stronger guarantees than the better
performing and more scalable weakly ordered implementations, why bother with full
ordering?

Answer:
Because strongly ordered implementations are sometimes able to provide greater
consistency among sets of calls to functions accessing a given data structure. For
example, compare the atomic counter of Listing 5.2 to the statistical counter of
Section 5.2. Suppose that one thread is adding the value 3 and another is adding the
value 5, while two other threads are concurrently reading the counter’s value. With
atomic counters, it is not possible for one of the readers to obtain the value 3 while the
other obtains the value 5. With statistical counters, this outcome really can happen.

                                                                                             v2025.12.18a
E.19. “TOY” RCU IMPLEMENTATIONS                                                      905

In fact, in some computing environments, this outcome can happen even on relatively
strongly ordered hardware such as x86.
    Therefore, if your user happen to need this admittedly unusual level of consistency,
you should avoid weakly ordered statistical counters. ❑

Quick Quiz A.5:                                                             p.662
Suppose a portion of a program uses RCU read-side primitives as its only synchro-
nization mechanism. Is this parallelism or concurrency?

Answer:
Yes. ❑

Quick Quiz A.6:                                                                p.663
In what part of the second (scheduler-based) perspective would the lock-based single-
thread-per-CPU workload be considered “concurrent”?

Answer:
The people who would like to arbitrarily subdivide and interleave the workload. Of
course, an arbitrary subdivision might end up separating a lock acquisition from the
corresponding lock release, which would prevent any other thread from acquiring that
lock. If the locks were pure spinlocks, this could even result in deadlock. ❑

E.19      “Toy” RCU Implementations

Quick Quiz B.1:                                                        p.666
Why wouldn’t any deadlock in the RCU implementation in Listing B.1 also be a
deadlock in any other RCU implementation?

Answer:
Suppose the functions foo() and bar() in Listing E.18 are invoked concurrently from
different CPUs. Then foo() will acquire my_lock() on line 3, while bar() will
acquire rcu_gp_lock on line 13.
    When foo() advances to line 4, it will attempt to acquire rcu_gp_lock, which
is held by bar(). Then when bar() advances to line 14, it will attempt to acquire
my_lock, which is held by foo().
    Each function is then waiting for a lock that the other holds, a classic deadlock.
    Other RCU implementations neither spin nor block in rcu_read_lock(), hence
avoiding deadlocks. ❑

Quick Quiz B.2:                                                             p.666
Why not simply use reader-writer locks in the RCU implementation in Listing B.1 in
order to allow RCU readers to proceed in parallel?

Answer:
One could in fact use reader-writer locks in this manner. However, textbook reader-writer
locks suffer from memory contention, so that the RCU read-side critical sections would
need to be quite long to actually permit parallel execution [McK03].

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
906                                   APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Listing E.18: Deadlock in Lock-Based RCU Implementation
1    void foo(void)
2    {
3            spin_lock(&my_lock);
4            rcu_read_lock();
5            do_something();
6            rcu_read_unlock();
7            do_something_else();
8            spin_unlock(&my_lock);
9    }
10
11   void bar(void)
12   {
13           rcu_read_lock();
14           spin_lock(&my_lock);
15           do_some_other_thing();
16           spin_unlock(&my_lock);
17           do_whatever();
18           rcu_read_unlock();
19   }

   On the other hand, use of a reader-writer lock that is read-acquired in rcu_read_
lock() would avoid the deadlock condition noted above. ❑

 Quick Quiz B.3:                                                                  p.667
 Wouldn’t it be cleaner to acquire all the locks, and then release them all in the loop
 from lines 15–18 of Listing B.2? After all, with this change, there would be a point in
 time when there were no readers, simplifying things greatly.

Answer:
Making this change would re-introduce the deadlock, so no, it would not be cleaner. ❑

 Quick Quiz B.4:                                                             p.667
 Is the implementation shown in Listing B.2 free from deadlocks? Why or why not?

Answer:
One deadlock is where a lock is held across synchronize_rcu(), and that same lock
is acquired within an RCU read-side critical section. However, this situation could
deadlock any correctly designed RCU implementation. After all, the synchronize_
rcu() primitive must wait for all pre-existing RCU read-side critical sections to
complete, but if one of those critical sections is spinning on a lock held by the thread
executing the synchronize_rcu(), we have a deadlock inherent in the definition of
RCU.
    Another deadlock happens when attempting to nest RCU read-side critical sections.
This deadlock is peculiar to this implementation, and might be avoided by using recursive
locks, or by using reader-writer locks that are read-acquired by rcu_read_lock() and
write-acquired by synchronize_rcu().
    However, if we exclude the above two cases, this implementation of RCU does
not introduce any deadlock situations. This is because only time some other thread’s
lock is acquired is when executing synchronize_rcu(), and in that case, the lock is
immediately released, prohibiting a deadlock cycle that does not involve a lock held
across the synchronize_rcu() which is the first case above. ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.19. “TOY” RCU IMPLEMENTATIONS                                                        907

Quick Quiz B.5:                                                           p.667
Isn’t one advantage of the RCU algorithm shown in Listing B.2 that it uses only
primitives that are widely available, for example, in POSIX pthreads?

Answer:
This is indeed an advantage, but do not forget that rcu_dereference() and rcu_
assign_pointer() are still required, which means volatile manipulation for rcu_
dereference() and memory barriers for rcu_assign_pointer(). Of course, many
Alpha CPUs require memory barriers for both primitives. ❑

Quick Quiz B.6:                                                            p.667
But what if you hold a lock across a call to synchronize_rcu(), and then acquire
that same lock within an RCU read-side critical section?

Answer:
Indeed, this would deadlock any legal RCU implementation. But is rcu_read_lock()
really participating in the deadlock cycle? If you believe that it is, then please ask
yourself this same question when looking at the RCU implementation in Appendix B.10.
❑

Quick Quiz B.7:                                                         p.668
How can the grace period possibly elapse in 40 nanoseconds when synchronize_
rcu() contains a 10-millisecond delay?

Answer:
The update-side test was run in absence of readers, so the poll() system call was never
invoked. In addition, the actual code has this poll() system call commented out, the
better to evaluate the true overhead of the update-side code. Any production uses of this
code would be better served by using the poll() system call, but then again, production
uses would be even better served by other implementations shown later in this section.
❑

Quick Quiz B.8:                                                             p.668
Why not simply make rcu_read_lock() wait when a concurrent synchronize_
rcu() has been waiting too long in the RCU implementation in Listing B.3? Wouldn’t
that prevent synchronize_rcu() from starving?

Answer:
Although this would in fact eliminate the starvation, it would also mean that rcu_
read_lock() would spin or block waiting for the writer, which is in turn waiting on
readers. If one of these readers is attempting to acquire a lock that the spinning/blocking
rcu_read_lock() holds, we again have deadlock.
    In short, the cure is worse than the disease. See Appendix B.4 for a proper cure. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
908                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

 Quick Quiz B.9:                                                          p.671
 Why the memory barrier on line 5 of synchronize_rcu() in Listing B.6 given that
 there is a spin-lock acquisition immediately after?

Answer:
The spin-lock acquisition only guarantees that the spin-lock’s critical section will not
“bleed out” to precede the acquisition. It in no way guarantees that code preceding the
spin-lock acquisition won’t be reordered into the critical section. Such reordering could
cause a removal from an RCU-protected list to be reordered to follow the complementing
of rcu_idx, which could allow a newly starting RCU read-side critical section to see
the recently removed data element.
    Exercise for the reader: Use a tool such as Promela/spin to determine which (if any)
of the memory barriers in Listing B.6 are really needed. See Chapter 12 for information
on using these tools. The first correct and complete response will be credited. ❑

 Quick Quiz B.10:                                                                  p.671
 Why is the counter flipped twice in Listing B.6? Shouldn’t a single flip-and-wait cycle
 be sufficient?

Answer:
Both flips are absolutely required. To see this, consider the following sequence of
events:

      1 Line 8 of rcu_read_lock() in Listing B.5 picks up rcu_idx, finding its value
        to be zero.

      2 Line 8 of synchronize_rcu() in Listing B.6 complements the value of rcu_idx,
        setting its value to one.

      3 Lines 10–12 of synchronize_rcu() find that the value of rcu_refcnt[0]
        is zero, and thus returns. (Recall that the question is asking what happens if
        lines 13–20 are omitted.)

      4 Lines 9 and 10 of rcu_read_lock() store the value zero to this thread’s instance
        of rcu_read_idx and increments rcu_refcnt[0], respectively. Execution
        then proceeds into the RCU read-side critical section.

      5 Another instance of synchronize_rcu() again complements rcu_idx, this
        time setting its value to zero. Because rcu_refcnt[1] is zero, synchronize_
        rcu() returns immediately. (Recall that rcu_read_lock() incremented rcu_
        refcnt[0], not rcu_refcnt[1]!)

      6 The grace period that started in step 5 has been allowed to end, despite the fact
        that the RCU read-side critical section that started beforehand in step 4 has not
        completed. This violates RCU semantics, and could allow the update to free a
        data element that the RCU read-side critical section was still referencing.

    Exercise for the reader: What happens if rcu_read_lock() is preempted for a
very long time (hours!) just after line 8? Does this implementation operate correctly in
that case? Why or why not? The first correct and complete response will be credited. ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
E.19. “TOY” RCU IMPLEMENTATIONS                                                      909

 Quick Quiz B.11:                                                            p.671
 Given that atomic increment and decrement are so expensive, why not just use non-
 atomic increment on line 10 and a non-atomic decrement on line 25 of Listing B.5?

Answer:
Using non-atomic operations would cause increments and decrements to be lost, in turn
causing the implementation to fail. See Appendix B.6 for a safe way to use non-atomic
operations in rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock(). ❑

Quick Quiz B.12:                                                              p.672
Come off it! We can see the atomic_read() primitive in rcu_read_lock()!!! So
why are you trying to pretend that rcu_read_lock() contains no atomic operations???

Answer:
Yes, the atomic_read() primitives is an atomic operation, but it does not execute
atomic machine instructions. It instead executes a normal load from an atomic_t. Its
sole purpose is to keep the compiler’s type-checking happy. If the Linux kernel ran on
8-bit CPUs, it would also need to prevent “store tearing”, which could happen due to
the need to store a 16-bit pointer with two eight-bit accesses on some 8-bit systems. But
thankfully, it seems that no one runs Linux on 8-bit systems. ❑

 Quick Quiz B.13:                                                               p.673
 Great, if we have 𝑁 threads, we can have 2𝑁 ten-millisecond waits (one set per
 flip_counter_and_wait() invocation, and even that assumes that we wait only
 once for each thread). Don’t we need the grace period to complete much more quickly?

Answer:
Keep in mind that we only wait for a given thread if that thread is still in an RCU
read-side critical section. So the only way that we would wait for 2𝑁 intervals would be
if each thread happened to be in an RCU read-side critical section at the time that the
update iterated over that thread.
    However, the implementation in Appendix B.6 does even better. ❑

Quick Quiz B.14:                                                                p.677
All of these toy RCU implementations have either atomic operations in rcu_read_
lock() and rcu_read_unlock(), or synchronize_rcu() overhead that increases
linearly with the number of threads. Under what circumstances could an RCU
implementation enjoy lightweight implementations for all three of these primitives, all
having deterministic (O (1)) overheads and latencies?

Answer:
Special-purpose uniprocessor implementations of RCU can attain this ideal [McK09a].
❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
910                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

Quick Quiz B.15:                                                                p.678
If any even value is sufficient to tell synchronize_rcu() to ignore a given task, why
don’t lines 11 and 12 of Listing B.17 simply assign zero to rcu_reader_gp?

Answer:
Assigning zero (or any other even-numbered constant) would in fact work, but assigning
the value of rcu_gp_ctr can provide a valuable debugging aid, as it gives the developer
an idea of when the corresponding thread last exited an RCU read-side critical section.
❑

Quick Quiz B.16:                                                               p.679
Why are the memory barriers on lines 19 and 31 of Listing B.17 needed? Aren’t the
memory barriers inherent in the locking primitives on lines 20 and 30 sufficient?

Answer:
These memory barriers are required because the locking primitives are only guaranteed
to confine the critical section. The locking primitives are under absolutely no obligation
to keep other code from bleeding in to the critical section. The pair of memory barriers
are therefore requires to prevent this sort of code motion, whether performed by the
compiler or by the CPU. ❑

Quick Quiz B.17:                                                              p.679
Couldn’t the update-side batching optimization described in Appendix B.7 be applied
to the implementation shown in Listing B.17?

Answer:
Indeed it could, with a few modifications. This work is left as an exercise for the reader.
❑

Quick Quiz B.18:                                                                     p.679
Is the possibility of readers being preempted in lines 3–4 of Listing B.17 a real problem,
in other words, is there a real sequence of events that could lead to failure? If not, why
not? If so, what is the sequence of events, and how can the failure be addressed?

Answer:
It is a real problem, there is a sequence of events leading to failure, and there are a
number of possible ways of addressing it. For more details, see the Quick Quizzes near
the end of Appendix B.9. The reason for locating the discussion there is to (1) give you
more time to think about it, and (2) because the nesting support added in that section
greatly reduces the time required to overflow the counter. ❑

Quick Quiz B.19:                                                               p.681
Why not simply maintain a separate per-thread nesting-level variable, as was done in
previous section, rather than having all this complicated bit manipulation?

Answer:
The apparent simplicity of the separate per-thread variable is a red herring. This
approach incurs much greater complexity in the guise of careful ordering of operations,

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.19. “TOY” RCU IMPLEMENTATIONS                                                         911

especially if signal handlers are to be permitted to contain RCU read-side critical
sections. But don’t take my word for it, code it up and see what you end up with! ❑

Quick Quiz B.20:                                                            p.681
Given the algorithm shown in Listing B.19, how could you double the time required
to overflow the global rcu_gp_ctr?

Answer:
One way would be to replace the magnitude comparison on lines 32 and 33 with an
inequality check of the per-thread rcu_reader_gp variable against rcu_gp_ctr+RCU_
GP_CTR_BOTTOM_BIT. ❑

Quick Quiz B.21:                                                              p.681
Again, given the algorithm shown in Listing B.19, is counter overflow fatal? Why or
why not? If it is fatal, what can be done to fix it?

Answer:
It can indeed be fatal. To see this, consider the following sequence of events:
   1. Thread 0 enters rcu_read_lock(), determines that it is not nested, and therefore
      fetches the value of the global rcu_gp_ctr. Thread 0 is then preempted for an
      extremely long time (before storing to its per-thread rcu_reader_gp variable).
   2. Other threads repeatedly invoke synchronize_rcu(), so that the new value of
      the global rcu_gp_ctr is now RCU_GP_CTR_BOTTOM_BIT less than it was when
      thread 0 fetched it.
   3. Thread 0 now starts running again, and stores into its per-thread rcu_reader_gp
      variable. The value it stores is RCU_GP_CTR_BOTTOM_BIT+1 greater than that of
      the global rcu_gp_ctr.
   4. Thread 0 acquires a reference to RCU-protected data element A.
   5. Thread 1 now removes the data element A that thread 0 just acquired a reference
      to.
   6. Thread 1 invokes synchronize_rcu(), which increments the global rcu_
      gp_ctr by RCU_GP_CTR_BOTTOM_BIT. It then checks all of the per-thread
      rcu_reader_gp variables, but thread 0’s value (incorrectly) indicates that it
      started after thread 1’s call to synchronize_rcu(), so thread 1 does not wait
      for thread 0 to complete its RCU read-side critical section.
   7. Thread 1 then frees up data element A, which thread 0 is still referencing.
     Note that scenario can also occur in the implementation presented in Appendix B.8.
     One strategy for fixing this problem is to use 64-bit counters so that the time required
to overflow them would exceed the useful lifetime of the computer system. Note that
non-antique members of the 32-bit x86 CPU family allow atomic manipulation of 64-bit
counters via the cmpxchg64b instruction.
     Another strategy is to limit the rate at which grace periods are permitted to occur in
order to achieve a similar effect. For example, synchronize_rcu() could record the
last time that it was invoked, and any subsequent invocation would then check this time

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
912                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

and block as needed to force the desired spacing. For example, if the low-order four bits
of the counter were reserved for nesting, and if grace periods were permitted to occur at
most ten times per second, then it would take more than 300 days for the counter to
overflow. However, this approach is not helpful if there is any possibility that the system
will be fully loaded with CPU-bound high-priority real-time threads for the full 300
days. (A remote possibility, perhaps, but best to consider it ahead of time.)
    A third approach is to administratively abolish real-time threads from the system in
question. In this case, the preempted process will age up in priority, thus getting to run
long before the counter had a chance to overflow. Of course, this approach is less than
helpful for real-time applications.
    A fourth approach would be for rcu_read_lock() to recheck the value of the
global rcu_gp_ctr after storing to its per-thread rcu_reader_gp counter, retrying if
the new value of the global rcu_gp_ctr is inappropriate. This works, but introduces
non-deterministic execution time into rcu_read_lock(). On the other hand, if your
application is being preempted long enough for the counter to overflow, you have no
hope of deterministic execution time in any case!
    A fifth approach is for the grace period process to wait for all readers to become
aware of the new grace period. This works nicely in theory, but hangs if a reader blocks
indefinitely outside of an RCU read-side critical section.
    A final approach is, oddly enough, to use a single-bit grace-period counter and for
each call to synchronize_rcu() to take two passes through its algorithm. This is the
approached use by userspace RCU [Des09b], and is described in detail in the journal
article and supplementary materials [DMS+ 12a, Appendix D]. ❑

Quick Quiz B.22:                                                        p.683
Doesn’t the additional memory barrier shown on line 14 of Listing B.21 greatly
increase the overhead of rcu_quiescent_state()?

Answer:
Indeed it does! An application using this implementation of RCU should therefore
invoke rcu_quiescent_state() sparingly, instead using rcu_read_lock() and
rcu_read_unlock() most of the time.
    However, this memory barrier is absolutely required so that other threads will see
the store on lines 12–13 before any subsequent RCU read-side critical sections executed
by the caller. ❑

Quick Quiz B.23:                                                           p.683
Why are the two memory barriers on lines 11 and 14 of Listing B.21 needed?

Answer:
The memory barrier on line 11 prevents any RCU read-side critical sections that might
precede the call to rcu_thread_offline() won’t be reordered by either the compiler
or the CPU to follow the assignment on lines 12–13. The memory barrier on line 14 is,
strictly speaking, unnecessary, as it is illegal to have any RCU read-side critical sections
following the call to rcu_thread_offline(). ❑

Quick Quiz B.24:                                                               p.684
To be sure, the clock frequencies of POWER systems in 2008 were quite high, but even

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.19. “TOY” RCU IMPLEMENTATIONS                                                     913

a 5 GHz clock frequency is insufficient to allow loops to be executed in 50 picoseconds!
What is going on here?

Answer:
Since the measurement loop contains a pair of empty functions, the compiler optimizes it
away. The measurement loop takes 1,000 passes between each call to rcu_quiescent_
state(), so this measurement is roughly one thousandth of the overhead of a single
call to rcu_quiescent_state(). ❑

Quick Quiz B.25:                                                                p.684
Why would the fact that the code is in a library make any difference for how easy it is
to use the RCU implementation shown in Listings B.21 and B.22?

Answer:
A library function has absolutely no control over the caller, and thus cannot force the
caller to invoke rcu_quiescent_state() periodically. On the other hand, a library
function that made many references to a given RCU-protected data structure might
be able to invoke rcu_thread_online() upon entry, rcu_quiescent_state()
periodically, and rcu_thread_offline() upon exit. ❑

Quick Quiz B.26:                                                             p.684
But what if you hold a lock across a call to synchronize_rcu(), and then acquire
that same lock within an RCU read-side critical section? This should be a deadlock,
but how can a primitive that generates absolutely no code possibly participate in a
deadlock cycle?

Answer:
Please note that the RCU read-side critical section is in effect extended beyond the
enclosing rcu_read_lock() and rcu_read_unlock(), out to the previous and next
call to rcu_quiescent_state(). This rcu_quiescent_state() can be thought of
as an rcu_read_unlock() immediately followed by an rcu_read_lock().
    Even so, the actual deadlock itself will involve the lock acquisition in the RCU
read-side critical section and the synchronize_rcu(), never the rcu_quiescent_
state(). ❑

Quick Quiz B.27:                                                              p.685
Given that grace periods are prohibited within RCU read-side critical sections, how
can an RCU data structure possibly be updated while in an RCU read-side critical
section?
Answer:
This situation is one reason for the existence of asynchronous grace-period primitives
such as call_rcu(). This primitive may be invoked within an RCU read-side critical
section, and the specified RCU callback will in turn be invoked at a later time, after a
grace period has elapsed.
    The ability to perform an RCU update while within an RCU read-side critical
section can be extremely convenient, and is analogous to a (mythical) unconditional
read-to-write upgrade for reader-writer locking. ❑

                                                                                           v2025.12.18a
914                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

E.20       Why Memory Barriers?

Quick Quiz C.1:                                                                     p.691
Where does a writeback message originate from and where does it go to?

Answer:
The writeback message originates from a given CPU, or in some designs from a given
level of a given CPU’s cache—or even from a cache that might be shared among several
CPUs. The key point is that a given cache does not have room for a given data item, so
some other piece of data must be ejected from the cache to make room. If there is some
other piece of data that is duplicated in some other cache or in memory, then that piece
of data may be simply discarded, with no writeback message required.
     On the other hand, if every piece of data that might be ejected has been modified so
that the only up-to-date copy is in this cache, then one of those data items must be copied
somewhere else. This copy operation is undertaken using a “writeback message”.
     The destination of the writeback message has to be something that is able to store
the new value. This might be main memory, but it also might be some other cache.
If it is a cache, it is normally a higher-level cache for the same CPU, for example, a
level-1 cache might write back to a level-2 cache. However, some hardware designs
permit cross-CPU writebacks, so that CPU 0’s cache might send a writeback message
to CPU 1. This would normally be done if CPU 1 had somehow indicated an interest in
the data, for example, by having recently issued a read request.
     In short, a writeback message is sent from some part of the system that is short of
space, and is received by some other part of the system that can accommodate the data.
❑

Quick Quiz C.2:                                                              p.691
What happens if two CPUs attempt to invalidate the same cache line concurrently?

Answer:
One of the CPUs gains access to the shared bus first, and that CPU “wins”. The other
CPU must invalidate its copy of the cache line and transmit an “invalidate acknowledge”
message to the other CPU.
    Of course, the losing CPU can be expected to immediately issue a “read invalidate”
transaction, so the winning CPU’s victory will be quite ephemeral. ❑

Quick Quiz C.3:                                                              p.691
When an “invalidate” message appears in a large multiprocessor, every CPU must give
an “invalidate acknowledge” response. Wouldn’t the resulting “storm” of “invalidate
acknowledge” responses totally saturate the system bus?

Answer:
It might, if large-scale multiprocessors were in fact implemented that way. Larger
multiprocessors, particularly NUMA machines, tend to use so-called “directory-based”
cache-coherence protocols to avoid this and other problems. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
E.20. WHY MEMORY BARRIERS?                                                             915

Quick Quiz C.4:                                                           p.691
If SMP machines are really using message passing anyway, why bother with SMP at
all?

Answer:
There has been quite a bit of controversy on this topic over the past few decades. One
answer is that the cache-coherence protocols are quite simple, and therefore can be
implemented directly in hardware, gaining bandwidths and latencies unattainable by
software message passing. Another answer is that the real truth is to be found in
economics due to the relative prices of large SMP machines and that of clusters of
smaller SMP machines. A third answer is that the SMP programming model is easier to
use than that of distributed systems, but a rebuttal might note the appearance of HPC
clusters and MPI. And so the argument continues. ❑

Quick Quiz C.5:                                                                      p.693
How does the hardware handle the delayed transitions described above?

Answer:
Usually by adding additional states, though these additional states need not be actually
stored with the cache line, due to the fact that only a few lines at a time will be
transitioning. The need to delay transitions is but one issue that results in real-world
cache coherence protocols being much more complex than the over-simplified MESI
protocol described in this appendix. Hennessy and Patterson’s classic introduction to
computer architecture [HP95] covers many of these issues. ❑

Quick Quiz C.6:                                                             p.695
What sequence of operations would put the CPUs’ caches all back into the “invalid”
state?

Answer:
There is no such sequence, at least in absence of special “flush my cache” instructions
in the CPU’s instruction set. Most CPUs do have such instructions. ❑

Quick Quiz C.7:                                                                      p.696
But then why do uniprocessors also have store buffers?

Answer:
Because the purpose of store buffers is not just to hide acknowledgement latencies in
multiprocessor cache-coherence protocols, but to hide memory latencies in general.
Because memory is much slower than is cache on uniprocessors, store buffers on
uniprocessors can help to hide write-miss memory latencies. ❑

Quick Quiz C.8:                                                                       p.696
So store-buffer entries are variable length? Isn’t that difficult to implement in hardware?

Answer:
Here are two ways for hardware to easily handle variable-length stores.

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
916                                 APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

    First, each store-buffer entry could be a single byte wide. Then an 64-bit store
would consume eight store-buffer entries. This approach is simple and flexible, but one
disadvantage is that each entry would need to replicate much of the address that was
stored to.
    Second, each store-buffer entry could be double the size of a cache line, with half
of the bits containing the values stored, and the other half indicating which bits had
been stored to. So, assuming a 32-bit cache line, a single-byte store of 0x5a to the
low-order byte of a given cache line would result in 0xXXXXXX5a for the first half and
0x000000ff for the second half, where the values labeled X are arbitrary because they
would be ignored. This approach allows multiple consecutive stores corresponding to a
given cache line to be merged into a single store-buffer entry, but is space-inefficient for
random stores of single bytes.
    Much more complex and efficient schemes are of course used by actual hardware
designers. ❑

Quick Quiz C.9:                                                                   p.699
In step 1 above, why does CPU 0 need to issue a “read invalidate” rather than a simple
“invalidate”? After all, foo() will overwrite the variable a in any case, so why should
it care about the old value of a?
Answer:
Because the cache line in question contains more data than just the variable a. Issuing
“invalidate” instead of the needed “read invalidate” would cause that other data to be
lost, which would constitute a serious bug in the hardware. ❑

 Quick Quiz C.10:                                                                    p.699
 In step 4 above, don’t systems avoid that store to memory?

Answer:
Yes, they do. But to do so, they add states beyond the MESI quadruple that this example
is working within. ❑

 Quick Quiz C.11:                                                               p.699
 In step 9 above, did bar() read a stale value from a, or did its reads of b and a get
 reordered?
Answer:
It could be either, depending on the hardware implementation. And it really does not
matter which. After all, the bar() function’s assert() cannot tell the difference! ❑

 Quick Quiz C.12:                                                               p.701
 After step 15 in Appendix C.3.3 on page 700, both CPUs might drop the cache line
 containing the new value of “b”. Wouldn’t that cause this new value to be lost?

Answer:
It might, and that is why real hardware takes steps to avoid this problem. A traditional
approach, pointed out by Vasilevsky Alexander, is to write this cache line back to main
memory before marking the cache line as “shared”. A more efficient (though more
complex) approach is to use additional state to indicate whether or not the cache line is

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.20. WHY MEMORY BARRIERS?                                                            917

“dirty”, allowing the writeback to happen. Year-2000 systems went further, using much
more state in order to avoid redundant writebacks [CSG99, Figure 8.42]. It would be
reasonable to assume that complexity has not decreased in the meantime. ❑

 Quick Quiz C.13:                                                                p.701
 How can the CPU possibly send the invalidate acknowledge before actually invalidating
 the corresponding cache line without wreaking all kinds of havoc, including different
 CPUs seeing multiple different values for the same variables at the same time???

Answer:
To start with, CPUs can already see multiple values for a given variable at the same time,
as amply demonstrated by Figure 15.10 on page 523. Furthermore, on weakly ordered
architectures, there are very few guarantees, so if the CPU can prove that the cache
coherence protocol allows the CPU to order subsequent loads before the other CPU’s
store (the one that caused the invalidate to be sent), then it can continue supplying loads
from the doomed cache line.
    Furthermore, the CPU might be able to commence speculative execution, which can
be squashed if need be. In short, speculative execution allows the CPU to violate the
rules if (and only if!) it can hide any such violations from the user code.
    However, if the cache line was in “modified” or “exclusive” state when the invalidate
was received, it will be necessary to transition its state to at least “shared” prior to
sending the invalidate acknowledge message. Otherwise, stores might be lost or atomic
read-modify-write operations on the other CPU might be executed incorrectly. And
even then, the CPU will need to keep track of the fact that the cache line is doomed,
which means that we are using something other than strict MESI. On the other hand,
hardware architects can and do use much more complex cache-coherence protocols
than MESI, which in turn permit more optimizations courtesy of the additional state
information that these more complex protocols track.
    This is all in the name of optimization, although such hardware optimizations must
be implemented extremely carefully. Of course, if the code contains memory-ordering
instructions such as memory barriers, then the CPU’s ability to optimize will be more
limited.
   But never forget that CPU-based optimizations are quite limited compared to
those of modern optimizing compilers! Whose optimizations are also limited by
memory-ordering constraints. ❑

 Quick Quiz C.14:                                                                    p.703
 In step 1 of the first scenario in Appendix C.4.3, why is an “invalidate” sent instead of
 a ”read invalidate” message? Doesn’t CPU 0 need the values of the other variables
 that share this cache line with “a”?

Answer:
CPU 0 already has the values of these variables, given that it has a read-only copy of
the cache line containing “a”. Therefore, all CPU 0 need do is to cause the other CPUs
to discard their copies of this cache line. An “invalidate” message therefore suffices. ❑

                                                                                              v2025.12.18a
 918                                   APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

     Quick Quiz C.15:                                                      p.704
     Say what??? Why do we need a memory barrier here, given that the CPU cannot
     possibly execute the assert() until after the while loop completes?

 Answer:
 Suppose that memory barrier was omitted.
     Keep in mind that CPUs are free to speculatively execute later loads, which can have
 the effect of executing the assertion before the while loop completes. Furthermore,
 compilers assume that only the currently executing thread is updating the variables, and
 this assumption allows the compiler to hoist the load of a to precede the loop.
     In fact, some compilers would transform the loop to a branch around an infinite loop
 as follows:
 1    void foo(void)
 2    {
 3            a = 1;
 4            smp_mb();
 5            b = 1;
 6    }
 7
 8    void bar(void)
 9    {
10            if (b == 0)
11                    for (;;)
12                            continue;
13            assert(a == 1);
14    }

    Given this optimization, the code would behave in a completely different way than
the original code. If bar() observed “b == 0”, the assertion could of course not be
reached at all due to the infinite loop. However, if bar() loaded the value “1” just as
“foo()” stored it, the CPU might still have the old zero value of “a” in its cache, which
would cause the assertion to fire. You should of course use volatile casts (for example,
those volatile casts implied by the C11 relaxed atomic load operation) to prevent the
compiler from optimizing your parallel code into oblivion. But volatile casts would not
prevent a weakly ordered CPU from loading the old value for “a” from its cache, which
means that this code also requires the explicit memory barrier in “bar()”.
    In short, both compilers and CPUs aggressively apply code-reordering optimizations,
so you must clearly communicate your constraints using the compiler directives and
memory barriers provided for this purpose. ❑

     Quick Quiz C.16:                                                                  p.705
     Instead of all of this marking of invalidation-queue entries and stalling of loads, why
     not simply force an immediate flush of the invalidation queue?

Answer:
An immediate flush of the invalidation queue would do the trick. Except that the common-
case super-scalar CPU is executing many instructions at once, and not necessarily even
in the expected order. So what would “immediate” even mean? The answer is clearly
“not much”.
    Nevertheless, for simpler CPUs that execute instructions serially, flushing the
invalidation queue might be a reasonable implementation strategy. ❑

                                                                                               v2025.12.18a
E.20. WHY MEMORY BARRIERS?                                                                919

 Quick Quiz C.17:                                                                 p.705
 But can’t full memory barriers impose global ordering? After all, isn’t that needed to
 provide the ordering shown in Listing 12.27?

Answer:
Sort of.
     Note well that this litmus test has not one but two full memory-barrier instructions,
namely the two sync instructions executed by P2 and P3.
     It is the interaction of those two instructions that provides the global ordering, not
just their individual execution. For example, each of those two sync instructions might
stall waiting for all CPUs to process their invalidation queues before allowing subsequent
instructions to execute.20 ❑

 Quick Quiz C.18:                                                                p.707
 Does the guarantee that each CPU sees its own memory accesses in order also
 guarantee that each user-level thread will see its own memory accesses in order? Why
 or why not?

Answer:
No. Consider the case where a thread migrates from one CPU to another, and where
the destination CPU perceives the source CPU’s recent memory operations out of
order. To preserve user-mode sanity, kernel hackers must use memory barriers in the
context-switch path. However, the locking already required to safely do a context switch
should automatically provide the memory barriers needed to cause the user-level task
to see its own accesses in order. That said, if you are designing a super-optimized
scheduler, either in the kernel or at user level, please keep this scenario in mind! ❑

 Quick Quiz C.19:                                                             p.708
 Could this code be fixed by inserting a memory barrier between CPU 1’s “while” and
 assignment to “c”? Why or why not?

Answer:
No. Such a memory barrier would only force ordering local to CPU 1. It would have no
effect on the relative ordering of CPU 0’s and CPU 1’s accesses, so the assertion could
still fail. However, all mainstream computer systems provide one mechanism or another
to provide “transitivity”, which provides intuitive causal ordering: If B saw the effects
of A’s accesses, and C saw the effects of B’s accesses, then C must also see the effects
of A’s accesses. In short, hardware designers have taken at least a little pity on software
developers. ❑

 Quick Quiz C.20:                                                                p.709
 Suppose that lines 3–5 for CPUs 1 and 2 in Listing C.3 are in an interrupt handler,
 and that the CPU 2’s line 9 runs at process level. In other words, the code in all
 three columns of the table runs on the same CPU, but the first two columns run in
 an interrupt handler, and the third column runs at process level, so that the code in
 third column can be interrupted by the code in the first two columns. What changes, if

   20 Real-life hardware of course applies many optimizations to minimize the resulting

stalls.

                                                                                                v2025.12.18a
920                                APPENDIX E. ANSWERS TO QUICK QUIZZES

any, are required to enable the code to work correctly, in other words, to prevent the
assertion from firing?

Answer:
The assertion must ensure that the load of “e” precedes that of “a”. In the Linux kernel,
the barrier() primitive may be used to accomplish this in much the same way that
the memory barrier was used in the assertions in the previous examples. For example,
the assertion can be modified as follows:

  r1 = e;
  barrier();
  assert(r1 == 0 || a == 1);

   No changes are needed to the code in the first two columns, because interrupt
handlers run atomically from the perspective of the interrupted code. ❑

Quick Quiz C.21:                                                        p.709
If CPU 2 executed an assert(e==0||c==1) in the example in Listing C.3, would
this assert ever trigger?

Answer:
The result depends on whether the CPU supports “transitivity”. In other words, CPU 0
stored to “e” after seeing CPU 1’s store to “c”, with a memory barrier between CPU 0’s
load from “c” and store to “e”. If some other CPU sees CPU 0’s store to “e”, is it also
guaranteed to see CPU 1’s store?
    All CPUs I am aware of claim to provide transitivity. ❑

                                                                                            v2025.12.18a
