Chapter 29

IO

                    In those days, many
                    successful projects started
                    out as graffitis on a beer
                    mat in a very, very smoky
                    pub.

                               Peter J. Landin

29.1     IO
You should be proud of yourself for making it this far into the
book. You’re juggling monads. You’ve defeated an army of
monad transformers. You’re comfortable with using algebraic
structures in typeclass form. You’ve got a basic understand-
ing of how Haskell terms evaluate, nonstrictness, and sharing.
With those things in hand, let’s talk about IO.
   We’ve used the IO type at various times throughout the
book, with only cursory explanation. You no doubt know that
we use this type in Haskell as a means of keeping our chocolate
separate from our peanut butter — that is, our pure functions
from our effectful ones. Perhaps you’re wondering how it all
works, what’s underneath that opaque type. To many people,
IO seems mysterious.
   An effectful function is one which has an observable impact
on the environment it is evaluated in, other than computing
and returning a result. Examples of effects includes writing to
standard output (like putStrLn), reading from standard input
(getChar), or modifying state destructively (ST). Implicit to this,
is that this almost always means the code requires it be evalu-
ated in a particular order. Haskell expressions which aren’t in
IO will always return the same result regardless of what order
they are evaluated in; we lose this guarantee and others besides
once IO is introduced.
   Most explanations of the IO type in Haskell don’t help much,

either. They seem designed to confuse the reader rather than
convey anything useful. Don’t look now, but somebody is writ-
ing an explanation of IO right now that uses van Laarhoven
Free Monads and costate comonad coalgebras to explain some-
thing that’s much simpler than either of those topics.
  We’re not going to do that here. We will instead try to
demystify IO a bit. The important thing about IO is that it’s a
special kind of datatype that disallows sharing in some cases.
  In this chapter, we will

  • explain how IO works operationally;

  • explore what it should mean to you when you read a type
    that has IO in it;

  • provide a bit more detail about the IO Functor, Applicative,
    and Monad.

29.2      Where IO explanations go astray
A lot of explanations of IO are misleading or muddled. We’ve
already alluded to the overwrought and complex explanations
of IO. Others call it “the IO Monad” and seem to equate IO with
Monad. While IO is a type that has a Monad instance, it is not only
a Monad and monads are not only IO. Other presentations imply
that once you enter IO, you destroy purity and referential
transparency. And some references don’t bother to say much

about IO because the fact that it remains opaque won’t stop
you from doing most of what you want to use it for anyway.
   We want to offer some guidance in critically evaluating
explanations of IO. Let us consider one of the most popular
explanations of IO, the one that attempts to explain IO in terms
of State.

Burn the State to the ground!
The temptation to use State to get someone comfortable with
the idea of IO is strong. Give the following passage early in the
documentation to GHC.IO a gander:

     The IO Monad is just an instance of the ST monad,
    where the state is the real world.

   The motivation for these explanations is easy to understand
when you look at the underlying types:

-- from ghc-prim
import GHC.Prim
import GHC.Types

newtype State s a
  = State {runState :: s -> (a, s)}

-- :info IO
newtype IO a =
  IO (State# RealWorld
         -> (# State# RealWorld, a #))

    Yep, it sure looks like State! However, this is less meaningful
or helpful than you’d think at first.
    The issue with this explanation is that you don’t usefully
see or interact with the underlying State#1 in IO. It’s not State
in the sense that one uses State, StateT, or even ST, although
the behavior of the 𝑠 here is certainly very like that of ST.
    The State here is a signalling mechanism for telling GHC
what order your IO actions are in and what a unique IO action
is. If we look through the GHC.Prim documentation, we see:

        State# is the primitive, unlifted type of states. It has
        one type parameter, thus State# RealWorld, or State#
    1
       The # indicates a primitive type. These are types that cannot be defined in Haskell
itself and are exported by the GHC.Prim module.

    𝑠, where 𝑠 is a type variable. The only purpose of
    the type parameter is to keep different state threads
    separate. It is represented by nothing at all.
    RealWorld is deeply magical. It is primitive, but it
    is not unlifted (hence ptrArg). We never manipulate
    values of type RealWorld; it’s only used in the type
    system, to parameterise State#.

  When they say that RealWorld is “represented by nothing at
all,” they mean it literally uses zero bits of memory. The state
tokens underlying the IO type are erased during compile time
and add no overhead to your runtime. So the problem with
explaining IO in terms of State is not precisely that it’s wrong;
it’s that it’s not a State you can meaningfully interact with or
control in the way you’d expect from the other State types.

29.3     The reason we need this type
So, let’s try to move from there to an understanding of IO that
is meaningful to us in our day-to-day Haskelling. IO primarily
exists to give us a way to order operations and to disable some
of the sharing that we talked so much about in the chapter on
nonstrictness.
  GHC is ordinarily free to do a lot of reordering of opera-
tions, delaying of evaluation, sharing of named values, dupli-
cating code via inlining, and other optimizations in order to

increase performance. The main thing the IO type does is turn
off most of those abilities.

What?
No, really. That’s a lot of it.

Order and chaos
As we’ve seen in the previous chapters, GHC can normally
reorder operations. This is disabled in IO (as in ST). IO actions
are instead enclosed within nested lambdas — nesting is the
only way to ensure that actions are sequenced within a pure
lambda calculus.
   Nesting lambdas is how we guarantee that this

main = do
  putStr    "1"
  putStr    "2"
  putStrLn "3"

   will output “123” and we want that guarantee. The underly-
ing representation of IO allows the actions to be nested, and
therefore sequenced.
   When we enter a lambda expression, any effects that need to
be performed will be performed first, before any computations
are evaluated. Then if there is a computation to evaluate, that

may be evaluated next, before we enter the next lambda to
perform the next effect and so on. We’ve seen how this plays
out in previous chapters; think of the parsers that perform the
effect of moving a “cursor” through the text without reducing
to any value; also recall what we saw with ST and mutable
vectors.
   In fact, the reason we have Monad is because it was a means
of abstracting away the nested lambda noise that underlies IO.

29.4       Sharing
In addition to enforcing ordering, IO turns off a lot of the shar-
ing we talked about in the nonstrictness chapter. As we’ll soon
see, it doesn’t disable all forms of sharing — it couldn’t, because
all Haskell programs have a main action with an obligatory IO
type. But we’ll get to that in a moment.
   For now, let’s turn our attention to what sharing is disabled
and why. Usually in Haskell, we’re pretty confident that if a
function is going to be evaluated at all, it will result in a value
of a certain type, bearing in mind that this could be a Nothing
value or an empty list. When we declare the type, we say, “if
this is evaluated at all, we will have a value of this type as a
result.”
   But with the IO type, you’re not guaranteed anything. Values
of type IO a are not an 𝑎; they’re a description of how you might
get an 𝑎. Something of type IO String is not a computation

that, if evaluated, will result in a String; it’s a description of
how you might get that String from the “real world,” possibly
performing effects along the way. Describing IO actions does
not perform them, just as having a recipe for a cake does not
give you a cake.2
   In this environment, where you do not have a value but
only a means of getting a value, it wouldn’t make sense to say
that value could be shared.

The time has come
So, one of the key features of IO is that it turns off sharing.
Let’s use an example to think of why we want this. We have
this library function that gets the current UTC time from the
system clock:

-- from Data.Time.Clock
getCurrentTime :: IO UTCTime

   Without IO preventing sharing, how would this work? When
you fetched the time once, it would share that result, and the
time would be whatever time it was the first time you forced it.
Unfortunately, this is not a means of stopping time; we would
continue to age, but your program wouldn’t work at all the
way you’d intended.
   2
     See Brent Yorgey’s explanation of IO for the cis194 class at UPenn http://www.cis.
upenn.edu/~cis194/spring13/lectures/08-IO.html

     But if that’s so, and it’s clearly a value with a name that
could be shared, why isn’t it?

getCurrentTime :: IO UTCTime
--                  ^-- that right there

     Remember: what we have here is a description of how we
can get the current time when we need it. We do not have the
current time yet, so it isn’t a value that can be shared, and we
don’t want it to be shared anyway, because we want it to get a
new time each time we run it.
     And the way we run it is by defining main in that module
for the runtime system to find and execute. Everything inside
main is within IO so that everything is nested and sequenced
and happens in the order you’re expecting.

Another example
Let’s look at another example of IO turning off sharing. You
remember the whnf and nf functions from criterion that we
used in the last chapter. You may recall that we want to turn
off sharing for those so that they get evaluated over and over
again; if the result was shared, our benchmarking would only
tell us how long it takes to evaluate it once instead of giving us
an average of evaluating it many times. The way we disabled
sharing for those functions is by applying them to arguments.

  But the IO variants of those functions do not require this
function application in order to disable sharing, because the
IO parameter itself disables sharing. Contrast the following
types:

whnf :: (a -> b) -> a -> Benchmarkable
nf :: NFData b
  => (a -> b) -> a -> Benchmarkable

whnfIO :: IO a -> Benchmarkable
nfIO :: NFData a => IO a -> Benchmarkable

  The IO variants don’t need a function argument to apply
because sharing is already prevented by being an IO action —
it can be executed over and over without resorting to adding
an argument.
  As we said earlier, IO doesn’t turn off all sharing everywhere;
it couldn’t, or else sharing would be meaningless because main
is always in IO. But it’s important to understand when sharing
will be disabled and why, because if you’ve got this notion of
sharing running around in the back of your head you’ll have
the wrong intuitions for how Haskell code works. Which then
leads to…

The code! It doesn’t work!
We’re going to use an example here that takes advantage of
the MVar type. This is based on a real code event that was how
Chris finally learned what IO means and the example he first
used to explain it to Julie.
   The MVar type is a means of synchronizing shared data in
Haskell. To give a very cursory overview, the MVar can hold
one value at a time. You put a value into it; it holds onto it
until you take that value out. Then and only then can you
put another cat in the box.3 We cannot hope to best Simon
Marlow’s work4 on this front, so if you want more information
about it, we strongly recommend you peruse Marlow’s book.
   OK, so we’ll set up some toy code here with the idea that
we want to put a value into an MVar and then take it back out:
   3
       What you need is a cat gif.         https://twitter.com/argumatronic/status/
631158432859488258
    4
      Parallel & Concurrent Programming in Haskell http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/
books/1230000000929

module WhatHappens where

import Control.Concurrent

myData :: IO (MVar Int)
myData = newEmptyMVar

main :: IO ()
main = do
  mv <- myData
  putMVar mv 0
  mv' <- myData
  zero <- takeMVar mv'
  print zero

This will spew an error about being stuck or in a deadlock.
The problem here is that the type IO MVar a of newEmptyMVar is
a recipe for producing as many empty MVars as you need or
want; it is not a reference to a single, shared MVar. In other
words, the two references to myData here are not referring to
the same MVar.
  Taking from an empty MVar blocks until something is put
into the MVar. Consider the following ordering:

take
put

take
put

  That will terminate successfully. An attempt to take a value
from the MVar blocked, then a value was put in it, then another
blocked take occurred, then there was another put to satisfy
the second take. This is fine.
  The following is an example of something that will dead-
lock:

put
take
take

  Whatever part of your program performed the second take
will now be blocked until a second put occurs. If your program
is designed such that no put ever occurs again, it’s deadlocked.
A deadlock error looks like the following:

Prelude> main
*** Exception:
  thread blocked indefinitely
  in an MVar operation

  When you see a type like:

IO String

     You don’t have a String; you have a means of (possibly)
obtaining a String, with some effects possibly performed along
the way. Similarly, what happened earlier is that we had two
MVars with two different lifetimes and that looked something
like this:

mv      mv'
put     take (the final one)

     The point here is that this type

IO (MVar a)

     tells you that you have a recipe for producing as many
empty MVars as you want, not a reference to a single shared
MVar.
     You can share the MVar, but it has to be done explicitly rather
than implicitly. Failing to explicitly share the MVar reference
after binding it once will simply spew out new, empty MVars.
Again, we recommend Simon Marlow’s book when you’re
ready to explore MVars in more detail.

29.5          IO doesn’t disable sharing for
              everything
As we mentioned earlier, IO doesn’t disable sharing for every-
thing, and it wouldn’t make sense if it did. It only disables

sharing for the terminal value it reduces to. Values that are
not dependent on IO for their evaluation can still be shared,
even within a larger IO action such as main.
  In the following example, we’ll use Debug.Trace again to show
us when things are being shared. For blah, the trace is outside
the IO action, so we’ll use outer trace:

import Debug.Trace

blah :: IO String
blah = return "blah"

blah' = trace "outer trace" blah

  And for woot, we’ll use inner trace inside the IO action:

woot :: IO String
woot = return (trace "inner trace" "woot")

  Then we throw both of them into a larger IO action, main:

main :: IO ()
main = do
  b <- blah'
  putStrLn b
  putStrLn b
  w <- woot
  putStrLn w
  putStrLn w

Prelude> main
outer trace
blah
blah
inner trace
woot
woot

  We only saw inner and outer emitted once because IO is not
intended to disable sharing for values not in IO that happen to
be used in the course of running of an IO action.

29.6        Purity is losing meaning
It’s common at this time to use the words “purely functional”
or to talk about purity when one means without effects. This is
inaccurate and not very useful as a definition, but we’re going

to provide some context here and an alternative understand-
ing.

Semantically, pedantically accurate
Purity and “pure functional” have undergone a few changes in
connotation and denotation since the 1950s. What was origi-
nally meant when describing a pure functional programming
language is that the semantics of the language would only be
lambda calculus. For quite a long time, impure functional lan-
guages were more typical. They admitted the augmentation of
lambda calculus, usually so that the means to describe imper-
ative, effectful programs was embedded within the semantics.
The strength of Haskell is that by sticking to lambda calculus,
we not only have a much simpler core language for describing
our language, but we retain referential transparency in the
language. We use nested lambdas (hidden behind a Monad ab-
straction) to order and encapsulate effects while maintaining
referential transparency.

Referential transparency
Referential transparency is something you are probably fa-
miliar with, even if you’ve never called it that before. Put
casually, it means that any function, when given the same in-
puts, returns the same result. More precisely, an expression

is referentially transparent when it can be replaced with its
value without changing the behavior of a program.
  One source of the confusion between purity as referential
transparency and purity as pure lambda calculus could be that
in a pure lambda calculus, referential transparency is assured.
Thus, a pure lambda calculus is necessarily pure in the other
sense as well.
  The mistake people make with IO is that they conflate the
effects with the semantics of the program. A function that
returns IO a is still referentially transparent, because given the
same arguments, it’ll generate the same IO action every time!
To make this point:

module IORefTrans where

import Control.Monad (replicateM)
import System.Random (randomRIO)

gimmeShelter :: Bool -> IO [Int]
gimmeShelter True =
  replicateM 10 (randomRIO (0, 10))
gimmeShelter False = pure [0]

  The trick here is to realize that while executing IO [Int] can
and does produce different literal values when the argument
is True, it’s still producing the same result (i.e., a list of ran-

dom numbers) for the same input. Referential transparency is
preserved because we’re still returning the same IO action, or
“recipe,” for the same argument, the same means of obtaining
a list of Int. Every True input to this function will return a list
of random Ints:

Prelude> gimmeShelter True
[1,8,7,9,10,4,2,9,3,6]
Prelude> gimmeShelter True
[10,0,7,1,10,2,4,0,9,3]
Prelude> gimmeShelter False
[0]

   The sense we’re trying to convey here is that as far as Haskell
is concerned, it’s a language for evaluating expressions and
constructing IO actions that get executed by main at some point
later.

29.7     IO’s Functor, Applicative, and
         Monad
Another mistake people make is in implying that IO is a Monad,
rather than accounting for the fact that, like all Monads, IO is
a datatype that has a Monad instance — as well as Functor and
Applicative instances:

  fmap: construct an action which performs the same effects
but transforms the 𝑎 into a 𝑏:

fmap :: (a -> b) -> IO a -> IO b

  (<*>): construct an action that performs the effects of both
the function and value arguments, applying the function to
the value:

(<*>) :: IO (a -> b) -> IO a -> IO b

  join: merge the effects of a nested IO action:

join :: IO (IO a) -> IO a

The IO Functor
What does fmap mean with respect to IO? As always, we want
an example:

fmap (+1) (randomIO :: IO Int)

  If we’re going to get that Int value, we will have to perform
some effects. What fmap does here is lift our incrementing
function over the effects that we might perform to obtain the
Int value. It doesn’t affect the effects, because the effects here
are part of that IO structure. Using fmap here returns a recipe for
obtaining an Int that also increments the result of the original
action that was lifted over.

   The key here is that we didn’t perform any effects. We pro-
duced a new IO action in terms of the old one by transforming
the final result of the IO action.

Applicative and IO
IO also has an Applicative instance, as we mentioned in the
Applicative chapter. You might remember an example like
this:

Prelude> (++) <$> getLine <*> getLine
hello
julie
"hellojulie"

   There we fmapped the concatenation operator over two
(potential) IO Strings to produce the final result. Let’s look at
another, more interesting example:

    (+)
<$> (randomIO :: IO Int)
<*> (randomIO :: IO Int)

   After the initial fmap, we have a means of obtaining a func-
tion which is monoidally lifted over a means of obtaining an
Int. What this means is that you’ll get a single new means
of obtaining the result of having applied the function which
performs the effects of both.

Monad and IO
For IO, pure or return can be read as an effect-free embedding
of a value in a recipe-creating environment. Let’s consider the
following examples.
    First, GHCi does basically two things: it can print values
not in IO, such as these:

Prelude> "I'll pile on the candy"
"I'll pile on the candy"
Prelude> 1
1

    It can also run IO actions and print their results, if any. When
you have values of type IO (IO a), what you have is a recipe
for making a recipe that produces an 𝑎. Consider why the
following example using print does not print anything:

Prelude> :{
*Main| let embedInIO =
*Main|        return :: a -> IO a
*Main| :}
Prelude> embedInIO 1
1
Prelude> :{
*Main| let s =
*Main|        "I'll put in some ingredients"

*Main| :}
Prelude> embedInIO (print s)

    In order to merge those effects and get a single IO a which
will print a result in GHCi, we need join:

Prelude> let s = "It's a piece of cake"
Prelude> join $ embedInIO (print s)
"It's a piece of cake"
Prelude> embedInIO (embedInIO 1)
Prelude> join $ embedInIO (embedInIO 1)
1

    What sets the IO Monad apart from the Applicative is that the
effects performed by the outer IO action can influence what
recipe you get in the inner part. The nesting also lets us express
order dependence, a useful trick for lambda calculi noted by
Peter J. Landin5 .
    An example for effect:
    5
        A correspondence between ALGOL 60 and Church’s Lambda-notations; P.J. Landin

module NestedIO where

import Data.Time.Calendar
import Data.Time.Clock
import System.Random

huehue :: IO (Either (IO Int) (IO ()))
huehue = do
  t <- getCurrentTime
  let (_, _, dayOfMonth) =
            toGregorian (utctDay t)
  case even dayOfMonth of
      True ->
         return $ Left randomIO
      False ->
         return $
         Right (putStrLn "no soup for you")

  The IO action we return here is contingent on having per-
formed effects and observed whether the day of the month
was an even number6 or an odd one. Note this is inexpressible
with Applicative. If you’d like a way to run it and see what
happens, try the following:

Prelude> blah <- huehue
  6
      Why? Monad chapter’s long passed, we need something to be spooky.

Prelude> either (>>= print) id blah
-7077132465932290066

   It was the 28th of January when we wrote this. Your mileage
may vary.

Monadic associativity
Haskellers will often get confused when they are told Monad’s
bind is associative because they’ll think of IO as a counterex-
ample. The mistake being made here is mistaking the con-
struction of IO actions for the execution of IO actions. As far
as Haskell is concerned, we only construct IO actions to be
executed when we call main. Semantically, IO actions aren’t
something we do, but something we talk about. Binding over
an IO action doesn’t execute it, it produces a new IO action in
terms of the old one.
   You can reconcile yourself with this framing by remem-
bering how IO actions are like recipes, an analogy created by
Brent Yorgey that we’re fond of.

29.8     Well, then, how do we MVar?
Earlier in the chapter, we showed you an example of when
IO prevents sharing, using the MVar type. Our previous code
would block because the following:

myData :: IO (MVar Int)
myData = newEmptyMVar

  is an IO action that produces an empty MVar; it isn’t a stable
reference to a single given MVar. We have a couple ways of
fixing this. One is by passing the single stable reference as an
argument. The following will terminate successfully:

module WhatHappens where

import Control.Concurrent

main :: IO ()
main = do
  mv <- newEmptyMVar
  putMVar mv (0 :: Int)
  zero <- takeMVar mv
  print zero

  There is a somewhat more evil and unnecessary way of
doing it. We’ll use this opportunity to examine an unsafe
means of enabling sharing for an IO action: unsafePerformIO!
Consider that the following will also terminate:

module WhatHappens where

import Control.Concurrent
import System.IO.Unsafe

myData :: MVar Int
myData = unsafePerformIO newEmptyMVar

main :: IO ()
main = do
  putMVar myData 0
  zero <- takeMVar myData
  print zero

  The type of unsafePerformIO is IO a -> a, which is seemingly
impossible and not a good idea in general. In real code, you
should pass references to MVars as an argument or via ReaderT,
but the combination of MVar and unsafePerformIO gives us an
opportunity to see in very stark terms what it means to use
unsafePerformIO in our code. The new empty MVar can now be
shared implicitly, as often as you want, instead of creating a
new one each time.
  Do not use unsafePerformIO when unnecessary or where it
could break referential transparency in your code! If you
aren’t sure — don’t use it! There are other unsafe IO functions,

too, but there is rarely a need for any of them, and in general
you should prefer explicit rather than implicit.

29.9     Chapter Exercises
File I/O with Vigenère
Reusing the Vigenère cipher you wrote back in algebraic datatypes
and wrote tests for in testing, make an executable that takes
a key and a mode argument. If the mode is -d the executable
decrypts the input from standard in and writes the decrypted
text to standard out. If the mode is -e the executable blocks
on input from standard input (stdin) and writes the encrypted
output to stdout.
  Consider this an opportunity to learn more about how file
handles and the following members of the base library work:

System.Environment.getArgs :: IO [String]
System.IO.hPutStr
  :: Handle -> String -> IO ()
System.IO.hGetChar :: Handle -> IO Char
System.IO.stdout :: Handle
System.IO.stdin :: Handle

  Whatever OS you’re on, you’ll need to learn how to feed
files as input to your utility and how to redirect standard out
to a file. Part of the exercise is figuring this out for yourself.

You’ll want to use hGetChar more than once to accept a string
which is encrypted or decrypted.

Add timeouts to your utility

Use hWaitForInput to make your utility timeout if no input is
provided within a span of time of your choosing. You can
make it an optional command-line argument. Exit with a
nonzero error code and an error message printed to standard
error (stderr) instead of stdout.

System.IO.hWaitForInput
  :: Handle -> Int -> IO Bool
System.IO.stderr :: Handle

Config directories
Reusing the INI parser from the Parsing chapter, parse a direc-
tory of INI config files into a Map whose key is the filename and
whose value is the result of parsing the INI file. Only parse
files in the directory that have the file extension .ini.

29.10      Follow-up resources
  1. Referential Transparency; Haskell Wiki
    https://wiki.haskell.org/Referential_transparency

 2. IO Inside; Haskell Wiki
   https://wiki.haskell.org/IO_inside

 3. Unraveling the mystery of the IO Monad; Edward Z. Yang

 4. Primitive Haskell; Michael Snoyman
   https://github.com/commercialhaskell/haskelldocumentation/
   blob/master/content/primitive-haskell.md

 5. Evaluation order and state tokens; Michael Snoyman
   https://wiki.haskell.org/Evaluation_order_and_state_tokens

 6. Haskell GHC Illustrated; Takenobu Tani

 7. Tackling the Awkward Squad; Simon PEYTON JONES
   http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/simonpj/papers/
   marktoberdorf/mark.pdf

 8. Note [IO hack in the demand analyser]; GHC source code

 9. Monadic I/O in Haskell 1.3; Andrew D. Gordon and Kevin
   Hammond

10. Notions of computation and monads; Eugenio Moggi
   http://www.disi.unige.it/person/MoggiE/ftp/ic91.pdf

 11. The Next 700 Programming Languages; P. J. Landin

12. Haskell Report 1.2
