
grammar and an input sentence. The first phase of the algorithm constructs a table tel-
ling us which non-terminal(s) derive which substrings of the sentence. This is the
recognition phase. It ultimately also tells us whether the input sentence can be derived
from the grammar. The second phase uses this table and the grammar to construct all
possible derivations of the sentence.
     We will first concentrate on the recognition phase, which really is the distinctive
feature of the algorithm.

4.2.1 CYK recognition with general CF grammars
To see how the CYK algorithm solves the recognition and parsing problem, let us con-
sider the grammar of Figure 4.4. This grammar describes the syntax of numbers in
scientific notation. An example sentence produced by this grammar is 32.5e+1. We
will now use this grammar and sentence as an example.

         NumberS             ->   Integer | Real
         Integer             ->   Digit | Integer Digit
            Real             ->   Integer Fraction Scale
        Fraction             ->   . Integer
           Scale             ->   e Sign Integer | Empty
           Digit             ->   0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
           Empty             ->   ε
            Sign             ->   + | -

Figure 4.4 A grammar describing numbers in scientific notation

     The CYK algorithm first concentrates on substrings of the input sentence, shortest
substrings first, and then works its way up. The following derivations of substrings of
length 1 can be read directly from the grammar:

        Digit          Digit                Digit                Sign      Digit
            3            2          .         5         e          +             1

This means that Digit derives 3, Digit derives 2, etc. Note however, that this pic-
ture is not yet complete. For one thing, there are several other non-terminals deriving
3. This complication arises because the grammar contains so-called unit rules, rules of
the form A→B, where A and B are non-terminals. Such rules are also called single
rules or chain rules. We can have chains of them in a derivation. So, the next step
consists of applying the unit rules, repetitively, for instance to find out which other
non-terminals derive 3. This gives us the following result:

       Number,        Number,              Number,                         Number,
      Integer,       Integer,             Integer,               Sign     Integer,
        Digit          Digit                Digit                           Digit
            3            2          .         5         e          +             1

Now, we already see some combinations that we recognize from the grammar: For
instance, an Integer followed by a Digit is again an Integer, and a . (dot) fol-
lowed by an Integer is a Fraction. We get (again also using unit rules):

        Number, Integer              Fraction                      Scale
       Number,    Number,                  Number,                          Number,
      Integer,   Integer,                 Integer,                 Sign    Integer,
        Digit      Digit                    Digit                            Digit
          3          2           .              5              e    +         1

At this point, we see that the Real-rule is applicable in several ways, and then the
Number-rule, so we get:

                                         Number, Real

                                                Number, Real

        Number, Integer              Fraction                      Scale
       Number,    Number,                  Number,                          Number,
      Integer,   Integer,                 Integer,                 Sign    Integer,
        Digit      Digit                    Digit                            Digit
          3          2           .              5              e    +         1

We find that Number does indeed derive 32.5e+1.
     In the example above, we have seen that unit rules complicate things a bit.
Another complication, one that we have avoided until now, is formed by ε-rules. For
instance, if we want to recognize the input 43.1 according to the example grammar,
we have to realize that Scale derives ε here, so we get the following picture:

                                         Number, Real

                                                Number, Real

                   Number, Integer                  Fraction       Scale
                  Number,      Number,                   Number
                 Integer,     Integer,                   Integer
                   Digit        Digit                     Digit
                     4           3              .              1

In general this is even more complicated. We must take into account the fact that
several non-terminals can derive ε between any two adjacent terminal symbols in the
input sentence, and also in front of the input sentence or at the back. However, as we
shall see, the problems caused by these kinds of rules can be solved, albeit at a certain
cost.
      In the meantime, we will not let these problems discourage us. In the example,

we have seen that the CYK algorithm works by determining which non-terminals
derive which substrings, shortest substrings first. Although we skipped them in the
example, the shortest substrings of any input sentence are, of course, the ε-substrings.
We shall have to be able to recognize them in arbitrary position, so let us first see if we
can compute R ε , the set of non-terminals that derive ε.
      Initially, this set R ε consists of the set of non-terminals A for which A→ε is a
grammar rule. For the example grammar, R ε is initially the set { Empty }. Next, we
check each grammar rule: If a right-hand side consists only of symbols that are a
member of R ε , we add the left-hand side to R ε (it derives ε, because all symbols in the
right-hand side do). In the example, Scale would be added. This process is repeated
until no new non-terminals can be added to the set. For the example, this results in

        R ε = { Empty, Scale }.

Now, we direct our attention to the non-empty substrings of the input sentence. Sup-
pose we have an input sentence z = z 1 z 2 . . . zn and we want to compute the set of
non-terminals that derive the substring of z starting at position i, of length l. We will
use the notation si,l for this substring, so,
             si,l = zi zi +1 . . . zi +l −1.
Figure 4.5 presents this notation graphically, using a sentence of 4 symbols.

                                                         s 1,4
                                                                 s 2,3
                                                 s 1,3
                                                                         s 3,2
                                                         s 2,2
                                         s 1,2
                                 s 1,1           s 2,1           s 3,1           s 4,1

                                  z1              z2              z3              z4

Figure 4.5 A graphical presentation of substrings

We will use the notation Rsi,l for the set of non-terminals deriving the substring si,l .
This notation can be extended to deal with substrings of length 0: si, 0 = ε, and
Rsi, 0 = R ε .
       Because shorter substrings are dealt with first, we can assume that we are at a
stage in the algorithm where all information on substrings with length smaller than a
certain l is available. Using this information, we check each right-hand side in the
grammar, to see if it derives si,l , as follows: suppose we have a right-hand side
A 1 . . . Am . Then we divide si,l into m (possibly empty) segments, such that A 1 derives
the first segment, A 2 the second, etc. We start with A 1 . If A 1 . . . Am is to derive si,l ,
A 1 has to derive a first part of it, say of length k. That is, A 1 must derive si,k (be a
member of Rsi,k ), and A 2 . . . Am must derive the rest:

                                   A1       A2       ...       Am

                zi       ...     zi +k −1   zi +k   zi +k +1   ...    zi +l −1

This is attempted for every k for which A 1 is a member of Rsi,k , including 0. Naturally,
if A 1 is a terminal, then A 1 must be equal to zi , and k is 1. Checking if A 2 . . . Am
derives zi +k . . . zi +l −1 is done in the same way. Unlike Unger’s method, we do not
have to try all partitions, because we already know which non-terminals derive which
substrings.
      Nevertheless, there are several problems with all this: in the first place, m could
be 1 and A 1 a non-terminal, so we are dealing with a unit rule. In this case, A 1 must
derive the whole substring si,l , and thus be a member of Rsi,l , which is the set that we
are computing now, so we do not know yet if this is the case. This problem can be
solved by observing that if A 1 is to derive si,l , somewhere along the derivation there
must be a first step not using a unit rule. So we have:
              A1 → B → . . . → C →      * si,l

where C is the first non-terminal using a non-unit rule in the derivation. Disregarding
ε-rules (the second problem) for a moment, this means that at a certain stage, C will be
added to the set Rsi,l . Now, if we repeat the process again and again, at some point, B
will be added, and during the next repetition, A 1 will be added. So, we have to repeat
the process until no new non-terminals are added to Rsi,l . The second problem is
caused by the ε-rules. If all but one of the At derive ε, we have a problem that is basi-
cally equivalent to the problem of unit rules. It can be solved in the same way.
      In the end, when we have computed all the Rsi,l , the recognition problem is solved:
the start symbol S derives z (= s 1,n ) if and only if S is a member of Rs 1,n .
      This is a complicated process, but part of this complexity stems from the ε-rules
and the unit rules. Their presence forces us to do the Rsi,l computation repetitively.
Another, less serious source of the complexity is that a right-hand side may consist of
arbitrary many non-terminals, so trying all possibilities can be a lot of work. So, impos-
ing certain restrictions on the rules may simplify this process a great deal. However,
these restrictions should not limit the generative power of the grammar significantly.

4.2.2 CYK recognition with a grammar in Chomsky Normal Form
Two of the restrictions that we want to impose on the grammar are obvious by now: no
unit rules and no ε-rules. We would also like to limit the maximum length of a right-
hand side to 2; this would simplify checking that a right-hand side derives a certain
substring. It turns out that there is a form for CF grammars that exactly fits these res-
trictions: the Chomsky Normal Form. It is as if this normal form was invented for this
algorithm. A grammar is in Chomsky Normal Form (CNF), when all rules either have
the form A→a, or A→BC, where a is a terminal and A, B, and C are non-terminals.
Fortunately, as we shall see later, almost all CF grammars can be mechanically
transformed into a CNF grammar.
      We will first discuss how the CYK-algorithm works for a grammar in CNF.

There are no ε-rules in a CNF grammar, so R ε is empty. The sets Rsi, 1 can be read
directly from the rules: they are determined by the rules of the form A→a. A rule
A→BC can never derive a single terminal, because there are no ε-rules.
     Next, we proceed iteratively as before, first processing all substrings of length 2,
then all substrings of length 3, etc. When a right-hand side BC is to derive a substring
of length l, B has to derive the first part (which is non-empty), and C the rest (also
non-empty).

                                              B                                        C

                             zi               ...         zi +k −1    zi +k            ...        zi +l −1

      So, B must derive si,k , that is, B must be a member of Rsi,k , and, likewise, C must
derive si +k,l −k , that is, C must be a member of Rsi +k,l −k . Determining if such a k exists is
easy: just try all possibilities; they range from 1 to l −1. All sets Rsi,k and Rsi +k,l −k have
already been computed at this point.
      This process is much less complicated than the one we saw before, with a general
CF grammar, for two reasons: the most important one is that we do not have to repeat
the process again and again until no new non-terminals are added to Rsi,l . Here, the sub-
strings we are dealing with are really substrings. They cannot be equal to the string we
started out with. The second reason is that we only have to find one place where the
substring must be split in two, because the right-hand side only consists of two non-
terminals. In ambiguous grammars, there can be several different splittings, but at this
point, that does not worry us. Ambiguity is a parsing issue, not a recognition issue.
      The algorithm results in a complete collection of sets Rsi,l . The sentence z con-
sists of only n symbols, so a substring starting at position i can never have more than
n +1−i symbols. This means that there are no substrings si,l with i +l>n +1. Therefore,
the Rsi,l sets can be organized in a triangular table, as depicted in Figure 4.6.

                  Rs 1,n
                 Rs 1,n −1        Rs 2,n −1
                    ..               ..             ..
                    ..               ..             ..        ..
                  Rs 1,l             ..           Rsi,l       ..      ..
                    ..               ..             ..        ..      ..          ..
                                               V                     W
                    ..               ..             ..        ..      ..          ..         ..
                  Rs 1,1             ..         Rsi, 1        ..      ..      Rsi +l −1,1    ..          Rsn, 1

Figure 4.6 Form of the recognition table

This table is called the recognition table, or the well-formed substring table. Rsi,l is
computed following the arrows V and W simultaneously, looking for rules A→BC with

B a member of a set on the V arrow, and C a member of the corresponding set on the W
arrow. For B, substrings are taken starting at position i, with increasing length k. So the
V arrow is vertical and rising, visiting Rsi, 1 , Rsi, 2 , . . . , Rsi,k , . . . , Rsi,l −1 ; for C, sub-
strings are taken starting at position i +k, with length l −k, with end-position i +l −1, so
the W arrow is diagonally descending, visiting Rsi +1,l −1 , Rsi +2,l −2 , . . . , Rsi +k,l −k , . . . ,
Rsi +l −1,1 .
        As described above, the recognition table is computed in the order depicted in
Figure 4.7(a). We could also compute the recognition table in the order depicted in Fig-
ure 4.7(b). In this last order, Rsi,l is computed as soon as all sets and input symbols
needed for its computation are available. For instance, when computing Rs 3,3 , Rs 5,1 is
relevant, but Rs 6,1 is not, because the substring at position 3 with length 3 does not con-
tain the substring at position 6 with length 1. This order makes the algorithm particu-
larly suitable for on-line parsing, where the number of symbols in the input is not
known in advance, and additional information is computed each time a symbol is
entered.

                     (a) off-line order                           (b) on-line order

Figure 4.7 Different orders in which the recognition table can be computed

     Now, let us examine the cost of this algorithm. Figure 4.6 shows that there are
(n*(n +1))/2 substrings to be examined. For each substring, at most n −1 different k-
positions have to be examined. All other operations are independent of n, so the algo-
rithm operates in a time at most proportional to the cube of the length of the input sen-
tence. As such, it is far more efficient than exhaustive search, which needs a time that
is exponential in the length of the input sentence.

4.2.3 Transforming a CF grammar into Chomsky Normal Form
The previous section has demonstrated that it is certainly worth while to try to
transform a general CF grammar into CNF. In this section, we will discuss this
transformation, using our number grammar as an example. The transformation is split
up into several stages:
      first, ε-rules are eliminated.
      then, unit rules are eliminated.
      then, non-productive non-terminals are removed.
      then, non-reachable non-terminals are removed.
      then, finally, the remaining grammar rules are modified, and rules are added, until
      they all have the desired form, that is, either A→a or A→BC.
All these transformations will not change the language defined by the grammar. This is
not proven here. Most books on formal language theory discuss these transformations

more formally and provide proofs, see for example Hopcroft and Ullman [Books 1979].

4.2.3.1 Eliminating ε-rules
Suppose we have a grammar G, with an ε-rule A→ε, and we want to eliminate this
rule. We cannot just remove the rule, as this would change the language defined by the
non-terminal A, and also probably the language defined by the grammar G. So, some-
thing has to be done about the occurrences of A in the right-hand sides of the grammar
rules. Whenever A occurs in a grammar rule B→αAβ, we replace this rule with two
others: B→αA′β, where A′ is a new non-terminal, for which we shall add rules later
(these rules will be the non-empty grammar rules of A), and B→αβ, which handles the
case where A derives ε in a derivation using the B→αAβ rule. Notice that the α and β
in the rules above could also contain A; in this case, each of the new rules must be
replaced in the same way, and this process must be repeated until all occurrences of A
are removed. When we are through, there will be no occurrence of A left in the gram-
mar.
      Every ε-rule must be handled in this way. Of course, during this process new ε-
rules may originate. This is only to be expected: the process makes all ε-derivations
explicit. The newly created ε-rules must be dealt with in exactly the same way. Ulti-
mately, this process will stop, because the number of non-terminals deriving ε is lim-
ited and, in the end, none of these non-terminals occur in any right-hand side.
      The next step in eliminating the ε-rules is the addition of grammar rules for the
new non-terminals. If A is a non-terminal for which an A′ was introduced, we add a
rule A′→α for all non-ε-rules A→α. Since all ε-rules have been made explicit, we can
be sure that if a rule does not derive ε directly, it cannot do so indirectly. A problem
that may arise here is that there may not be a non-ε-rule for A. In this case, A only
derives ε, so we remove all rules using A′.
      All this leaves us with a grammar that still contains ε-rules. However, none of the
non-terminals having an ε-rule occurs in any right-hand side. These occurrences have
just been carefully removed. So, these non-terminals can never play a role in any
derivation from the start symbol S, with one important exception: S itself. In particular,
we now have a rule S→ε if and only if ε is a member of the language defined by the
grammar G. All other non-terminals with ε-rules can be removed safely. Cleaning up
the grammar is left to later transformations.

                                   S    ->     L a M
                                   L    ->     L M
                                   L    ->     ε
                                   M    ->     M M
                                   M    ->     ε

Figure 4.8 An example grammar to test ε-rule elimination schemes

     The grammar of Figure 4.8 is a nasty grammar to test your ε-rule elimination
scheme. Our scheme transforms this grammar into the grammar of Figure 4.9. This
grammar still has ε-rules, but these will be eliminated by the removal of non-
productive and/or non-reachable non-terminals. Cleaning up this mess will leave only
one rule: S→a. Removing the ε-rules in our number grammar results in the grammar
of Figure 4.10. Note that the two rules to produce ε, Empty and Scale, are still

                     S     ->    L’ a M’ | a M’ | L’ a | a
                     L     ->    L’ M’ | L’ | M’ | ε
                     M     ->    M’ M’ | M’ | ε
                    L’     ->    L’ M’ | L’ | M’
                    M’     ->    M’ M’ | M’

Figure 4.9 Result after our ε-rule elimination scheme

      NumberS      ->     Integer | Real
      Integer      ->     Digit | Integer Digit
         Real      ->     Integer Fraction Scale’ | Integer Fraction
     Fraction      ->     . Integer
       Scale’      ->     e Sign Integer
        Scale      ->     e Sign Integer | ε
        Empty      ->     ε
        Digit      ->     0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
         Sign      ->     + | -

Figure 4.10 Our number grammar after elimination of ε-rules

present but are not used any more.

4.2.3.2 Eliminating unit rules
The next trouble-makers to be eliminated are the unit rules, that is, rules of the form
A→B. It is important to realize that, if such a rule A→B is used in a derivation, it must
be followed at some point by the use of a rule B→α. Therefore, if we have a rule
A→B, and the rules for B are
            B → α1 | α2 | . . . | αn ,
we can replace the rule A→B with
            A → α1 | α2 | . . . | αn .
In doing this, we can of course introduce new unit rules. In particular, when repeating
this process, we could at some point again get the rule A→B. In this case, we have an
infinitely ambiguous grammar, because B derives B. Now this may seem to pose a
problem, but we can just leave such a unit rule out; the effect is that we short-cut
derivations like
             A →B → ... →B → ...
Also rules of the form A→A are left out. In fact, a pleasant side-effect of removing ε-
rules and unit rules is that the resulting grammar is not infinitely ambiguous any more.
      Removing the unit rules in our ε-free number grammar results in the grammar of
Figure 4.11.

4.2.3.3 Removing non-productive non-terminals
Non-productive non-terminals are non-terminals that have no terminal derivation.
Every sentential form that can be derived from it will contain non-terminals. These are

     NumberS       ->     0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
     NumberS       ->     Integer Digit
     NumberS       ->     Integer Fraction Scale’ | Integer Fraction
     Integer       ->     0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
     Integer       ->     Integer Digit
        Real       ->     Integer Fraction Scale’ | Integer Fraction
    Fraction       ->     . Integer
      Scale’       ->     e Sign Integer
       Scale       ->     e Sign Integer | ε
       Empty       ->     ε
       Digit       ->     0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
        Sign       ->     + | -

Figure 4.11 Our number grammar after eliminating unit rules

not pleasant things to have in a grammar. Naturally, “proper” grammars do not have
them. Nevertheless, we must be able to determine which non-terminals do have a ter-
minal derivation, if only to check that a grammar is “proper”.
      To find out which non-terminals have a terminal derivation we use a scheme that
hinges on the fact that a non-terminal has a terminal derivation if and only if it has a
right-hand side consisting of symbols that all have a terminal derivation. Of course, ter-
minals have themselves a terminal derivation. The scheme works as follows: First, we
mark the non-terminals that have a right-hand side containing only terminals: they
obviously have a terminal derivation. Next, we mark all non-terminals that have a
right-hand side consisting only of terminals and marked non-terminals: they too have a
terminal derivation. We keep on doing this until there are no more non-terminals to be
marked.
      Now, the non-productive non-terminals are the ones that have not been marked in
the process. We remove all rules that contain a non-marked non-terminal in either the
left-hand side or the right-hand side. This process does not remove all rules of a
marked non-terminal, as there must be at least one rule for it with a right-hand side
consisting only of terminals and marked non-terminals, or it would not have been
marked in the first place. (This may remove all rules, including those for the start-
symbol, in which case the grammar describes the empty language).
      Our number grammar does not contain non-productive non-terminals, so it will
not be changed by this phase.

4.2.3.4 Removing non-reachable non-terminals
A non-terminal is called reachable or accessible if there exists at least one sentential
form, derivable from the start symbol, in which it occurs. So, a non-terminal A is reach-
         * αAβ for some α and β. A non-terminal is non-reachable if it is not reach-
able if S→
able. For non-reachable non-terminals the same holds as for non-productive non-
terminals: they do not occur in “proper” grammars. However, they can be introduced
by some of the transformations that we have seen before, so we must be able to find
them to “clean up” a grammar again.
     We found the non-productive non-terminals by finding the “useful” ones. Like-
wise, we find the non-reachable non-terminals by finding the reachable ones. For this,

we can use the following scheme: First, the start symbol is marked: it is reachable.
Then, any time an as yet unmarked non-terminal is marked, all non-terminals occurring
in any of its right-hand sides are marked. In the end, the unmarked non-terminals are
not reachable and their rules can be removed. They do not occur in any right-hand side
of a reachable non-terminal, for otherwise it would have been marked in the process.
      It is interesting to note that removing non-reachable non-terminals does not intro-
duce non-productive non-terminals. However, first removing non-reachable non-
terminals and then removing non-productive non-terminals may produce a grammar
which contains again non-reachable non-terminals. Finding an example demonstrating
this is left to the reader.
      In our number grammar, the non-terminals Real, Scale, and Empty are non-
reachable, which leaves us with the grammar of Figure 4.12.

      NumberS      ->     0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
      NumberS      ->     Integer Digit
      NumberS      ->     Integer Fraction Scale’ | Integer Fraction
      Integer      ->     0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
      Integer      ->     Integer Digit
     Fraction      ->     . Integer
       Scale’      ->     e Sign Integer
        Digit      ->     0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
         Sign      ->     + | -

Figure 4.12 Our number grammar after removal of non-reachable rules

4.2.3.5 Finally, to Chomsky Normal Form
After all these grammar transformations, we have a grammar without ε-rules or unit
rules, all non-terminal are reachable, and there are no non-productive non-terminals.
So, we are left with two types of rules: rules of the form A→a, which are already in the
proper form, and rules of the form A→X 1 X 2 . . . Xm , with m≥2. For every terminal b
occurring in such a rule we create a new non-terminal Tb with as only rule Tb →b, and
we replace each occurrence of b in a rule A→X 1 X 2 . . . Xm with Tb . Now, the only
rules not yet in CNF are of the form A→X 1 X 2 . . . Xm , with m≥3, and all Xi a non-
terminal. These rules can now just be split up:

                                A    →      X 1 X 2 . . . Xm

is replaced by the following two rules:

                               A      →     A 1 X 3 . . . Xm
                               A1     →     X 1X 2

where A 1 is a new non-terminal. Now, we have replaced the original rule with one that
is one shorter, and one that is in CNF. This splitting can be repeated until all parts are
in CNF. Figure 4.13 represents our number grammar in CNF.

         NumberS       ->     0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
         NumberS       ->     Integer Digit
         NumberS       ->     N1 Scale’ | Integer Fraction
              N1       ->     Integer Fraction
         Integer       ->     0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
         Integer       ->     Integer Digit
        Fraction       ->     T1 Integer
              T1       ->     .
          Scale’       ->     N2 Integer
              N2       ->     T2 Sign
              T2       ->     e
           Digit       ->     0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
            Sign       ->     + | -

Figure 4.13 Our number grammar in CNF

4.2.4 The example revisited
Now, let us see how the CYK algorithm works with our example grammar, which we
have just transformed into CNF. Again, our input sentence is 32.5e+1. The recogni-
tion table is given in Figure 4.14. The bottom row is read directly from the grammar;
for instance, the only non-terminals having a production rule with right-hand side 3 are
Number, Integer, and Digit. Notice that for each symbol a in the sentence there
must be at least one non-terminal A with a production rule A→a, or else the sentence
cannot be derived from the grammar.
      The other rows are computed as described before. Actually, there are two ways to
compute a certain Rsi,l . The first method is to check each right-hand side in the gram-
mar; for instance, to check whether the right-hand side N1 Scale’ derives the sub-
string 2.5e (= s 2,4 ). The recognition table derived so far tells us that
      N1 is not a member of Rs 2,1 or Rs 2,2 ,
      N1 is a member of Rs 2,3 , but Scale’ is not a member of Rs 5,1
so the answer is no. Using this method, we have to check each right-hand side in this
way, adding the left-hand side to Rs 2,4 if we find that the right-hand side derives s 2,4 .
      The second method is to compute possible right-hand sides from the recognition
table computed so far; for instance, Rs 2,4 is the set of non-terminals that have a right-
hand side AB where either
      A is a member of Rs 2,1 and B is a member of Rs 3,3 , or
      A is a member of Rs 2,2 and B is a member of Rs 4,2 , or
      A is a member of Rs 2,3 and B is a member of Rs 5,1 .
This gives as possible combinations for AB: N1 T2 and Number T2. Now we check
all rules in the grammar to see if they have a right-hand side that is a member of this
set. If so, the left-hand side is added to Rs 2,4 .

4.2.5 CYK parsing with Chomsky Normal Form
We now have an algorithm that determines whether a sentence belongs to a language or
not, and it is much faster than exhaustive search. Most of us, however, not only want to
know whether a sentence belongs to a language, but also, if so, how it can be derived

    7   Number

    6     ∅        Number

    5     ∅          ∅           ∅

        Number,
    4                ∅           ∅           ∅
          N1

                  Number,
l   3     ∅                      ∅           ∅         Scale’
                    N1

        Number,
    2 Integer        ∅        Fraction       ∅           N2          ∅

        Number,    Number,                 Number,                             Number,
    1 Integer,    Integer,       T1       Integer,       T2         Sign      Integer,
        Digit       Digit                   Digit                               Digit

          3          2            .          5           e           +            1
          1          2            3          4           5           6            7
                                  i

Figure 4.14 The recognition table for the input sentence 32.5e+1

from the grammar. If it can be derived in more than one way, we probably want to
know all possible derivations. As the recognition table contains the information on all
derivations of substrings of the input sentence that we could possible make, it also con-
tains the information we want. Unfortunately, this table contains too much informa-
tion, so much that it hides what we want to know. The table may contain information
about non-terminals deriving substrings, where these derivations cannot be used in the
derivation of the input sentence from the start symbol S. For instance, in the example
above, Rs 2,3 contains N1, but the fact that N1 derives 2.5 cannot be used in the deriva-
tion of 32.5e+1 from Number.
      The key to the solution of this problem lies in the simple observation that the
derivation must start with the start-symbol S. The first step of the derivation of the
input sentence z, with length n, can be read from the grammar, together with the recog-
nition table. If n =1, there must be a rule S→z; if n ≥2, we have to examine all rules
S→AB, where A derives the first k symbols of z, and B the rest, that is, A is a member
of Rs 1,k and B is a member of Rsk +1,n −k , for some k. There must be at least one such a
rule, or else S would not derive z.
      Now, for each of these combinations AB we have the same problem: how does A
derive s 1,k and B derive sk +1,n −k ? These problems are solved in exactly the same way.
It does not matter which non-terminal is examined first. Consistently taking the left-

most one results in a left-most derivation, consistently taking the right-most one results
in a right-most derivation.
      Notice that we can use an Unger-style parser for this. However, it would not have
to generate all partitions any more, because we already know which partitions will
work.
      Let us try to find a left-most derivation for the example sentence and grammar,
using the recognition table of Figure 4.14. We begin with the start symbol, Number.
Our sentence contains seven symbols, which is certainly more than one, so we have to
use one of the rules with a right-hand side of the form AB. The Integer Digit rule is
not applicable here, because the only instance of Digit that could lead to a derivation
of the sentence is the one in Rs 7,1 , but Integer is not a member of Rs 1,6 . The
Integer Fraction rule is not applicable either, because there is no Fraction
deriving the last part of the sentence. This leaves us with the production rule Number
-> N1 Scale’, which is indeed applicable, because N1 is a member of Rs 1,4 , and
Scale’ is a member of Rs 5,3 , so N1 derives 32.5 and Scale’ derives e+1.
      Next, we have to find out how N1 derives 32.5. There is only one applicable
rule: N1 -> Integer Fraction, and it is indeed applicable, because Integer is a
member of Rs 1,2 , and Fraction is a member of Rs 3,2 , so Integer derives 32, and
Fraction derives .5. In the end, we find the following derivation:

       Number ->
       N1 Scale’ ->
       Integer Fraction Scale’ ->
       Integer Digit Fraction Scale’ ->
       3 Digit Fraction Scale’ ->
       3 2 Fraction Scale’ ->
       3 2 T1 Integer Scale’ ->
       3 2 . Integer Scale’ ->
       3 2 . 5 Scale’ ->
       3 2 . 5 N2 Integer ->
       3 2 . 5 T2 Sign Integer ->
       3 2 . 5 e Sign Integer ->
       3 2 . 5 e + Integer ->
       3 2 . 5 e + 1

Unfortunately, this is not exactly what we want, because this is a derivation that uses
the rules of the grammar of Figure 4.13, not the rules of the grammar of Figure 4.4, the
one that we started with.

4.2.6 Undoing the effect of the CNF transformation
When we examine the grammar of Figure 4.4 and the recognition table of Figure 4.14,
we see that the recognition table contains the information we need on most of the non-
terminals of the original grammar. However, there are a few non-terminals missing in
the recognition table: Scale, Real, and Empty. Scale and Empty were removed
because they became non-reachable, after the elimination of ε-rules. Empty was
removed altogether, because it only derived the empty string, and Scale was replaced
by Scale’, where Scale’ derives exactly the same as Scale, except for the empty

    string. We can use this to add some more information to the recognition table: at every
    occurrence of Scale’, we add Scale.
          The non-terminal Real was removed because it became non-reachable after elim-
    inating the unit rules. Now, the CYK algorithm does not require that all non-terminals
    in the grammar be reachable. We could just as well have left the non-terminal Real in
    the grammar, and have transformed its rules to CNF. The CYK algorithm would then
    have added Real to the recognition table, wherever that would be appropriate. The
    rules for Real that would be added to the grammar of Figure 4.13 are:

                     Real      ->       N1 Scale’ | Integer Fraction

         The resulting recognition table is presented in Figure 4.15. In this figure, we have
    also added an extra row at the bottom of the triangle. This extra row represents the
    non-terminals that derive the empty string. These non-terminals can be considered as
    possibly occurring between any two adjacent symbols in the sentence, and also in front
    of or at the end of the sentence. The set Rsi, 0 represents the non-terminals that can be
    considered as possibly occurring just in front of symbol zi and the set Rsn +1,0 represents
    the ones that can occur at the end of the sentence.

          Number,
      7    Real

                    Number,
      6     ∅
                     Real

      5     ∅          ∅            ∅

          Number,
      4    Real,       ∅            ∅        ∅
            N1
                    Number,
                                                     Scale’,
l     3     ∅        Real,          ∅        ∅
                                                      Scale
                      N1
          Number,
      2 Integer        ∅      Fraction       ∅         N2         ∅

          Number,   Number,                Number,                        Number,
      1 Integer, Integer,        T1       Integer,     T2       Sign     Integer,
          Digit      Digit                  Digit                          Digit
          Scale,    Scale,     Scale,      Scale,    Scale,    Scale,     Scale,     Scale,
      0   Empty     Empty      Empty       Empty     Empty     Empty      Empty      Empty

            3          2            .        5         e          +         1
            1          2            3        4         5          6         7          8
                                    i

Figure 4.15 The recognition table with Scale, Real, and Empty added

    Now, we have a recognition table which contains all the information we need to parse a

sentence with the original grammar. Again, a derivation starts with the start-symbol S.
If A 1 A 2 . . . Am is a right-hand side of S, we want to know if this rule can be applied,
that is, if A 1 A 2 . . . Am derives s 1,n . This is checked, starting with A 1 . There are two
cases:
      A 1 is a terminal symbol. In this case, it must be the first symbol of s 1,n , or this
      rule is not applicable. Then, we must check if A 2 . . . Am derives s 2,n −1 , in the
      same way that we are now checking if A 1 A 2 . . . Am derives s 1,n .
      A 1 is a non-terminal. In this case, it must be a member of a Rs 1,k , for some k, or
      this rule is not applicable. Then, we must check if A 2 . . . Am derives sk +1,n −k , in
      the same way that we are now checking if A 1 A 2 . . . Am derives s 1,n . If we want
      all parsings, we must do this for every k for which A 1 is a member of Rs 1,k .
      Notice that non-terminals deriving the empty string pose no problem at all,
      because they appear as a member of Rsi, 0 for all i.
We have now determined whether the rule is applicable, and if it is, which parts of the
rule derive which substrings. The next step now is to determine how the substrings can
be derived. These tasks are similar to the task we started with, and are solved in the
same way. This process will terminate at some time, provided the grammar does not
contain loops. This is simply an Unger parser that knows in advance which partitions
will lead to a successful parse.
      Let us go back to the grammar of Figure 4.4 and the recognition table of Figure
4.15, and see how this works for our example input sentence. We now know that
Number does derive 32.5e+1, and want to know how. We first ask ourselves: can we
use the Number -> Integer rule? Integer is a member of Rs 1,1 and Rs 1,2 , but there
is nothing behind the Integer in the rule to derive the rest of the sentence, so we can-
not use this rule. Can we use the Number -> Real rule? Yes we can, because Real
is a member of Rs 1,7 , and the length of the sentence is 7. So, we start our derivation
with

        Number -> Real -> ...

Now, we get similar questions for the Real non-terminal: can we use the Real ->
Integer Fraction Scale rule? Well, Integer is a member of Rs 1,1 , but we can-
not find a Fraction in any of the Rs 2,k sets. However, Integer is also a member of
Rs 1,2 , and Fraction is a member of Rs 3,2 . Now, Scale is a member of Rs 5,0 ; this does
not help because it would leave nothing in the rule to derive the rest. Fortunately,
Scale is also a member of Rs 5,3 , and that matches exactly to the end of the string. So,
this rule is indeed applicable, and we continue our derivation:

        Number -> Real -> Integer Fraction Scale -> ...

The sentence is now split up into three parts:
                                                            
                                                           
                                                Number             ?
                                                                      
                                                              
                                               Real      ?             ?
                                    Integer ? Fraction ? Scale ?
                                                                
                                                                          
                                                                
                                    3 2         . 5          e + 1

It is left to the reader to verify that we will find only one derivation, and that this is it:

        Number ->
        Real ->
        Integer Fraction Scale ->
        Integer Digit Fraction Scale ->
        Digit Digit Fraction Scale ->
        3 Digit Fraction Scale ->
        3 2 Fraction Scale ->
        3 2 . Integer Scale ->
        3 2 . Digit Scale ->
        3 2 . 5 Scale ->
        3 2 . 5 e Sign Integer ->
        3 2 . 5 e + Integer ->
        3 2 . 5 e + Digit ->
        3 2 . 5 e + 1

4.2.7 A short retrospective of CYK
We have come a long way. We started with building a recognition table using the ori-
ginal grammar. Then we found that using the original grammar with its unit rules and
ε-rules is somewhat complicated, although it can certainly be done. We proceeded by
transforming the grammar to CNF. CNF does not contain unit rules or ε-rules; our gain
in this respect was that the algorithm for constructing the recognition table became
much simpler. The limitation of the maximum length of a right-hand side to 2 was a
gain in efficiency, and also a little in simplicity. However, Sheil [CF 1976] has demon-
strated that the efficiency only depends on the maximum number of non-terminals
occurring in a right-hand side of the grammar, not on the length of the right-hand sides.
This can easily be understood, once one realizes that the efficiency depends (among
others) on the number of cuts in a substring that are “difficult” to find, when checking
whether a right-hand side derives this substring. This number of “difficult” cuts only
depends on the number of non-terminals in the right-hand side. So, for efficiency, CNF
is a bit too restrictive.
      A disadvantage of this transformation to CNF is that the resulting recognition
table lacks some information that we need to construct a derivation using the original
grammar. In the transformation process, some non-terminals were thrown away,
because they became non-productive. Fortunately, the missing information could
easily be added. Ultimately, this process resulted in almost the same recognition table
that we would get with our first attempt using the original grammar. It only contains
some extra information on non-terminals that were added during the transformation of
the grammar to CNF. More importantly, however, it was obtained in a simpler and
much more efficient way.

4.2.8 Chart parsing
The CYK algorithm is also known under the name of chart parsing. More precisely,
both techniques have a number of variants and some variants of the CYK algorithm are
identical to some variants of chart parsing. The most striking difference between them
lies in the implementation; conceptually both algorithms do the same thing: they collect
possible parsings for larger and larger chunks of the input.
      Although often presented in a different format, a chart is just a recognition table.
Figure 4.16 shows the recognition table of Figure 4.14 in a chart format: each arc
represents a non-terminal deriving the part of the sentence spanned by the arc.

                                               Number

                                                        Number

                          Number
                             N1
                                  Number
                                    N1                                     Scale’
            Number
            Integer                      Fraction                     N2
     Number         Number                     Number                                Number
    Integer        Integer                     Integer                              Integer
     Digit           Digit          T1          Digit            T2         Sign      Digit

       3              2             .               5            e           +        1

Figure 4.16 The recognition table of Figure 4.14 in chart format

    Several variants of chart parsing are discussed and compared in Bolc [NatLang
1987].
5
Regular grammars and finite-state automata

Regular grammars are the simplest form of grammars that still have generative power.
They can describe concatenation (joining two texts together) and repetition and can
specify alternatives, but they cannot express nesting. Regular grammars are probably
the best-understood part of formal linguistics and almost all questions about them can
be answered.

5.1 APPLICATIONS OF REGULAR GRAMMARS
In spite of their simplicity there are many applications of regular grammars, of which
we will briefly mention the most important ones.

5.1.1 CF parsing
In some parsers for CF grammars, a subparser can be discerned that handles a regular
grammar; such a subparser is based implicitly or explicitly on the following surprising
phenomenon. Consider the sentential forms in left-most or right-most derivations.
Such a sentential form consists of a closed (finished) part, which contains terminal
symbols only and an open (unfinished) part which contains non-terminals as well. In
left-most derivations, the open part starts at the left-most non-terminal and extends to
the right, in right-most derivations, the open part starts at the right-most non-terminal
and extends to the left; see Figure 5.1 which uses sentential forms from Section 2.5.2.

                     d , N & N                          N , N & h

Figure 5.1 Open parts in left-most and right-most productions

Now it can be proved (and it is not difficult to show) that these open parts can be
described by a regular grammar (which follows from the CF grammar). Furthermore,
these open parts of the sentential form play an important role in some CF parsing
methods which explains the significance of regular grammars for CF parsing.
Sec. 5.1]                  Applications of regular grammars                              107

5.1.2 Systems with finite memory
Since CF (or stronger) grammars allow nesting and since nesting can, in principle, be
arbitrarily deep, the generation of correct CF (or stronger) sentences may, in principle,
require an arbitrary amount of memory to temporarily hold the unprocessed nesting
information. Mechanical systems do not possess an arbitrary amount of memory and
consequently cannot exhibit CF behaviour and are restricted to regular behaviour. This
is immediately clear for simple mechanical systems like vending machines, traffic
lights and video-recorders: they all behave according to a regular grammar. It is also in
principle true for more complicated mechanical systems, like a country’s train system
or a computer. Here, the argument gets, however, rather vacuous since nesting infor-
mation can be represented very efficiently and a little memory can take care of a lot of
nesting. Consequently, although these systems in principle exhibit regular behaviour, it
is often easier to describe them with CF or stronger means, even though that would
incorrectly ascribe infinite memory to them.
       Conversely, the global behaviour of many systems that do have much memory can
still be described by a regular grammar, and many CF grammars are already for a large
part regular. This is because regular grammars already take adequate care of concatena-
tion, repetition and choice; context-freeness is only required for nesting. If we apply a
rule that produces a regular (sub)language (and which consequently could be replaced
by a regular rule) “quasi-regular”, we can observe the following. If all alternatives of a
rule contain terminals only, that rule is quasi-regular (choice). If all alternatives of a
rule contain only terminals and non-terminals the rules of which are quasi-regular and
non-recursive, then that rule is quasi-regular (concatenation). And if a rule is recursive
but recursion occurs only at the end of an alternative and involves only quasi-regular
rules, then that rule is again quasi-regular (repetition). This often covers large parts of a
CF grammar. See Krzemień and Łukasiewicz [FS 1976] for an algorithm to identify all
quasi-regular rules in a grammar.
       Natural languages are a case in point. Although CF or stronger grammars seem
necessary to delineate the set of correct sentences (and they may very well be, to catch
many subtleties), quite a good rough description can be obtained through regular
languages. Consider the stylized grammar for the main clause in an Subject-Verb-
Object (SVO) language in Figure 5.2.

              MainClause        ->     Subject Verb Object
                 Subject        ->     [ a | the ] Adjective* Noun
                  Object        ->     [ a | the ] Adjective* Noun
                    Verb        ->     verb1 | verb2 | ...
               Adjective        ->     adj1 | adj2 | ...
                    Noun        ->     noun1 | noun2 | ...

Figure 5.2 A not obviously quasi-regular grammar

This grammar is quasi-regular: Verb, Adjective and Noun are regular by themselves,
Subject and Object are concatenations of repetitions of regular forms (regular non-
terminals and choices) and are therefore quasi-regular, and so is MainClause. It takes
some work to bring this grammar into standard regular form, but it can be done, as
shown in Figure 5.3, in which the lists for verbs, adjectives and nouns have been abbre-
viated to verb, adjective and noun, to save space. Even (finite) context-

                  MainClause        ->    a SubjAdjNoun_verb_Object
                  MainClause        ->    the SubjAdjNoun_verb_Object

SubjAdjNoun_verb_Object             ->    noun verb_Object
SubjAdjNoun_verb_Object             ->    adjective SubjAdjNoun_verb_Object

                 verb_Object        ->    verb Object

                        Object      ->    a ObjAdjNoun
                        Object      ->    the ObjAdjNoun

                  ObjAdjNoun        ->    noun
                  ObjAdjNoun        ->    adjective ObjAdjNoun

                        verb        ->    verb1 | verb2 | ...
                   adjective        ->    adj1 | adj2 | ...
                        noun        ->    noun1 | noun2 | ...

Figure 5.3 A regular grammar in standard form for that of Figure 5.2

dependency can be incorporated: for languages that require the verb to agree in number
with the subject, we duplicate the first rule:

        MainClause       ->     SubjectSingular VerbSingular Object
                         |      SubjectPlural VerbPlural Object

and duplicate the rest of the grammar accordingly. The result is still regular. Nested
subordinate clauses may seem a problem, but in practical usage the depth of nesting is
severely limited. In English, a sentence containing a subclause containing a subclause
containing a subclause will baffle the reader, and even in German and Dutch nestings
over say five deep are frowned upon. We replicate the grammar the desired number of
times and remove the possibility of further recursion from the deepest level. Then the
deepest level is regular, which makes the other levels regular in turn. The resulting
grammar will be huge but regular and will be able to profit from all simple and effi-
cient techniques known for regular grammars. The required duplications and modifica-
tions are mechanical and can be done by a program. Dewar, Bratley and Thorne
[NatLang 1969] describe an early example of this approach, Blank [NatLang 1989] a
recent one.

5.1.3 Pattern searching
Many linear patterns, especially text patterns, have a structure that is easily expressed
by a (quasi-)regular grammar. Notations that indicate amounts of money in various
currencies, for instance, have the structure given by the grammar of Figure 5.4, where
  has been used to indicate a space symbol. Examples are $ 19.95 and ¥ 1600. Such
notations, however, do not occur in isolation but are usually embedded in long stretches
of text that itself does not conform to the grammar of Figure 5.4. To isolate the nota-
tions, a recognizer (rather than a parser) is derived from the grammar that will accept
arbitrary text and will indicate where sequences of symbols are found that conform to
Sec. 5.1]                   Applications of regular grammars                             109

             AmountS          ->       CurrencySymbol Space* Digit+ Cents?
      CurrencySymbol          ->       ƒ | $ | ¥ | £ | ...
               Space          ->
               Digit          ->       [0123456789]
               Cents          ->       . Digit Digit | .--

Figure 5.4 A quasi-regular grammar for currency notations

the grammar. Parsing (or an other form of analysis) is deferred to a later stage. A tech-
nique for constructing such a recognizer is given in Section 5.3.4.

5.2 PRODUCING FROM A REGULAR GRAMMAR
When producing from a regular grammar, the producer needs to remember only one
thing: which non-terminal is next. We shall illustrate this and further concepts using the
simple regular grammar of Figure 5.5.

                                       SS    ->        a A
                                        S    ->        a B
                                        A    ->        b B
                                        A    ->        b C
                                        B    ->        c A
                                        B    ->        c C
                                        C    ->        a

Figure 5.5 Sample regular grammar

This grammar produces sentences consisting of an a followed by an alternating
sequence of b’s and c’s followed by a terminating a. For the moment we shall restrict
ourselves to regular grammars in standard notation; further on we shall extend our
methods to more convenient forms.
      The one non-terminal the producer remembers is called its state and the producer
is said to be in that state. When a producer is in a given state, for instance, A, it chooses
one of the rules belonging to that state, for instance, A->bC, produces the b and moves
to state C. Such a move is called a state transition. It is customary to represent the
states and the possible transitions of a producer in a transition diagram, Figure 5.6,
where the above state transition is represented by the arc marked b from A to C.

                                              A
                                         a         b
                                                             a
                                   S         c b         C       ◊

                                         a         c
                                              B

Figure 5.6 Transition diagram for the regular grammar of Figure 5.5

S is the initial state and the accepting state is marked ◊; another convention (not used
here) is to draw an accepting state as a double circle. The symbols on the arcs are those
produced by the corresponding move. The producer stops when it is in an accepting
state. Like the non-deterministic automaton we saw in Section 3.4, the producer is an
automaton, a finite non-deterministic automaton, or finite-state automaton, to be exact.
“Finite” because it can only be in a finite number of states (5 in this case; 3 bits of
internal memory would suffice) and “non-deterministic” because, for instance, in state
S it has more than one way to produce an a.

5.3 PARSING WITH A REGULAR GRAMMAR
The above automaton for producing a sentence can in principle also be used for pars-
ing. If we have a sentence, for instance, abcba, and want to check and parse it, we can
view the above transition diagram as a maze and the (tokens in the) sentence as a guide.
If we manage to follow a path through the maze, matching symbols from our sentence
to those on the walls of the corridors as we go and end up in ◊ exactly at the end of the
sentence, we have checked the sentence and the names of the rooms we have visited
form the backbone of the parse tree. See Figure 5.7, where the path is shown as a dotted
line.

                                                                   .. .
                                                               . .A     .
                                                        . . . . .. . . .
                                                   .a. . .. .b. .
                                                      .         .
                                                ..           ..          .  ..
                                             ..              .            .
                                                                          .
                                                                               ..
                                                                                  . . . . . . .a
                  . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
                                         S                  .
                                                            .c b.
                                                             .
                                                                          .
                                                                          .
                                                                                   C                 ◊
                                                                                               .......
                                                             .           .
                                                              ..         .
                                                                        .
                                                    a ... .. c
                                                                  B.

                                   S                  A                 B                  A             C       ◊

                                            a                  b                 c                  b        a

Figure 5.7 Actual and linearized passage through the maze

Now this is easier said than done. How did we know, for instance, to turn left in room S
rather than right? Of course we could employ general maze-solving techniques (and
they would give us our answer in exponential time) but a much simpler and much more
efficient answer is available here: we split ourselves in two and head both ways. After
the first a of abcba we are in the set of rooms {A     A, B}. Now we have a b to follow;
from B there are no exits marked b but from A there are two, which lead to B and C. So
we are now in rooms {B  B, C}. Our path is now more difficult to depict but still easy to
linearize, as shown in Figure 5.8. We can find the parsing by starting at the end and
following the pointers backwards: ◊ <- C <- A <- B <- A <- S. If the grammar
is ambiguous the backward pointers may bring us to a fork in the road: an ambiguity
has been found and both paths have to be followed separately to find both parsings.
With regular grammars, however, one is often not interested in the parse, but only in
the recognition: the fact that the input is correct and it ends here suffices.

                                      A        B         A           B

                            S         B        C         C           C         ◊

                                 a        b         c            b        a

Figure 5.8 Linearized set-based passage through the maze

5.3.1 Replacing sets by states
Although the process described above is linear in the length of the input (each next
token takes an amount of work that is not dependent on the length of the input), still a
lot of work has to be done for each token. What is worse, the grammar has to be con-
sulted repeatedly and so we expect the speed of the process to depend adversely on the
size of the grammar. Fortunately there is a surprising and fundamental improvement
possible: from the NFA in Figure 5.6 we construct a new automaton with a new set of
states, where each new state is equivalent to a set of old states. Where the original
(non-deterministic) automaton was in doubt after the first a, a situation we represented
as {A
    A, B}, the new automaton firmly knows that after the first a it is in state AB.
      The states of the new automaton can be constructed systematically as follows. We
start with the initial state of the old automaton, which is also the initial state of the new
one. For each new state we create, we examine its contents in terms of the old states,
and for each token in the language we determine to which set of old states the given set
leads. These sets of old states are then considered states of the new automaton. If we
create the same state a second time, we do not analyse it again. This process is called
the subset construction and results initially in a (deterministic) state tree. The state tree
for the grammar of Figure 5.5 is depicted in Figure 5.9. To stress that it systematically
checks all new states for all symbols, outgoing arcs leading nowhere are also shown.
Newly generated states that have already been generated before are marked with a ✔.

                                                                               ✔
                                                                          ◊
                                      a                              a
                                               b                      b
                                 AB                          BC
                            a
                                                    ◊                          ✔
                             b                 a                     c
                       S              c                                   AC
                                                b            ✔
                                          AC            BC
                            c
                                               c

Figure 5.9 Deterministic state tree for the grammar of Figure 5.5

     The state tree of Figure 5.9 is turned into a transition diagram by leading the
arrows to states marked ✔ to their first-time representatives and removing the dead
ends. The new automaton is shown in Figure 5.10. When we now use the sentence
abcba as a guide for traversing this transition diagram, we find that we are never in
doubt and that we safely arrive at the accepting state. All outgoing arcs from a state

                                                                          BC
                                                                b                      a
                                         a
                                   S               AB                   b c                       ◊

                                                                c                      a
                                                                          AC

Figure 5.10 Deterministic automaton for the grammar of Figure 5.5

bear different symbols, so when following a list of symbols, we are always pointed to
at most one direction. If in a given state there is no outgoing arc for a given symbol,
then that symbol may not occur in that position. If it is, the input is in error.
      There are two things to be noted here. The first is that we see that most of the pos-
sible states of the new automaton do not actually materialize: the old automaton had 5
states, so there were 25 =32 possible states for the new automaton while in fact it has
only 5; states like SB or ABC do not occur. This is usual; although there are non-
deterministic finite-state automata with n states that turn into a DFA with 2n states,
these are rare and have to be constructed on purpose. The average garden variety NFA
with n states typically results in a DFA with less than or around 10*n states.
      The second is that consulting the grammar is no longer required; the state of the
automaton together with the input token fully determine the next state. To allow effi-
cient look-up the next state can be stored in a table indexed by the old state and the
input token. The table for our DFA is given in Figure 5.11.

                                                input      ? symbol         ?                ?
                                                             
                                                         a  ?            b    ?            c
                                          S ? AB ?
                                                                                                
                                                                                                  
                                         AB ?                   ?       BC ? AC ?
                          old state     ???????????????????
                                                                                                    
                                                         ◊
                                                           
                                         AC                         ?   BC            ?              ??
                                                                                         
                                         BC              ◊
                                                                                          AC

Figure 5.11 Transition table for the automaton of Figure 5.10

Using such a table, an input string can be checked at the expense of only a few machine
instructions per token. For the average DFA, most of the entries in the table are empty
(cannot be reached by correct input and refer to error states). Since the table can be of
considerable size (300 states times 100 tokens is normal), several techniques exist to
exploit the empty space by compressing the table. Dencker, Dürre and Heuft [Misc
1984] give a survey of some techniques.
      The parse tree obtained looks as follows:

                           S       AB              BC                   AC                  BC                ◊

                               a          b                    c                   b                      a

which is not the original parse tree. If the automaton is used only to recognize the input
string this is no drawback; if the parse tree is required, it can be reconstructed in the
following fairly obvious bottom-up way. Starting from the last state ◊ and the last token
a, we conclude that the last right-hand side (the “handle” in bottom-up parsing) was a.
Since the state was BC, a combination of B and C, we look through the rules for B and C.
We find that a derived from C->a, which narrows down BC to C. The right-most b and
the C combine into the handle bC which in the set {A  A, C} must derive from A. Working
our way backwards we find the parsing:

                                    AB             BC             AC             BC
                          S       ........       ........       ........       ........       ◊
                                     A              B              A              C

                              a              b              c              b              a

This method again requires the grammar to be consulted repeatedly; moreover, the way
back will not always be so straight as in the above example and we will have problems
with ambiguous grammars. Efficient full parsing of regular grammars has received
relatively little attention; substantial information can be found in Ostrand, Paull and
Weyuker [FS 1981].

5.3.2 Non-standard notation
A regular grammar in standard form can only have rules of the form A →a and A →aB.
We shall now first extend our notation with two other types of rules, A →B and A →ε,
and show how to construct NFA’s and DFA’s for them. We shall then turn to regular
expressions and rules that have regular expressions as right-hand sides (for instance,
P→a * bQ) and show how to convert them into rules in the extended notation.
      The grammar in Figure 5.12 contains examples of both new types of rules; Figure
5.13 presents the usual trio of NFA, state tree and DFA for this grammar. First consider
the NFA. When we are in state S we see the expected transition to state B on the token
a, resulting in the standard rule S->aB. The non-standard rule S->A indicates that we
can get from state S to state A without reading (or producing) a symbol; we then say
that we read the zero-length string ε and that we make an ε-transition (or ε-move). The
rule A->aA creates a transition from A to A marked a and B->bB does something simi-
lar. The standard rule B->b creates a transition marked b to the accepting state, and the
non-standard rule A->ε creates an ε-transition to the accepting state. ε-transitions
should not be confused with ε-rules: unit rules create ε-transitions to non-accepting
states and ε-rules create ε-transitions to accepting states.

                                       SS          ->           A
                                        S          ->           a B
                                        A          ->           a A
                                        A          ->           ε
                                        B          ->           b B
                                        B          ->           b

Figure 5.12 Sample regular grammar with ε-rules

                                   a                                                         ✔
                                                                                        A◊
                                                                                    a
                             A
                         ε             ε                                       A◊
                                                                           a
                    S                       ◊                                       b
                                                                 AB◊
                                                             a                      a
                         a             b                                   b
                             B                         SA◊                     B◊
                                                             b                      b        ✔
                                   b                                                    B◊

                             (a)                                       (b)
                                                                       a

                                                                 A◊
                                                             a
                                                 a
                                           SA◊         AB◊

                                                             b
                                                                 B◊

                                                 (c)                   b

Figure 5.13 NFA (a), state tree (b) and DFA (c) for the grammar of Figure 5.12

      Now that we have constructed an NFA with ε-moves, the question arises how we
can process the ε-moves to obtain a DFA. To answer this question we use the same rea-
soning as before; in Figure 5.6, after having seen an a we did not know if we were in
state A or state B and we represented that as {A  A, B}. Here, when we enter state S, even
before having processed a single symbol, we already do not know if we are in states S,
A or ◊, since the latter two are reachable from S through ε-moves. So the initial state of
the DFA is already compound: SA◊ . We now have to consider where this state leads to
for the symbols a and b. If we are in S then a will bring us to B and if we are in A, a
will bring us to A. So the new state includes A and B, and since ◊ is reachable from A
through ε-moves, it also includes ◊ and its name is AB◊ . Continuing in this vein we can
construct the complete state tree (Figure 5.13(b)) and collapse it into a DFA (c). Note
that all states of the DFA contain the NFA state ◊ , so the input may end in all of them.
      The set of NFA states reachable from a given state through ε-moves is called the
ε-closure of that state. The ε-closure of, for instance, S is {S
                                                               S, A, ◊ }.

5.3.3 DFA’s from regular expressions
As mentioned in Section 2.3.3, regular languages are often specified by regular expres-
sions rather than by regular grammars. Examples of regular expressions are [0-
9]+(.[0-9]+)? which should be read as “one or more symbols from the set 0 through
9, possibly followed by a dot which must then be followed by one or more symbols
from 0 through 9” (and which represents numbers with possibly a dot in them) and
(ab)*(p|q)+, which should be read as “zero or more strings ab followed by one or
more p’s or q’s” (and which is not directly meaningful). The usual forms occurring in
regular expressions are recalled in the table in Figure 5.14; some systems provide more
possibilities, some provide fewer. In computer input, no difference is generally made

   Form           Meaning                                    Name

   R 1R 2         R 1 followed by R 2                        concatenation
   R1 |R2         R 1 or R 2                                 alternative
   R*             zero or more R’s                           optional sequence (Kleene star)
   R+             one or more R’s                            (proper) sequence
   R?             zero or one R                              optional
   (R)            R                                          nesting
   [abc . . . ]   any symbol from the set abc . . .
   a              the symbol a itself

Figure 5.14 Some usual elements of regular expressions

between the metasymbol * and the symbol *, etc. Special notations will be necessary if
the language to be described contains any of the symbols | * + ? ( ) [ or ].

                     Rule pattern                   replaced by:

                     P→a                            (standard)
                     P→aQ                           (standard)
                     P→Q                            (extended standard)
                     P→ε                            (extended standard)

                     P→a . . .                      P→aT
                                                    T→ . . .
                     P→(R 1 | R 2 | . . . ) . . .   P→R 1 . . .
                                                    P→R 2 . . .
                                                    ...
                     P→(R) . . .                    P→R . . .
                     P→R * . . .                    P→T
                                                    T→RT
                                                    T→ . . .
                     P→R + . . .                    P→RT
                                                    T→RT
                                                    T→ . . .
                     P→R ? . . .                    P→R . . .
                                                    P→ . . .

                     P→[abc . . . ] . . .           P→(a | b | c | . . . ) . . .

Figure 5.15 Transformations on regular grammars

      A regular expression can be converted into a regular grammar by using the
transformations given in Figure 5.15; this regular grammar can then be used to produce
a DFA as described above. There is also a method to create an NFA directly from the
regular expression, which requires, however, some preprocessing on the regular expres-
sion; see Thompson [FS 1968].
      We shall illustrate the method using the expression (ab)*(p|q)+. Our method

will also work for regular grammars that contain regular expressions (like A→ab * cB)
and we shall in fact immediately turn our regular expression into such a grammar:

                                 SS     ->     (ab)*(p|q)+

The T in the transformations stands for an intermediate non-terminal, to be chosen
fresh for each application of a transformation; we use A, B, C . . . in the example since
that is less confusing than T 1 , T 2 , T 3 , . . . . The transformations are to be applied until
all rules are in (extended) standard form.
      The first transformation that applies is P→R * . . . , which replaces
SS->(ab)*(p|q)+ by

                           SS     ->     A                        ✔
                            A     ->     (ab) A
                            A     ->     (p|q)+

The first rule is already in the desired form and has been marked ✔. The transforma-
tions P→(R) . . . and P→a . . . work on A->(ab)A and result in

                            A     ->     a B                      ✔
                            B     ->     b A                      ✔

Now the transformation P →R + . . . must be applied to A->(p|q)+, yielding

                            A     ->     (p|q) C
                            C     ->     (p|q) C
                            C     ->     ε                        ✔

The ε originated from the fact that (p|q)+ in A->(p|q)+ is not followed by anything
(of which ε is a faithful representation). Now A->(p|q)C and C->(p|q)C are easily
decomposed into

                            A     ->     p C                      ✔
                            A     ->     q C                      ✔
                            C     ->     p C                      ✔
                            C     ->     q C                      ✔

The complete extended-standard version can be found in Figure 5.16; an NFA and
DFA can now be derived using the methods of Section 5.3.1 (not shown).

5.3.4 Fast text search using finite-state automata
Suppose we are looking for the occurrence of a short piece of text, for instance, a word
or a name (the “search string”) in a large piece of text, for instance, a dictionary or an
encyclopedia. One naive way of finding a search string of length n in a text would be to
try to match it to the characters 1 to n; if that fails, shift the pattern one position and try
to match against characters 2 to n +1, etc., until we find the search string or reach the
end of the text. (Dictionaries and encyclopedias may be organized better, but a file con-
taining a million business letters almost certainly would not.)

                                                SS        ->           A
                                                 A        ->           a B
                                                 B        ->           b A
                                                 A        ->           p C
                                                 A        ->           q C
                                                 C        ->           p C
                                                 C        ->           q C
                                                 C        ->           ε

Figure 5.16 Extended-standard regular grammar for (ab)*(p|q)+

      Finite automata offer a much more efficient way to do text search. We derive a
DFA from the string, let it run down the text and when it reaches an accepting state, it
has found the string. Assume for example that the search string is ababc and that the
text will contain only a’s, b’s and c’s. The NFA that searches for this string is shown
in Figure 5.17(a); it was derived as follows. At each character in the text there are two
possibilities: either the search string starts there, which is represented by the chain of
states going to the right, or it does not start there, in which case we have to skip the
present character and return to the initial state. The automaton is non-deterministic,
since when we see an a in state A, we have two options: to believe that it is the start of
an occurrence of ababc or not to believe it.

                         abc

                         A     a       B        b        C        a        D    b        E       c         ◊

                                       (a)
                                                                                     ✔                 ✔
                                                                               AB                ABD
                                                                       a                 a
                                                ✔                                                      ✔             ✔
                                           AB                ABD       b       ACE       b       A              AB
                                   a                 a                                                     a
                                                                   ✔c                ✔c                              ✔
                         AB        b       AC        b        A                A                 A◊        b    A
                     a
                              ✔c                ✔c                 ✔                                       c         ✔
                A    b   A                 A                  A                                                 A
                     c        ✔
                         A

                              (b)

                                       a
                                                                  a                 a            a

                         A     a       AB       b        AC       a ABD b ACE c                        A◊
                                       c                 bc                c                 b             bc
                         bc

                              (c)

Figure 5.17 NFA (a), state tree (b) and DFA (c) to search for ababc

      Using the traditional techniques, this NFA can be used to produce a state tree (b)
and then a DFA (c). Figure 5.18 shows the states the DFA goes through when fed the
text aabababca.

                   A        AB       AB       AC       ABD       ACE       ABD       ACE       A◊       AB
                       a         a        b        a         b         a         b         c        a

Figure 5.18 State transitions of the DFA of Figure 5.17(c) on aabababca

      This application of finite-state automata is known as the Aho and Corasick biblio-
graphic search algorithm [FS 1975]. Like any DFA, it requires only a few machine
instructions per character. As an additional bonus it will search for several strings for
the price of one. The DFA corresponding to the NFA of Figure 5.19 will search simul-
taneously for Kawabata, Mishima and Tanizaki; note that three different accepting
states result, ◊K, ◊M and ◊T.

                                 k        a        w         a         b         a         t        a
                            AK       BK       CK       DK        EK        FK        GK        HK       ◊K
                       ε

                       ε         m        i        s         h         i         m         a
            Σ               AM       BM       CM       DM        EM        FM        GM        ◊M

                       ε         t        a        n         i         z         a         k        i
                            AT       BT       CT       DT        ET        FT        GT        HT       ◊T

Figure 5.19 Example of an NDA for searching multiple strings

     The Aho and Corasick algorithm is not the last word in string search; it faces stiff
competition from the Rabin-Karp algorithm † and the Boyer-Moore algorithm ‡ neither
of which will be treated here, since they are based on different principles.

             
† R.M. Karp, M.O. Rabin, “Efficient randomized pattern matching algorithms”, Technical Re-

port TR-31-81, Harvard Univ., Cambridge, Mass., 1981. We want to find a string S of length l
in a text T. First we choose a hash function H that assigns a large integer to any string of length l
and calculate H (S) and H (T [1..l ]). If they are equal, we compare S and T [1..l ]. If either fails
we calculate H (T [2..l +1]) and repeat the process. The trick is to choose H so that
H (T [p +1..p +l ]) can be calculated cheaply from H (T [p..p +l −1]). See also Sedgewick
[CSBooks 1988], page 289.
‡ Robert S. Boyer, J. Strother Moore, “A fast string searching algorithm”, Commun. ACM, vol.
20, no. 10, p. 762-772, Oct 1977. We want to find a string S of length l in a text T and start by
positioning S [1] at T [1]. Now suppose that T [l ] does not occur in S; then we can shift S to
T [l +1] without missing a match, and thus increase the speed of the search process. This princi-
ple can be extended to blocks of more characters. See also Sedgewick [CSBooks 1988], page
286.
6
General directional top-down methods

In this chapter, we will discuss top-down parsing methods that try to rederive the input
sentence by prediction. As explained in Section 3.3.1, we start with the start symbol
and try to produce the input from it. At any point in time, we have a sentential form
that represents our prediction of the rest of the input sentence:

                                  rest of input

                                  prediction

This sentential form consists of both terminals and non-terminals. If a terminal symbol
is in front, we match it with the current input symbol. If a non-terminal is in front, we
pick one of its right-hand sides and replace the non-terminal with this right-hand side.
This way, we all the time replace the left-most non-terminal, and in the end, if we
succeed, we have imitated a left-most production.

6.1 IMITATING LEFT-MOST PRODUCTIONS
Let us see how such a rederiving process could proceed with an example. Consider the
example grammar of Figure 6.1. This grammar produces all sentences with equal
numbers of a’s and b’s.

                              S     ->      aB | bA
                              A     ->      a | aS | bAA
                              B     ->      b | bS | aBB

Figure 6.1 A grammar producing all sentences with equal numbers of a’s and b’s

Let us try to parse the sentence aabb, by trying to rederive it from the start-symbol, S.
S is our first prediction. The first symbol of our prediction is a non-terminal, so we
have to replace it by one of its right-hand sides. In this grammar, there are two choices
for S: either we use the rule S->aB, or we use the rule S->bA. The sentence starts with
an a and not with a b, so we cannot use the second rule here. Applying the first rule

leaves us with the prediction aB. Now, the first symbol of the prediction is a terminal
symbol. Here, we have no choice:

                                        a   abb
                                        a   B

We have to match this symbol with the current symbol of the sentence, which is also an
a. So, we have a match, and accept the a. This leaves us with the prediction B for the
rest of the sentence: abb. The first symbol of the prediction is again a non-terminal, so
it has to be replaced by one of its right-hand sides. Now, we have three choices. How-
ever, the first and the second are not applicable here, because they start with a b, and
we need another a. Therefore, we take the third choice, so now we have prediction
aBB:

                                      a a       bb
                                      a a       BB

Again, we have a match with the current input symbol, so we accept it and continue
with the prediction BB for bb. Again, we have to replace the left-most B by one of its
choices. The next terminal in the sentence is a b, so the third choice is not applicable
here. This still leaves us with two choices, b and bS. So, we can either try them both,
or be a bit more intelligent about it. If we would take bS, then we would get at least
another a (because of the S), so this cannot be the right choice. So, we take the b
choice, and get the prediction bB for bb. Again, we have a match, and this leaves us
with prediction B for b. For the same reason, we take the b choice again. After match-
ing, this leaves us with an empty prediction. Luckily, we are also at the end of the input
sentence, so we accept it. If we had made notes of the production rules used, we would
have found the following derivation:

       S -> aB -> aaBB -> aabB -> aabb.

Figure 6.2 presents the steps of the parse in a tree-form. The dashed line separates the
already processed part from the prediction. All the time, the left-most symbol of the
prediction is processed.
     This example demonstrates several aspects that the parsers discussed in this
chapter have in common:
     we always process the left-most symbol of the prediction;
     if this symbol is a terminal, we have no choice: we have to match it with the
     current input symbol or reject the parse;
     if this symbol is a non-terminal, we have to make a prediction: it has to be
     replaced by one of its right-hand sides. Thus, we always process the left-most
     non-terminal first, so we get a left-most derivation.
Sec. 6.1]                       The pushdown automaton                                121

                   S                      S                     S

                                     a        B             a        B

                   S                      S                     S

              a        B             a        B             a        B

                   a   B    B             a   B    B            a    B    B

                                                                     b

                   S                      S                     S

              a        B             a        B             a        B

                   a   B    B             a   B    B            a    B    B

                       b                      b    b                 b    b

Figure 6.2 Production trees for the sentence aabb

6.2 THE PUSHDOWN AUTOMATON
The steps we have taken in the example above resemble very much the steps of a so-
called pushdown automaton. A pushdown automaton (PDA) is an imaginary
mathematical device that reads input and has control over a stack. The stack can con-
tain symbols that belong to a so-called stack alphabet. A stack is a list that can only be
accessed at one end: the last symbol entered on the list (“pushed”) is the first symbol to
be taken from it (“popped”). This is also sometimes called a “first-in, last-out” list, or
a FILO list: the first symbol that goes in is the last symbol to come out. In the example
above, the prediction works like a stack, and this is what the pushdown automaton uses
the stack for too. We therefore often call this stack the prediction stack. The stack also
explains the name “pushdown” automaton: the automaton “pushes” symbols on the
stack for later processing.
      The pushdown automaton operates by popping a stack symbol and reading an
input symbol. These two symbols then in general give us a choice of several lists of
stack symbols to be pushed on the stack. So, there is a mapping of (input symbol, stack
symbol) pairs to lists of stack symbols. The automaton accepts the input sentence
when the stack is empty at the end of the input. If there are choices (so an (input sym-
bol, stack symbol) pair maps to more than one list), the automaton accepts a sentence
when there are choices that lead to an empty stack at the end of the sentence.
      This automaton is modeled after context-free grammars with rules in the so-called

Greibach Normal Form (GNF). In this normal form, all grammar rules have either the
form A→a or A→aB 1 B 2 . . . Bn , with a a terminal and A, B 1 , ... , Bn non-terminals.
The stack symbols are, of course, the non-terminals. A rule of the form
A→aB 1 B 2 . . . Bn leads to a mapping of the (a, A) pair to the list B 1 B 2 . . . Bn . This
means that if the input symbol is an a, and the prediction stack starts with an A, we
could accept the a, and replace the A part of the prediction stack with B 1 B 2 . . . Bn . A
rule of the form A→a leads to a mapping of the (a, A) pair to an empty list. The auto-
maton starts with the start symbol of the grammar on the stack. Any context-free
grammar that does not produce the empty string can be put into Greibach Normal
Form. Most books on formal language theory discuss how to do this (see for instance
Hopcroft and Ullman [Books 1979]).
     The example grammar of Figure 6.1 already is in Greibach Normal Form, so we
can easily build a pushdown automaton for it. The automaton is characterized by the
mapping shown in Figure 6.3.

                                   (a, S)      ->     B
                                   (b, S)      ->     A
                                   (a, A)      ->
                                   (a, A)      ->     S
                                   (b, A)      ->     AA
                                   (b, B)      ->
                                   (b, B)      ->     S
                                   (a, B)      ->     BB

Figure 6.3 Mapping of the PDA for the grammar of Figure 6.1

      An important remark to be made here is that many pushdown automata are non-
deterministic. For instance, the pushdown automaton of Figure 6.3 can choose between
an empty list and an S for the pair (a
                                     a, A). In fact, there are context-free languages for
which we cannot build a deterministic pushdown automaton, although we can build a
non-deterministic one. We should also mention that the pushdown automata as dis-
cussed here are a simplification of the ones we find in automata theory. In automata
theory, pushdown automata have so-called states, and the mapping is from (state, input
symbol, stack symbol) triplets to (state, list of stack symbols) pairs. Seen in this way,
they are like finite-state automata (discussed in Chapter 5), extended with a stack.
Also, pushdown automata come in two different kinds: some accept a sentence by
empty stack, others accept by ending up in a state that is marked as an accepting state.
Perhaps surprisingly, having states does not make the pushdown automaton concept
more powerful. Pushdown automata with states still only accept languages that can be
described with a context-free grammar. In our discussion, the pushdown automaton
only has one state, so we have taken the liberty of leaving it out.
      Pushdown automata as described above have several shortcomings that must be
resolved if we want to convert them into parsing automata. Firstly, pushdown auto-
mata require us to put our grammar into Greibach Normal Form. While grammar
transformations are no problem for the formal linguist, we would like to avoid them as
much as possible, and use the original grammar if we can. Now we could relax the
Greibach Normal Form requirement a little by also allowing terminals as stack sym-
bols, and adding
Sec. 6.2]                     The pushdown automaton                                  123

             (a, a) →

to the mapping for all terminals a. We could then use any grammar all of whose right-
hand sides start with a terminal. We could also split the steps of the pushdown automa-
ton into separate “match” and “predict” steps, as we did in the example of Section 6.1.
The “match” steps then correspond to usage of the

             (a, a) →

mappings, and the “predict” step then corresponds to a

             (, A) → . . .

mapping, that is, a non-terminal on the top of the stack is replaced by one of its right-
hand sides, without consuming a symbol from the input. For the grammar of Figure
6.1, this would result in the mapping shown in Figure 6.4, which is in fact just a rewrite
of the grammar of Figure 6.1.

                                  (, S)      ->     aB
                                  (, S)      ->     bA
                                  (, A)      ->     a
                                  (, A)      ->     aS
                                  (, A)      ->     bAA
                                  (, B)      ->     b
                                  (, B)      ->     bS
                                  (, B)      ->     aBB
                                 (a, a)      ->
                                 (b, b)      ->

Figure 6.4 Match and predict mappings of the PDA for the grammar of Figure 6.1

We will see later that, even using this approach, we may have to modify the grammar
anyway, but in the meantime, this looks very promising so we adopt this strategy. This
strategy also solves another problem: ε-rules do not need special treatment any more.
To get Greibach Normal Form, we would have to eliminate them. This is not necessary
any more, because they now just correspond to a

             (, A) →

mapping.
      The second shortcoming is that the pushdown automaton does not keep a record of
the rules (mappings) it uses. Therefore, we introduce an analysis stack into the auto-
maton. For every prediction step, we push the non-terminal being replaced onto the
analysis stack, suffixed with the number of the right-hand side taken (numbering the
right-hand sides of a non-terminal from 1 to n). For every match, we push the matched
terminal onto the analysis stack. Thus, the analysis stack corresponds exactly to the
parts to the left of the dashed line in Figure 6.2, and the dashed line represents the
separation between the analysis stack and the prediction stack. This results in an

automaton that at any point in time has a configuration as depicted in Figure 6.5. In the
literature, such a configuration, together with its current state, stacks, etc. is sometimes
called an instantaneous description. In Figure 6.5, matching can be seen as pushing the
vertical line to the right.

                                 matched input rest of input

                                       analysis prediction

Figure 6.5 An instantaneous description

     The third and most important shortcoming, however, is the non-determinism.
Formally, it may be satisfactory that the automaton accepts a sentence if and only if
there is a sequence of choices that leads to an empty stack at the end of the sentence,
but for our purpose it is not, because it does not tell us how to obtain this sequence. We
have to guide the automaton to the correct choices. Looking back to the example of
Section 6.1, we had to make a choice at several points in the derivation, and we did so
based on some ad hoc considerations that were specific for the grammar at hand: some-
times we looked at the next symbol in the sentence, and there were also some points
where we had to look further ahead, to make sure that there were no more a’s coming.
In the example, the choices were easy, because all the right-hand sides start with a ter-
minal symbol. In general, however, finding the correct choice is much more difficult.
The right-hand sides could for instance equally well have started with a non-terminal
symbol that again has right-hand sides starting with a non-terminal, etc.
     In Chapter 8 we will see that many grammars still allow us to decide which right-
hand side to choose, given the next symbol in the sentence. In this chapter, however,
we will focus on top-down parsing methods that work for a larger class of grammars.
Rather than trying to pick a choice based on ad hoc considerations, we would like to
guide the automaton through all the possibilities. In Chapter 3 we saw that there are in
general two methods for solving problems in which there are several alternatives in
well-determined points: depth-first search and breadth-first search. We shall now see
how we can make the machinery operate for both search methods. Since the effects
can be exponential in size, even a small example can get quite big. We will use the
grammar of Figure 6.6, with test input aabc. This grammar generates a rather complex
language: sentences consist either of a number of a’s followed by a number of b’s fol-
lowed by an equal number of c’s, or of a number of a’s followed by an equal number
of b’s followed by a number of c’s. Example sentences are for instance: abc, aabbc.

                                  S     ->     AB | DC
                                  A     ->     a | aA
                                  B     ->     bc | bBc
                                  D     ->     ab | aDb
                                  C     ->     c | cC

Figure 6.6 A more complicated example grammar
Sec. 6.2]                    Breadth-first top-down parsing                               125

6.3 BREADTH-FIRST TOP-DOWN PARSING
The breadth-first solution to the top-down parsing problem is to maintain a list of all
possible predictions. Each of these predictions is then processed as described in Sec-
tion 6.2 above, that is, if there is a non-terminal in front, the prediction stack is replaced
by several new prediction stacks, as many as there are choices for this non-terminal. In
each of these new prediction stacks, the non-terminal is replaced by the corresponding
choice. This prediction step is repeated for all prediction stacks it applies to (including
the new ones), until all prediction stacks have a terminal in front. Then, for each of the
prediction stacks we match the terminal in front with the current input symbol, and
strike out all prediction stacks that do not match. If there are no prediction stacks left,
the sentence does not belong to the language. So, instead of one prediction
stack/analysis stack pair, our automaton now maintains a list of prediction
stack/analysis stack pairs, one for each possible choice, as depicted in Figure 6.7.

                                 matched input rest of input
                                      analysis1 prediction1
                                      analysis2 prediction2
                                             ... ...

Figure 6.7 An instantaneous description of our extended automaton

      The method is suitable for on-line parsing, because it processes the input from left
to right. Any parsing method that processes its input from left to right and results in a
left-most derivation is called an LL parsing method. The first L stands for Left to right,
and the second L for Left-most derivation.
      Now, we almost know how to write a parser along these lines, but there is one
detail that we have not properly dealt with yet: termination. Does the input sentence
belong to the language defined by the grammar when, ultimately, we have an empty
prediction stack? Only when the input is exhausted! To avoid this extra check, and to
avoid problems about what to do when we arrive at the end of sentence but haven’t fin-
ished parsing yet, we introduce a special so-called end-marker #, that is appended at
the end of the sentence. Also, a new grammar rule S’->S# is added to the grammar,
where S’ is a new non-terminal that serves as a new start symbol. The end-marker
behaves like an ordinary terminal symbol; when we have an empty prediction, we
know that the last step taken was a match with the end-marker, and that this match suc-
ceeded. This also means that the input is exhausted, so it must be accepted.

6.3.1 An example
Figure 6.8 presents a complete breadth-first parsing of the sentence aabc#. At first
there is only one prediction stack: it contains the start-symbol; no symbols have been
accepted yet (a). The step leading to (b) is a simple predict step; there is no other
right-hand side for S’. Another predict step leads us to (c), but this time there are two
possible right-hand sides, so we obtain two prediction stacks; note that the difference of
the prediction stacks is also reflected in the analysis stacks, where the different suffixes
of S represent the different right-hand sides predicted. Another predict step with
several right-hand sides leads to (d). Now, all prediction stacks have a terminal on top;

                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                              
  (a)                         ? aabc#
                                                   (b)                         ? aabc#
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                
                                 S’                                     S’1 ? S#
                                                                                      

                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                               
  (c)                           ? aabc#
                                                   (d)                          ? aabc#
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                      S’1S1 ?? DC#                                  S’1S1D1 ?? abC#
                      S’1S2 ? AB#                                   S’1S1D2 ? aDbC#
                                                                    S’1S2A1 ? aB#
                                    
                                                                    S’1S2A2 ? aAB#
                                                                                      

                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                               
  (e)                     a     ? abc#
                                                   (f)                    a     ? abc#
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                   S’1S1D1a ?? bC#                                 S’1S1D1a ?? bC#
                   S’1S1D2a ? DbC#                               S’1S1D2aD1 ? abbC#
                   S’1S2A1a ? B#                                 S’1S1D2aD2 ? aDbbC#
                   S’1S2A2a ? AB#                                S’1S2A1aB1 ? bc#
                                                                 S’1S2A1aB2 ? bBc#
                                    
                                                                 S’1S2A2aA1 ?? aB#
                                       
                                                                 S’1S2A2aA2 ? aAB#
                                                                                      

                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                               
  (g)                    aa ? bc#
                                       
                                                   (h)                   aa ? bc#
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                S’1S1D2aD1a ?? bbC#                             S’1S1D2aD1a ?? bbC#
                S’1S1D2aD2a ? DbbC#                           S’1S1D2aD2aD1 ? abbbC#
                S’1S2A2aA1a ? B#                              S’1S1D2aD2aD2 ? aDbbbC#
                S’1S2A2aA2a ? AB#                             S’1S2A2aA1aB1 ? bc#
                                                              S’1S2A2aA1aB2 ? bBc#
                                   
                                                              S’1S2A2aA2aA1 ?? aB#
                                      
                                                              S’1S2A2aA2aA2 ? aAB#
                                                                                      

                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                              
  (i)                  a ab   ? c#
                                                   (j)                  aab    ? c#
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
                                                                                 
              S’1S1D2aD1ab ? bC#                               S’1S1D2aD1ab ? bC#
            S’1S2A2aA1aB1b ? c#                              S’1S2A2aA1aB1b ? c#
            S’1S2A2aA1aB2b ? Bc#                           S’1S2A2aA1aB2bB1 ? bcc#
                                                           S’1S2A2aA1aB2bB2 ? bBcc#
                                                                                      

                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                               
  (k)                 aabc ? #
                                       
                                                   (l)                aabc# ?
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
           S’1S2A2aA1aB1bc ? #                             S’1S2A2aA1aB1bc# ?
                                                                                      

Figure 6.8 The breadth-first parsing of the sentence aabc#

all happen to match, resulting in (e). Next, we again have some predictions with a
non-terminal in front, so another predict step leads us to (f). The next step is a match
step, and fortunately, some matches fail; these are just dropped as they can never lead
to a successful parse. From (g) to (h) is again a predict step. Another match where,
again, some matches fail, leads us to (i). A further prediction results in (j) and then two
matches result in (k) and (l), leading to a successful parse (the predict stack is empty).
The analysis is
Sec. 6.3]                   Breadth-first top-down parsing                             127

       S’1S2A2aA1aB1bc#.

For now, we do not need the terminals in the analysis; discarding them gives

       S’1S2A2A1B1.

This means that we get a left-most derivation by first applying rule S’1, then rule S2,
then rule A2, etc., all the time replacing the left-most non-terminal. Check:

       S’ -> S# -> AB# -> aAB# -> aaB# -> aabc#.

    The breadth-first method described here was first presented by Greibach [CF
1964]. However, in that presentation, grammars are first transformed into Greibach
Normal Form, and the steps taken are like the ones our initial pushdown automaton
makes. The predict and match steps are combined.

6.3.2 A counterexample: left-recursion
The method discussed above clearly works for this grammar, and the question arises
whether it works for all context-free grammars. One would think it does, because all
possibilities are systematically tried, for all non-terminals, in any occurring prediction.
Unfortunately, this reasoning has a serious flaw that is demonstrated by the following
example: let us see if the sentence ab belongs to the language defined by the simple
grammar

                                   S    ->     Sb | a

Our automaton starts off in the following state:
                                                       
                                             
                                                ab#
                                                       
                                                       
                                                 S’
                                                       

As we have a non-terminal at the beginning of the prediction, we use a predict step,
resulting in:
                                                       
                                             
                                                ab#
                                                       
                                                       
                                                
                                       S’1 S#
                                                       

Now, another predict step results in:
                                                       
                                              
                                                 ab#
                                                       
                                                       
                                     S’1S1 ?? Sb#
                                     S’1S2 ? a#
                                                       

As one prediction again starts with a non-terminal, we predict again:
                                                       
                                             
                                                ab#
                                                       
                                                       
                                                
                                   S’1S1S1 ? Sbb#
                                   S’1S1S2 ? ab#
                                                  
                                      S’ S     a#
                                                       
                                       1 2

      By now, it is clear what is happening: we seem to have ended up in an infinite
process leading us nowhere. The reason for this is that we keep trying the S->Sb rule
without ever coming to a state where a match can be attempted. This problem can
occur whenever there is a non-terminal that derives an infinite sequence of sentential
forms, all starting with a non-terminal, so no matches can take place. As all these sen-
tential forms in this infinite sequence start with a non-terminal, and the number of
non-terminals is finite, there is at least one non-terminal A occurring more than once at
the start of those sentential forms. So, we have: A → . . . → Aα. A non-terminal that
derives a sentential form starting with itself is called left-recursive. Left recursion
comes in two kinds: we speak of immediate left-recursion when there is a grammar rule
A→Aα, like in the rule S->Sb; we speak of indirect left-recursion when the recursion
goes through other rules, for instance A→Bα, B→Aβ. Both forms of left-recursion
can be concealed by ε-producing non-terminals. For instance in the grammar

                                     S    ->     ABc
                                     B    ->     Cd
                                     B    ->     ABf
                                     C    ->     Se
                                     A    ->     ε

the non-terminals S, B, and C are all left-recursive. Grammars with left-recursive non-
terminals are called left-recursive as well.
      If a grammar has no ε-rules and no loops, we could still use our parsing scheme if
we use one extra step: if a prediction stack has more symbols than the unmatched part
of the input sentence, it can never derive the sentence (no ε-rules), so it can be dropped.
However, this little trick has one big disadvantage: it requires us to know the length of
the input sentence in advance, so the method no longer is suitable for on-line parsing.
Fortunately, left-recursion can be eliminated: given a left-recursive grammar, we can
transform it into a grammar without left-recursive non-terminals that defines the same
language. As left-recursion poses a major problem for any top-down parsing method,
we will now discuss this grammar transformation.

6.4 ELIMINATING LEFT-RECURSION
We will first discuss the elimination of immediate left-recursion. We will assume that
ε-rules and unit rules already have been eliminated (see Section 4.2.3.1 and 4.2.3.2).
Now, let A be a left-recursive rule, and

       A     →      Aα1 | . . . | Aαn | β1 | . . . | βm

be all the rules for A. None of the αi are equal to ε, or we would have a rule A→A, a
unit rule. None of the β j are equal to ε either, or we would have an ε-rule. The senten-
tial forms generated by A using only the A→Aαk rules all have the form
