Introduction
Windows kernel programming is considered by many a dark art, available to select few that manage to
somehow unlock the mysteries of the Windows kernel. Kernel development, however, is no different than
user-mode development, at least in general terms. In both cases, a good understanding of the platform is
essential for producing high quality code.
The book is a guide to programming within the Windows kernel, using the well-known Visual Studio
integrated development environment (IDE). This environment is familiar to many developers in the
Microsoft space, so that the learning curve is restricted to kernel understanding, coding and debugging,
with less friction from the development tools.
The book targets software device drivers, a term I use to refer to drivers that do not deal with hardware.
Software kernel drivers have full access to the kernel, allowing these to perform any operation allowed by
the kernel. Some software drivers are more specific, such as file system mini filters, also described in the
book.

Who Should Read This Book
The book is intended for software developers that target the Windows kernel, and need to write kernel
drivers to achieve their goals. Common scenarios where kernel drivers are employed are in the Cyber
Security space, where kernel drivers are the chief mechanism to get notified of important events, with the
power to intercept certain operations. The book uses C and C++ for code examples, as the kernel API is all
C. C++ is used where it makes sense, where its advantages are obvious in terms of maintenance, clarity,
resource management, or any combination of these. The book does not use complex C++ constructs, such
as template metaprogramming. The book is not about C++, it’s about Windows kernel drivers.

What You Should Know to Use This Book
Readers should be very comfortable with the C programming language, especially with pointers, structures,
and its standard library, as these occur very frequently when working with kernel APIs. Basic C++
knowledge is highly recommended, although it is possible to traverse the book with C proficiency only.

Book Contents
Here is a quick rundown of the chapters in the book:

    • Chapter 1 (“Windows Internals Overview) provides the fundamentals of the internal workings of
      the Windows OS at a high level, enough to get the fundamentals without being bogged down by
      too many details.
Introduction                                                                                               2

    • Chapter 2 (“Getting Started with Kernel Development”) describes the tools and procedures needed
      to set up a development environment for developing kernel drivers. A very simple driver is created
      to make sure all the tools and procedures are working correctly.
    • Chapter 3 (“Kernel Programming Basics) looks at the fundamentals of writing drivers, including
      bssic kernel APIs, handling of common programming tasks involving strings, linked lists, dynamic
      memory allocations, and more.
    • Chapter 4 (“Driver from Start to Finish”) shows how to build a complete driver that performs some
      useful functionality, along with a client application to drive it.

If you are new to Windows kernel development, you should read chapters 1 to 7 in order. Chapter 8 contains
some advanced material you may want to go back to after you have built a few simple drivers. Chapters
9 onward describe specialized techniques, and in theory at least, can be read in any order.

Sample Code
All the sample code from the book is freely available on the book’s Github repository at https://github.
com/zodiacon/windowskernelprogrammingbook2e. Updates to the code samples will be pushed to this
repository. It’s recommended the reader clone the repository to the local machine, so it’s easy to experiment
with the code directly.
All code samples have been compiled with Visual Studio 2019. It’s possible to compile most code samples
with earlier versions of Visual Studio if desired. There might be few features of the latest C++ standards
that may not be supported in earlier versions, but these should be easy to fix.
Happy reading!
Pavel Yosifovich
June 2022
