                          PREFACE

    This is the fourth edition of “Distributed Systems.” We have stayed close
to the setup of the third edition, including examples of (part of) existing
distributed systems close to where general principles are discussed. For
example, we have included material on blockchain systems, and discuss their
various components throughout the book. We have, again, used special boxed
sections for material that can be skipped at first reading.
    The text has been thoroughly reviewed, revised, and updated. In particular,
all the Python code has been updated to Python3, while at the same time
the channel package has been almost completely revised and simplified. The
coding examples in the book leave out many details for readability, but
the complete examples are available through the book’s Website, hosted at
www.distributed-systems.net. We have made sure that virtually all examples
can be instantly executed through a simple script. However, it will be necessary
to download and install special packages, such as Redis.
   As before, the Website also contains slides in PDF and PPT, as well as the
sources for producing slides using LATEX with the Beamer class. All figures,
now including those for tables and coding examples, are available in PDF and
PNG formats.
    Like the previous edition, the book can be (freely) downloaded, making it
much easier to use hyperlinks where appropriate. At the same time, we are
offering a printed version through Amazon.com, available at minimal costs.
    The book being fully digital allows us to incorporate updates when needed.
We plan to run updates on a yearly basis, while keeping previous versions
digitally available, as well as the original printed version. Running frequent
updates is not always the right thing to do from the perspective of teaching, but
yearly updates and maintaining previous versions seems a good compromise.
Updates generally consist of small corrections, the kind that usually pop up
in errata lists. Next to that, the book now also contains an index section, as
well as a glossary section. These are typically sections that generally take a
huge time to compile, but are also sections that typically grow as the book
is being used. Likewise, we may find ways to improve how hyperlinks have
been incorporated. Such matters do not affect the main text, while potentially
improving the usability of the digital version.

                                       xi
xii                                                                 PREFACE

Acknowledgements
Many teachers and students have helped with spotting the inevitable errors
in the third edition, and we owe them many thanks, but in any case Michael
May, Linh Phan, Juan Abadie, and Christian Zirpins. For the fourth edition,
a handful of colleagues were so kind to review parts of the material. In
particular, we wish to thank Armin Stocker, Hermann de Meer, Pim Otte,
Johan Pouwelse, Michael P. Anderson, Ivo Varenhorst, Aditya Pappu, and
Alexander Iosup. A special thanks goes to Hein Meling of Stavanger University.
Not only did he help us tremendously in understanding how Paxos works
(already for the third edition), we have gratefully adopted, and adapted, his
LATEX style file for generating message-sequence charts. These figures are now
much more consistent. We thank Max van Steen for designing the cover.

Maarten van Steen
Andrew S. Tanenbaum

