     02

ARCHITECTURES

    Distributed systems are often complex pieces of software, of which the
components are by definition dispersed across multiple machines. To master
their complexity, it is crucial that these systems be properly organized. There
are different ways on how to view the organization of a distributed system,
but an obvious one is to make a distinction between, on the one hand, the
logical organization of the collection of software components, and on the other
hand the actual physical realization.
    The organization of distributed systems is mostly about the software
components that constitute the system. These software architectures tell us
how the various software components are to be organized and how they
should interact. In this chapter, we will first pay attention to some commonly
applied architectural styles toward organizing (distributed) computer systems.
    An important goal of distributed systems is to separate applications from
underlying platforms by providing a so-called middleware layer. Adopting
such a layer is an important architectural decision, and its main purpose is
to provide distribution transparency. However, trade-offs need to be made
to achieve transparency, which has led to various techniques to adjust the
middleware to the needs of the applications that make use of it. We discuss
some of the more commonly applied techniques, as they affect the organization
of the middleware itself.
    The actual realization of a distributed system requires that we instantiate
and place software components on real machines. There are many choices
that can be made in doing so. The final instantiation of a software architecture
is also referred to as a system architecture. In this chapter, we will look into
traditional centralized architectures in which a single server implements most
of the software components (and thus functionality), while remote clients
can access that server using simple communication means. In addition, we
consider decentralized peer-to-peer architectures in which all nodes more or
less play equal roles. Many real-world distributed systems are often organized
in a hybrid fashion, combining elements from centralized and decentralized
architectures. We discuss several examples that illustrate the complexity of
many real-world distributed systems.

2.1    Architectural styles
We start our discussion on architectures by first considering the logical or-
ganization of a distributed system into software components, also referred
to as its software architecture [Bass et al., 2021; Richards and Ford, 2020].
Research on software architectures has matured considerably, and it is now
commonly accepted that designing or adopting an architecture is crucial for
the successful development of large software systems.
    For our discussion, the notion of an architectural style is important. Such
a style is formulated in terms of components, the way that components are

connected to each other, the data exchanged between components, and finally,
how these elements are jointly configured into a system. A component is
a modular unit with well-defined required and provided interfaces that is
replaceable within its environment [OMG, 2004]. That a component can be
replaced, and, in particular, while a system continues to operate, is important.
This is because often it is not an option to shut down a system for maintenance.
At best, only parts of it may be put temporarily out of order. Replacing a
component can be done only if its interfaces remain untouched. In practice, we
see that replacing or updating a component means that a part of a system (such
as a server), runs a regular update and switches to the refreshed components
once their installation has finished. Special measures may need to be taken
when a part of the distributed system does need to be restarted to let the
updates take effect. Such measures may include having replicated standbys
that take over while the partial restart is taking place.
    A somewhat more difficult concept to grasp is that of a connector, which
is generally described as a mechanism that mediates communication, coordi-
nation, or cooperation among components [Bass et al., 2021]. For example, a
connector can be formed by the facilities for (remote) procedure calls, message
passing, or streaming data. In other words, a connector allows for the flow of
control and data between components.
    Using components and connectors, we can come to various configurations,
which, in turn, have been classified into architectural styles. Several styles
have by now been identified, of which the most important ones for distributed
systems are:

   • Layered architectures
   • Service-oriented architectures
   • Publish-subscribe architectures

In the following, we discuss each of these styles separately. We note in ad-
vance that in most real-world distributed systems, many styles are combined.
Notably, following an approach by which a system is subdivided into several
(logical) layers is such a universal principle that it is generally combined with
most other architectural styles.

2.1.1   Layered architectures
The basic idea for the layered style is simple: components are organized in
a layered fashion where a component at layer Lj can make a downcall to
a component at a lower-level layer Li (with i < j) and generally expects a
response. Only in exceptional cases will an upcall be made to a higher-level
component. The three common cases are shown in Figure 2.1.

           (a)                       (b)                           (c)

Figure 2.1: (a) Pure layered organization. (b) Mixed layered organization.
(c) Layered organization with upcalls (adopted from [Krakowiak, 2009]).

    Figure 2.1(a) shows a standard organization in which only downcalls to
the next lower layer are made. This organization is commonly deployed in
the case of network communication.
    In many situations, we also encounter the organization shown in Fig-
ure 2.1(b). Consider, for example, an application A that makes use of a library
LOS to interface to an operating system. At the same time, the application uses
a specialized mathematical library Lmath that has been implemented by also
making use of LOS . In this case, referring to Figure 2.1(b), A is implemented at
layer N − 1, Lmath at layer N − 2, and LOS which is common to both of them,
at layer N − 3.
    Finally, a special situation is shown in Figure 2.1(c). In some cases, it
is convenient to have a lower layer do an upcall to its next higher layer. A
typical example is when an operating system signals the occurrence of an
event, to which end it calls a user-defined operation for which an application
had previously passed a reference (typically referred to as a handle).

Layered communication protocols
A well-known and ubiquitously applied layered architecture is that of commu-
nication-protocol stacks. We will concentrate here on the global picture only
and defer a detailed discussion to Section 4.1.1.
    In communication-protocol stacks, each layer implements one or several,
communication services allowing data to be sent from a destination to one
or several targets. To this end, each layer offers an interface specifying the

Figure 2.2: A layered communication-protocol stack, showing the difference
between a service, its interface, and the protocol it deploys.

functions that can be called. In principle, the interface should completely hide
the actual implementation of a service. Another important concept in the case
of communication is that of a (communication) protocol, which describes
the rules that parties will follow to exchange information. It is important to
understand the difference between a service offered by a layer, the interface by
which that service is made available, and the protocol that a layer implements
to establish communication. This distinction is shown in Figure 2.2.
    To make this distinction clear, consider a reliable, connection-oriented
service, which is provided by many communication systems. In this case,
a communicating party first needs to set up a connection to another party
before the two can send and receive messages. Being reliable means that
strong guarantees will be given that sent messages will indeed be delivered to
the other side, even when there is a high risk that messages may be lost (as,
for example, may be the case when using a wireless medium). In addition,
such services generally also ensure that messages are delivered in the same
order as that they were sent.
    This kind of service is realized in the Internet by the Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP). The protocol specifies which messages are to be exchanged for
setting up or tearing down a connection, what needs to be done to preserve
the ordering of transferred data, and what both parties need to do to detect
and correct data that was lost during transmission. The service is made
available in the form of a relatively simple programming interface, containing
calls to set up a connection, send and receive messages, and to tear down
the connection again. In fact, there are different interfaces available, often
dependent on the operating system or programming language used. Likewise,
there are many implementations of the protocol and its interfaces. (All the
gory details can be found in [Stevens, 1994; Wright and Stevens, 1995].)

  Note 2.1 (Example: Two communicating parties)
  To make this distinction between service, interface, and protocol more concrete,
  consider the following two communicating parties, also known as a client and a
  server, respectively, expressed in Python (note that some code has been removed
  for clarity).

     1    from socket import *
     2
     3    s = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
     4    (conn, addr) = s.accept() # returns new socket and addr. client
     5    while True:                # forever
     6      data = conn.recv(1024) # receive data from client
     7      if not data: break       # stop if client stopped
     8      msg = data.decode()+"*" # process the incoming data into a response
     9      conn.send(msg.encode()) # return the response
     10   conn.close()               # close the connection

                                        (a) A simple server
     1    from socket import *
     2
     3    s = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
     4    s.connect((HOST, PORT)) # connect to server (block until accepted)
     5    msg = "Hello World"     # compose a message
     6    s.send(msg.encode())    # send the message
     7    data = s.recv(1024)     # receive the response
     8    print(data.decode())    # print the result
     9    s.close()               # close the connection

                                            (b) A client

Figure 2.3: Two communicating parties.

  In this example, a server is created that makes use of a connection-oriented
  service as offered by the socket library available in Python. This service allows
  two communicating parties to reliably send and receive data over a connection.
  The main functions available in its interface are:

          • socket(): to create an object representing the connection
          • accept(): a blocking call to wait for incoming connection requests; if
            successful, the call returns a new socket for a separate connection
          • connect(): to set up a connection to a specified party
          • close(): to tear down a connection
          • send(), recv(): to send and receive data over a connection, respectively

  The combination of constants AF_INET and SOCK_STREAM is used to specify that
  the TCP protocol should be used in the communication between the two parties.
  These two constants can be seen as part of the interface, whereas making use of
  TCP is part of the offered service. How TCP is implemented, or for that matter, any
  part of the communication service, is hidden completely from the applications.

      Finally, also note that these two programs implicitly adhere to an application-
  level protocol: apparently, if the client sends some data, the server will return it.
  Indeed, it operates as an echo server, where the server adds an asterisk to the data
  sent by the client.

Application layering
Let us now turn our attention to the logical layering of applications. Consider-
ing that a large class of distributed applications is targeted toward supporting
users or applications access to databases, many people have advocated a
distinction between three logical levels, essentially following a layered archi-
tectural style:

   • The application-interface level
   • The processing level
   • The data level

    In line with this layering, we see that applications can often be constructed
from roughly three different pieces: a part that handles interaction with a
user or some external application, a part that operates on a database or file
system, and a middle part that generally contains the core functionality of the
application. This middle part is logically placed at the processing level. In
contrast to user interfaces and databases, there are not many aspects common
to the processing level. Therefore, we shall give several examples to make this
level clearer.
    As a first example, consider a simple Internet search engine, for example
one dedicated to buying houses. Such search engines appear as seemingly
simple Websites through which someone can provide descriptors such as
a city or region, a price range, the type of house, etc. The back end con-
sists of a huge database of houses currently for sale. The processing layer
does nothing else but transform the provided descriptors into a collection of
database queries, retrieves the answers and post-processes these answers by,
for example, ranking the output by relevance and subsequently generating an
HTML page. Figure 2.4 shows this organization.
    As another example, consider the organization of this book’s Website, in
particular, the interface that allows someone to get a personalized digital
copy of the book in PDF. In this case, the interface consists of a WordPress-
based Web server that merely collects the user’s e-mail address (and some
information on exactly which version of the book is being requested). This
information is internally appended to a file requests.txt. The data layer is
simple: it merely consists of a collection of LATEX files and figures that jointly
constitute the entire book.

Figure 2.4: The simplified organization of an Internet search engine for
housing, into three different layers.

   Making a personalized copy consists of embedding the user’s e-mail
address into each of the figures. To this end, once every five minutes a
separate process is started that takes the list of requests and one-by-one adds
the requester’s e-mail address into each bitmapped figure, generates a fresh
copy of the book, stores the generated PDF in a special location (accessible
through a unique URL), and sends the requester an e-mail that the copy is
available for download. This process continues until all requests have been
handled. In this example, we thus see that the processing layer outweighs the
data layer or the application-interface layer in terms of computational efforts
and actions to take.

2.1.2      Service-oriented architectures
Although the layered architectural style is popular, one of its major drawbacks
is the often strong dependency between different layers. Good examples
where these potential dependencies have been carefully considered are found
in designing communication protocol stacks. Bad examples include applica-
tions that have essentially been designed and developed as compositions of
existing components without much concern for the stability of interfaces or
the components themselves, let alone the overlap of functionality between
different components. (A compelling example is given by Kucharski [2020],
who describes the dependency on a simple component that pads a given
string with zeroes or spaces. The author withdrew the component from the
NPM library, leaving thousands of programs affected.)
    Such direct dependencies to specific components have led to an architec-
tural style reflecting a more loose organization into a collection of separate,

independent entities. Each entity encapsulates a service. Whether they are
called services, objects, or microservices, they have in common that the ser-
vice is executed as a separate process (or thread). Of course, running separate
entities does not necessarily lower dependencies in comparison to a layered
architectural style.

Object-based architectural style
Taking the object-based approach as an example, we have a logical organiza-
tion as shown in Figure 2.5. In essence, each object corresponds to what we
have defined as a component, and these components are connected through
a procedure-call mechanism. In the case of distributed systems, a procedure
call can also take place over a network, that is, the calling object need not be
executed on the same machine as the called object. In fact, where exactly the
called object is located can be transparent to the caller: the called object may
equally well run as a separate process on the same machine.

Figure 2.5: An object-based architectural style.

    Object-based architectures are attractive because they provide a natural
way of encapsulating data (called an object’s state) and the operations that can
be performed on that data (which are referred to as an object’s methods) into
a single entity. The interface offered by an object conceals implementation
details, essentially meaning that we, in principle, can consider an object
completely independent of its environment. As with components, this also
means that if the interface is clearly defined and left otherwise untouched, an
object should be replaceable with one having the same interface.
    This separation between interfaces and the objects implementing these
interfaces allows us to place an interface at one machine, while the object itself
resides on another machine. This organization, which is shown in Figure 2.6
is commonly referred to as a distributed object, or every so often a remote
object.
    When a client binds to a distributed object, an implementation of the
object’s interface, called a proxy, is then loaded into the client’s address space.
A proxy is analogous to a so-called client stub in RPC systems. The only thing
it does is pack method invocations into messages and unpack reply messages
to return the result of the method invocation to the client. The actual object

                Client machine                             Server machine
                                                                                 Object
             Client                                     Server
                                                                                 State
                                   Same
Client                             interface                                     Method
invokes                            as object
a method
                                     Skeleton
                                                                                 Interface
                                     invokes
                      Proxy          same method              Skeleton
                                     at object
           Client OS                                                 Server OS

              Network
                                          Marshalled invocation
                                          is passed across network

Figure 2.6: Common organization of a remote object with client-side proxy.

resides at a server machine, where it offers the same interface as it does on the
client machine. Incoming invocation requests are first passed to a server stub,
which unpacks them to make method invocations at the object’s interface at
the server. The server stub is also responsible for packing return values into a
message, and forwarding these reply messages to the client-side proxy.
    The server-side stub is often referred to as a skeleton as it provides the
bare means for letting the server middleware access the user-defined objects.
In practice, it often contains incomplete code in the form of a language-specific
class that needs to be further specialized by the developer.
    A characteristic, but somewhat counterintuitive, feature of most distributed
objects is that their state is not distributed: it resides at a single machine. Only
the interfaces implemented by the object are made available on other machines.
Such objects are also referred to as remote objects. In a general distributed
object, the state itself may be physically distributed across multiple machines,
but this distribution is also hidden from clients behind the object’s interfaces.

Microservice architectural style
One could argue that object-based architectures form the foundation of encap-
sulating services into independent units. Encapsulation is the keyword here:
the service as a whole is realized as a self-contained entity, although it can
possibly make use of other services. By clearly separating various services
such that they can operate independently, we are paving the road toward
service-oriented architectures, generally abbreviated as SOAs.
   Stimulated by object-oriented designs and inspired by the Unix approach
in which many, many small and mutually independent programs can be easily

composed to form larger programs, software architects have been working on
what are called microservices. Essential is that each microservice runs as a
separate (network) process. The implementation of a microservice could be
in the form of a remote object, but this is not a requirement. Furthermore,
despite that people speak of microservices, there is no common agreement on
what the size of such a service should be. Most important, however, is that a
microservice truly represents a separate, independent service. In other words,
modularization is key to designing microservices [Wolff, 2017].
    Nevertheless, size does matter. By already stating that microservices run
as separate networked processes, we are also given a choice where to place a
microservice. As we shall see later in this chapter, in the advent of edge and
fog infrastructures, discussions have started on the orchestration of deploying
distributed applications across different layers. In other words, where do we
place what.

Coarse-grained service composition
In a service-oriented architecture, a distributed application or system is essen-
tially constructed as a composition of many services. A difference (although
not strict) with microservices is that not all of these services may belong to the
same administrative organization. We already came across this phenomenon
when discussing cloud computing: it may very well be that an organization
running its business application makes use of storage services offered by a
cloud provider. These storage services are logically completely encapsulated
into a single unit, of which an interface is made available to customers.
    Of course, storage is a rather basic service, but more sophisticated situa-
tions easily come to mind. Consider, for example, a Web shop selling goods
such as e-books. A simple implementation, following the application layering
we discussed previously, may consist of an application for processing orders,
which, in turn, operates on a local database containing the e-books. Order
processing typically involves selecting items, registering and checking the
delivery channel (perhaps by making use of e-mail), but also making sure that
a payment takes place. The latter can be handled by a separate service, run by
a different organization, to which a purchasing customer is redirected for the
payment, after which the e-book organization is notified so that it can com-
plete the transaction. This example also illustrates that where microservices
are considered to be relatively small, a general service may be expected to
be relatively large. In fact, it is not uncommon to implement a service as a
collection of microservices.
    In this way, we see that the problem of developing a distributed system is
partly one of service composition, and making sure that those services operate
in harmony. Indeed, this problem is completely analogous to the enterprise
application integration issues discussed in Section 1.3.2. Crucial is, and
remains, that each service offers a well-defined (programming) interface. In

practice, this also means that each service offers its own interface, in turn,
possibly making the composition of services far from trivial.

Resource-based architectures
As an increasing number of services became available over the Web and the
development of distributed systems through service composition became more
important, researchers started to rethink the architecture of mostly Web-based
distributed systems. One of the problems with service composition is that
connecting various components can easily turn into an integration nightmare.
    As an alternative, one can also view a distributed system as a huge collec-
tion of resources that are individually managed by components. Resources
may be added or removed by (remote) applications, and likewise can be
retrieved or modified. This approach has now been widely adopted for
the Web and is known as Representational State Transfer (REST) [Fielding,
2000]. There are four key characteristics of what are known as RESTful
architectures [Pautasso et al., 2008]:

     1. Resources are identified through a single naming scheme
     2. All services offer the same interface, consisting of at most four operations,
        as shown in Figure 2.7
     3. Messages sent to or from a service are fully self-described
     4. After executing an operation at a service, that component forgets every-
        thing about the caller

The last property is also referred to as a stateless execution, a concept to
which we return in Chapter 3.

           Operation   Description
           PUT         Modify a resource by transferring a new state
           POST        Create a new resource
           GET         Retrieve the state of a resource in some representation
           DELETE      Delete a resource

Figure 2.7: The four operations available in RESTful architectures.

    To illustrate how RESTful can work in practice, consider a cloud storage
service, such as Amazon’s Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3). Amazon
S3, described in [Murty, 2008] and more recently in [Culkin and Zazon, 2022],
supports two resources: objects, which are essentially the equivalent of files,
and buckets, the equivalent of directories. There is no concept of placing
buckets into buckets. An object named ObjectName contained in a bucket
BucketName is referred to by the following Uniform Resource Identifier (URI):

             https://s3.amazonaws.com/BucketName/ObjectName
To create a bucket, or an object for that matter, an application would essentially
send a PUT request with the URI of the bucket/object. In principle, the protocol
that is used with the service is HTTP. In other words, it is just another HTTP
request, which will subsequently be correctly interpreted by S3. If the bucket
or object already exists, an HTTP error message is returned.
    Similarly, to know which objects are contained in a bucket, an application
would send a GET request with the URI of that bucket. S3 will return a list of
object names, again as an ordinary HTTP response.
    The RESTful architecture has become popular because of its simplicity.
Pautasso et al. [2008] have compared RESTful services to service-specific
interfaces, and, as to be expected, they both have their advantages and dis-
advantages. In particular, the simplicity of RESTful architectures can easily
prohibit easy solutions to intricate communication schemes. One example is
where distributed transactions are needed, which generally requires that ser-
vices keep track of the state of execution. On the other hand, there are many
examples in which RESTful architectures match perfectly a simple integration
scheme of services, yet where the myriad of service interfaces will complicate
matters.

  Note 2.2 (Advanced: On interfaces)
  Clearly, a service cannot be made easier or more difficult just because of the
  particular interface it offers. A service offers functionality, and at best the way
  that the service is accessed is determined by the interface. Indeed, one could
  argue that the discussion on RESTful versus service-specific interfaces is much
  about access transparency. To better appreciate why so many people are paying
  attention to this issue, let us zoom in on the Amazon S3 service, which offers a
  REST interface as well as a more traditional interface (referred to as the SOAP
  interface). The fact that the latter has been deprecated out says a lot.
        Bucket operations                    Object operations
        ListAllMyBuckets                     PutObjectInline
        CreateBucket                         PutObject
        DeleteBucket                         CopyObject
        ListBucket                           GetObject
        GetBucketAccessControlPolicy         GetObjectExtended
        SetBucketAccessControlPolicy         DeleteObject
        GetBucketLoggingStatus               GetObjectAccessControlPolicy
        SetBucketLoggingStatus               SetObjectAccessControlPolicy

Figure 2.8: The operations in Amazon’s S3 SOAP interface, by now
      deprecated.

      The SOAP interface consists of approximately 16 operations, listed in Fig-
  ure 2.8. However, if we were to access Amazon S3 using the Python boto3 library,
  we would have more than 100 operations available. In contrast, the REST interface

  offers only very few operations, essentially those listed in Figure 2.7. Where do
  these differences come from? The answer is, of course, in the parameter space. In
  the case of RESTful architectures, an application will need to provide all that it
  wants through the parameters it passes by one of the operations. In Amazon’s
  SOAP interface, the number of parameters per operation is generally limited, and
  this is certainly the case if we were to use the Python boto3 library.
      Sticking to principles (so that we can avoid the intricacies of real code), suppose
  that we have an interface bucket that offers an operation create, requiring an
  input string such as mybucket, for creating a bucket with name “mybucket.”
  Normally, the operation would be called roughly as follows:
           import bucket
           bucket.create("mybucket")
  However, in a RESTful architecture, the call would need to be essentially encoded
  as a single string, such as
           PUT "https://mybucket.s3.amazonsws.com/"
  The difference is striking. For example, in the first case, many syntactical errors
  can often already be caught during compile time, whereas in the second case,
  checking needs to be deferred until runtime. Secondly, one can argue that
  specifying the semantics of an operation is much easier with specific interfaces
  than with ones that offer only generic operations. On the other hand, with generic
  operations, changes are much easier to accommodate, as they would generally
  involve changing the layout of strings that encode what is actually required.

2.1.3      Publish-subscribe architectures
As systems continue to grow and processes can more easily join or leave, it
becomes important to have an architecture in which dependencies between
processes become as loose as possible. A large class of distributed systems
have adopted an architecture in which there is a strong separation between
processing and coordination. The idea is to view a system as a collection of
autonomously operating processes. In this model, coordination encompasses
the communication and cooperation between processes. It forms the glue
that binds the activities performed by processes into a whole [Gelernter and
Carriero, 1992].
   Cabri et al. [2000] provide a taxonomy of coordination models that can
be applied equally to many types of distributed systems. Slightly adapting
their terminology, we make a distinction between models along two different
dimensions, temporal and referential, as shown in Figure 2.9.
   When processes are temporally and referentially coupled, coordination
takes place directly, referred to as direct coordination. The referential coupling
generally appears in the form of explicit referencing in communication. For
example, a process can communicate only if it knows the name or identifier of

                                     Temporally   Temporally
                                      coupled     decoupled
                    Referentially      Direct       Mailbox
                        coupled
                    Referentially      Event-       Shared
                     decoupled         based      data space

Figure 2.9: Examples of different forms of coordination.

the other processes it wants to exchange information with. Temporal coupling
means that processes that are communicating will both have to be up and
running. In real life, talking over cell phones (and assuming that a cell phone
has only one owner), is an example of direct communication.
     A different type of coordination occurs when processes are temporally de-
coupled, but referentially coupled, which we refer to as mailbox coordination.
In this case, there is no need for two communicating processes to be active
at the same time to let communication take place. Instead, communication
takes place by putting messages in a (possibly shared) mailbox. Because it is
necessary to explicitly address the mailbox that will hold the messages that
are to be exchanged, there is a referential coupling.
     The combination of referentially decoupled and temporally coupled sys-
tems form the group of models for event-based coordination. In referentially
decoupled systems, processes do not know each other explicitly. The only
thing a process can do is publish a notification describing the occurrence of an
event (e.g., that it wants to coordinate activities, or that it just produced some
interesting results). Assuming that notifications come in all sorts and kinds,
processes may subscribe to a specific kind of notification (see also [Mühl et al.,
2006]). In an ideal event-based coordination model, a published notification
will be delivered exactly to those processes that have subscribed to it. However,
it is generally required that the subscriber is up-and-running at the time the
notification was published.
     A well-known coordination model is the combination of referentially and
temporally decoupled processes, leading to what is known as a shared data
space. The key idea is that processes communicate entirely through tuples,
which are structured data records consisting of several fields, very similar to a
row in a database table. Processes can put any type of tuple into the shared
data space. To retrieve a tuple, a process provides a search pattern that is
matched against the tuples. Any tuple that matches is returned.
     Shared data spaces are thus seen to implement an associative search
mechanism for tuples. When a process wants to extract a tuple from the data
space, it specifies (some of) the values of the fields it is interested in. Any
tuple that matches that specification is then removed from the data space and
passed to the process.

   Shared data spaces are often combined with event-based coordination: a
process subscribes to certain tuples by providing a search pattern; when a
process inserts a tuple into the data space, matching subscribers are notified. In
both cases, we are dealing with a publish-subscribe architecture, and indeed,
the key characteristic feature is that processes have no explicit reference to
each other. The difference between a pure event-based architectural style , and
that of a shared data space, is shown in Figure 2.10. We have also shown an
abstraction of the mechanism by which publishers and subscribers are matched,
known as an event bus.

                     (a)                                        (b)

Figure 2.10: The (a) event-based and (b) shared data-space architectural style.

  Note 2.3 (Example: Linda tuple spaces)
  To make matters a bit more concrete, we take a closer look at Linda, a program-
  ming model developed in the 1980s [Carriero and Gelernter, 1989]. The shared
  data space in Linda is known as a tuple space, which supports three operations:
      • in(t): remove a tuple that matches the template t
      • rd(t): obtain a copy of a tuple that matches the template t
      • out(t): add the tuple t to the tuple space
  Note that if a process would call out(t) twice in a row, we would find that two
  copies of tuple t would have been stored. Formally, a tuple space is therefore
  always modeled as a multiset. Both in and rd are blocking operations: the caller
  will be blocked until a matching tuple is found, or has become available.
      Consider a simple microblog application in which messages are tagged with
  the name of its poster and a topic, followed by a short string. Each message
  is modeled as a tuple <string,string,string> where the first string names the
  poster, the second string represents the topic, and the third one is the actual
  content. Assuming that we have created a shared data space called MicroBlog,
  Figure 2.11 shows how Alice and Bob can post messages to that space, and how

  Chuck can pick a (randomly selected) message. We have omitted some code for
  clarity. Note that neither Alice nor Bob knows who will read their postings.

   1   blog = linda.universe._rd(("MicroBlog",linda.TupleSpace))[1]
   2
   3   blog._out(("bob","distsys","I am studying chap 2"))
   4   blog._out(("bob","distsys","The linda example’s pretty simple"))
   5   blog._out(("bob","gtcn","Cool book!"))

          (a) Bob’s code for creating a microblog and posting three messages.
   1   blog = linda.universe._rd(("MicroBlog",linda.TupleSpace))[1]
   2
   3   blog._out(("alice","gtcn","This graph theory stuff is not easy"))
   4   blog._out(("alice","distsys","I like systems more than graphs"))

          (b) Alice’s code for creating a microblog and posting two messages.
   1   blog = linda.universe._rd(("MicroBlog",linda.TupleSpace))[1]
   2
   3   t1 = blog._rd(("bob","distsys",str))
   4   t2 = blog._rd(("alice","gtcn",str))
   5   t3 = blog._rd(("bob","gtcn",str))

            (c) Chuck reading a message from Bob’s and Alice’s microblog.

Figure 2.11: A simple example of using a shared data space.

      In the first line of each code fragment, a process looks up the tuple space
  named “MicroBlog.” Bob posts three messages: two on topic distsys, and one on
  gtcn. Alice posts two messages, one on each topic. Chuck, finally, reads three
  messages: one from Bob on distsys and one on gtcn, and one from Alice on gtcn.
      Obviously, there is much room for improvement. For example, we should
  ensure that Alice cannot post messages under Bob’s name. However, the important
  issue to note now, is that by providing only tags, a reader such as Chuck will
  be able to pick up messages without needing to directly reference the poster. In
  particular, Chuck could also read a randomly selected message on topic distsys
  through the statement
         t = blog_rd((str,"distsys",str))
  We leave it as an exercise to the reader to extend the code fragments such that a
  next message will be selected instead of a random one.

   An important aspect of publish-subscribe systems is that communication
takes place by describing the events that a subscriber is interested in. As a
consequence, naming plays a crucial role. We return to naming later, but for
now, the important issue is that often, data items are not explicitly identified
by senders and receivers.
   Let us first assume that events are described by a series of attributes.
A notification describing an event is said to be published when it is made

available for other processes to read. To that end, a subscription needs to
be passed to the middleware, containing a description of the event that the
subscriber is interested in. Such a description typically consists of some
(attribute, value) pairs, which is common for so-called topic-based publish-
subscribe systems.
    As an alternative, in content-based publish-subscribe systems, a sub-
scription may also consist of (attribute, range) pairs. In this case, the specified
attribute is expected to take on values within a specified range. Descriptions
can sometimes be given using all kinds of predicates formulated over the
attributes, very similar in nature to SQL-like queries in the case of relational
databases. Obviously, the more expressive a description is allowed to be, the
more difficult it will be to test whether an event matches a description.
    We are now confronted with a situation in which subscriptions need to be
matched against notifications, as shown in Figure 2.12. Often, an event actually
corresponds to data becoming available. In that case, when matching succeeds,
there are two possible scenarios. In the first case, the middleware may decide
to forward the published notification, along with the associated data, to its
current set of subscribers, that is, processes with a matching subscription. As
an alternative, the middleware can also forward only a notification, at which
point subscribers can execute a read operation to retrieve the data item.

Figure 2.12: The principle of exchanging data items between publishers and
subscribers.

    In those cases, in which data associated with an event are immediately
forwarded to subscribers, the middleware will generally not offer storage
of data. Storage is either explicitly handled by a separate service, or is
the responsibility of subscribers. In other words, we have a referentially
decoupled, but temporally coupled system.
    This situation is different when notifications are sent so that subscribers
need to explicitly read the associated data. Necessarily, the middleware will
have to store data items. In these situations, there are additional operations
for data management. It is also possible to attach a lease to a data item such
that when the lease expires that the data item is automatically deleted.

    Events can easily complicate the processing of subscriptions. To illustrate,
consider a subscription such as “notify when room ZI.1060 is unoccupied and
the door is unlocked.” Typically, a distributed system supporting such sub-
scriptions can be implemented by placing independent sensors for monitoring
room occupancy (e.g., motion sensors) and those for registering the status
of a door lock. Following the approach sketched so far, we would need to
compose such primitive events into a publishable data item, to which processes
can then subscribe. Event composition turns out to be a difficult task, notably
when the primitive events are generated from sources dispersed across the
distributed system.
    Clearly, in publish-subscribe systems such as these, the crucial issue is the
efficient and scalable implementation of matching subscriptions to notifica-
tions. From the outside, the publish-subscribe architecture provides lots of
potential for building very large-scale distributed systems due to the strong
decoupling of processes. On the other hand, devising scalable implementa-
tions without losing this independence is not a trivial exercise, notably in
the case of content-based publish-subscribe systems. In this sense, although
many claim that the publish-subscribe style offers the path toward scalable
architectures, the fact is that implementations may easily form a bottleneck,
certainly when security and privacy is at stake, as we will discuss in Chapter 9
and later in Chapter 5.

2.2   Middleware and distributed systems
To assist the development of distributed applications, distributed systems are
often organized to have a separate layer of software that is logically placed on
top of the respective operating systems of the computers that are part of the

Figure 2.13: A distributed system organized in a middleware layer, which
extends over multiple machines, offering each application the same interface.

system. This organization is shown in Figure 2.13, leading to what is known
as middleware [Bernstein, 1996].
    Figure 2.13 shows four networked computers and three applications, of
which application B is distributed across computers 2 and 3. Each application
is offered the same interface. The distributed system provides the means for
components of a single distributed application to communicate with each
other, but also to let different applications communicate. At the same time,
it hides, as best and reasonably as possible, the differences in hardware and
operating systems from each application.
    In a sense, middleware is the same to a distributed system as what an
operating system is to a computer: a manager of resources offering its ap-
plications to efficiently share and deploy those resources across a network.
Next to resource management, it offers services that can also be found in most
operating systems, including:

     • Facilities for interapplication communication.
     • Security services.
     • Accounting services.
     • Masking of and recovery from failures.

The main difference with their operating-system equivalents, is that middle-
ware services are offered in a networked environment. Note also that most
services are useful to many applications. In this sense, middleware can also
be viewed as a container of commonly used components and functions that
now no longer have to be implemented by applications separately.

  Note 2.4 (Historical note: The term middleware)
  Although the term middleware became popular in the mid 1990s, it was most
  likely mentioned for the first time in a report on a NATO software engineering
  conference, edited by Peter Naur and Brian Randell in October 1968 [Naur and
  Randell, 1968]. Indeed, middleware was placed precisely between applications
  and service routines (the equivalent of operating systems).

2.2.1      Middleware organization
Let us now zoom into the actual organization of middleware. There are two
important types of design patterns that are often applied to the organization of
middleware: wrappers and interceptors. Each targets different problems, yet
addresses the same goal for middleware: achieving openness (as we discussed
in Section 1.2.3).

Wrappers
When building a distributed system out of existing components, we immedi-
ately bump into a fundamental problem: the interfaces offered by the legacy
component are most likely not suitable for all applications. In Section 1.3.2 we
discussed how enterprise application integration could be established through
middleware as a communication facilitator, but there we still implicitly as-
sumed that, in the end, components could be accessed through their native
interfaces.
    A wrapper or adapter is a special component that offers an interface
acceptable to a client application, of which the functions are transformed
into those available at the component. In essence, it solves the problem of
incompatible interfaces (see also Gamma et al. [1994]).
    Although originally narrowly defined in the context of object-oriented
programming, in the context of distributed systems wrappers are much more
than simple interface transformers. For example, an object adapter is a
component that allows applications to invoke remote objects, although those
objects may have been implemented as a combination of library functions
operating on the tables of a relational database.
    As another example, reconsider Amazon’s S3 storage service. As men-
tioned, there are two types of interfaces available, one adhering to a RESTful
architecture, another following a more traditional approach. For the RESTful
interface, clients will be using the HTTP protocol, essentially communicating
with a traditional Web server which now acts as an adapter to the actual stor-
age service, by partly dissecting incoming requests and subsequently handing
them off to specialized servers internal to S3.
    Wrappers have always played an important role in extending systems with
existing components. Extensibility, which is crucial for achieving openness,
used to be addressed by adding wrappers as needed. In other words, if
an application A managed data that was needed by an application B, one
approach would be to develop a wrapper specific for B so that it could
have access to A’s data. Clearly, this approach does not scale well: with N
applications we would, in theory, need to develop N × ( N − 1) = O( N 2 )
wrappers.
    Again, facilitating a reduction of the number of wrappers is typically
done through middleware. One way of doing this is implementing a so-
called broker, which is logically a centralized component that handles all
the accesses between different applications. An often-used type is a message
broker of which we discuss the technicalities in Section 4.3.3. In the case of a
message broker, applications simply send requests to the broker containing
information on what they need. The broker, having knowledge of all relevant
applications, contacts the appropriate applications, possibly combines and
transforms the responses and returns the result to the initial application. In
principle, because a broker offers a single interface to each application, we

                          (a)                               (b)

Figure 2.14: (a) Requiring each application to have a wrapper for each other
application. (b) Reducing the number of wrappers by making use of a broker.

now need at most 2N = O( N ) wrappers instead of O( N 2 ). This situation is
sketched in Figure 2.14.

Interceptors
Conceptually, an interceptor is nothing but a software construct that will
break the usual flow of control and allow other (application specific) code
to be executed. Interceptors are a primary means for adapting middleware
to the specific needs of an application. As such, they play an important role
in making middleware open. To make interceptors generic may require a
substantial implementation effort, as illustrated by Schmidt et al. [2000], and it
is unclear whether in such cases generality should be preferred over restricted
applicability and simplicity. Furthermore, often having only limited intercep-
tion facilities will improve management of the software and the distributed
system as a whole.
    To make matters concrete, consider interception as supported in many
object-based distributed systems. The basic idea is simple: an object A can call
a method that belongs to an object B, while the latter resides on a different
machine than A. As we explain in detail later in the book, such a remote-object
invocation is carried out in three steps:

     1. Object A is offered a local interface that is the same as the interface
        offered by object B. A calls the method available in that interface.
     2. The call by A is transformed into a generic object invocation, made
        possible through a general object-invocation interface offered by the
        middleware at the machine where A resides.
     3. Finally, the generic object invocation is transformed into a message that
        is sent through the transport-level network interface as offered by A’s
        local operating system.

Figure 2.15: Using interceptors to handle remote-object invocations.

    This scheme is shown in Figure 2.15. After the first step, the call B.doit(val)
is transformed into a generic call, such as invoke(B,&doit,val) with a ref-
erence to B’s method and the parameters that go along with the call. Now
imagine that object B is replicated. In that case, each replica should actu-
ally be invoked. This is a clear point where interception can help. What
the request-level interceptor will do, is simply call invoke(B,&doit,val) for
each of the replicas. The beauty of this all is that the object A need not be
aware of the replication of B, but also the object middleware need not have
special components that deal with this replicated call. Only the request-level
interceptor, which may be added to the middleware, needs to know about B’s
replication.
    In the end, a call to a remote object will have to be sent over the network.
In practice, this means that the messaging interface as offered by the local
operating system will need to be invoked. At that level, a message-level
interceptor may assist in transferring the invocation to the target object. For
example, imagine that the parameter val actually corresponds to a huge array
of data. In that case, it may be wise to fragment the data into smaller parts to
have it assembled again at the destination. Such a fragmentation may improve
performance or reliability. Again, the middleware need not be aware of this
fragmentation; the lower-level interceptor will transparently handle the rest of
the communication with the local operating system.

2.2.2      Modifiable middleware
What wrappers and interceptors offer are means to extend and adapt the
middleware. The need for adaptation comes from the fact that the environment
in which distributed applications are executed changes continuously. Changes
include those resulting from mobility, a strong variance in the quality-of-
service of networks, failing hardware, and battery drainage, among others.
Rather than making applications responsible for reacting to changes, this task
is placed in the middleware. Moreover, as the size of a distributed system
increases, changing its parts can rarely be done by temporarily shutting it
down. What is needed is being able to make changes on-the-fly.
    These strong influences from the environment have brought many de-
signers of middleware to consider the construction of adaptive software. We
follow Parlavantzas and Coulson [2007] in speaking of modifiable middle-
ware to express that middleware may not only need to be adaptive, but that
we should be able to purposefully modify it without bringing it down. In
this context, interceptors can be thought of offering a means to adapt the
standard flow of control. Replacing software components at runtime is an
example of modifying a system. And indeed, perhaps one of the most popular
approaches toward modifiable middleware is that of dynamically constructing
middleware from components.
    Component-based design focuses on supporting modifiability through
composition. A system may either be configured statically at design time,
or dynamically at runtime. The latter requires support for late binding,
a technique that has been successfully applied in programming language
environments, but also for operating systems where modules can be loaded
and unloaded at will. Automatically selecting the best implementation of
a component during runtime is by now well understood [Yellin, 2003] but
again, the process remains complex for distributed systems, especially when
considering that replacement of one component requires to know exactly what
the effect of that replacement on other components will be. Often, components
are less independent as one may think.
    The bottom line is that to accommodate dynamic changes to the software
that makes up middleware, we need at least basic support to load and unload
components at runtime. In addition, for each component explicit specifications
of the interfaces it offers, as well the interfaces it requires, are needed. If state
is maintained between calls to a component, then further special measures
are needed. By-and-large, it should be clear that organizing middleware to be
modifiable requires special attention.

2.3     Layered-system architectures
Let us now take a look at how many distributed systems are actually organized
by considering where software components are placed. Deciding on software

components, their interaction, and their placement leads to an instance of a
software architecture, also known as a system architecture [Bass et al., 2021].
We start with discussing layered architectures. Other forms follow later.
    Despite the lack of consensus on many distributed systems issues, there
is one issue that many researchers and practitioners agree upon: thinking in
terms of clients that request services from servers helps to understand and
manage the complexity of distributed systems [Saltzer and Kaashoek, 2009].
In the following, we first consider a simple layered organization, followed by
looking at multi-layered organizations.

2.3.1   Simple client-server architecture
In the basic client-server model, processes in a distributed system are divided
into two (possibly overlapping) groups. A server is a process implementing
a specific service, for example, a file system service or a database service. A
client is a process that requests a service from a server by sending it a request
and subsequently waiting for the server’s reply. This client-server interaction,
also known as request-reply behavior is shown in Figure 2.16.

Figure 2.16: General interaction between a client C and a server S. C sends
the operation oper and waits for the response from S.

     Communication between a client and a server can be implemented by a
simple connectionless protocol when the underlying network is fairly reliable,
as in many local-area networks. In these cases, when a client requests a service,
it simply packages a message for the server, identifying the service it wants,
along with the necessary input data. The message is then sent to the server.
The latter, in turn, will always wait for an incoming request, subsequently
process it, and package the results in a reply message that is then sent to the
client.
     Using a connectionless protocol has the obvious advantage of being effi-
cient. As long as messages do not get lost or corrupted, the request/reply
protocol just sketched works fine. Unfortunately, making the protocol resistant
to occasional transmission failures is not trivial. The only thing we can do is
possibly let the client resend the request when no reply message comes in. The
problem, however, is that the client cannot detect whether the original request
message was lost, or that transmission of the reply failed. If the reply was lost,
then resending a request may result in performing the operation twice. If the

operation was something like “transfer $10,000 from my bank account,” then
clearly, it would have been better that we simply reported an error instead.
On the other hand, if the operation was “tell me how much money I have left,”
it would be perfectly acceptable to resend the request. When an operation
can be repeated multiple times without harm, it is said to be idempotent.
Since some requests are idempotent and others are not, it should be clear that
there is no single solution for dealing with lost messages. We defer a detailed
discussion on handling transmission failures to Section 8.3.
    As an alternative, many client-server systems use a reliable connection-
oriented protocol. Although this solution is not entirely appropriate in a
local-area network due to relatively low performance, it works perfectly fine
in wide-area systems in which communication is inherently unreliable. For
example, virtually all Internet application protocols are based on reliable
TCP/IP connections. In this case, whenever a client requests a service, it first
sets up a connection to the server before sending the request. The server
generally uses that same connection to send the reply message, after which
the connection is torn down. The trouble may be that setting up and tearing
down a connection is relatively costly, especially when the request and reply
messages are small.
    The client-server model has been subject to many debates and controver-
sies over the years. One of the main issues was how to draw a clear distinction
between a client and a server. Not surprisingly, there is often no clear distinc-
tion. For example, a server for a distributed database may continuously act as
a client because it is forwarding requests to different file servers responsible
for implementing the database tables. In such a case, the database server itself
only processes the queries.

2.3.2      Multitiered Architectures
The distinction into three logical levels, as discussed so far, suggests sev-
eral possibilities for physically distributing a client-server application across
several machines. The simplest organization is to have only two types of
machines:

     1. A client machine containing only the programs implementing (part of)
        the user-interface level
     2. A server machine containing the rest, that is, the programs implementing
        the processing and data level

    In this organization everything is handled by the server while the client is
essentially no more than a dumb terminal, possibly with only a convenient
graphical interface. There are, however, many other possibilities. As explained
in Section 2.1.1, many distributed applications are divided into three layers:
(1) a user-interface layer, (2) a processing layer, and (3) a data layer. One

approach for organizing clients and servers is then to distribute these layers
across different machines, as shown in Figure 2.17 (see also Umar [1997]).
As a first step, we make a distinction between only two kinds of machines:
client machines and server machines, leading to what is also referred to as a
(physically) two-tiered architecture.

                                     Client machine

  User interface   User interface    User interface   User interface   User interface
                                       Application     Application      Application
                                                                         Database

  User interface

   Application      Application        Application
    Database        Database            Database       Database           Database

                                     Server machine
    (a)               (b)                 (c)              (d)               (e)

Figure 2.17: Client-server organizations in a two-tiered architecture.

    One possible organization is to have only the terminal-dependent part
of the user interface on the client machine, as shown in Figure 2.17(a), and
give the applications remote control over the presentation of their data. An
alternative is to place the entire user-interface software on the client side, as
shown in Figure 2.17(b). In such cases, we essentially divide the application
into a graphical front end, which communicates with the rest of the application
(residing at the server) through an application-specific protocol. In this model,
the front end (the client software) does no processing other than necessary for
presenting the application’s interface.
    Continuing along this line of reasoning, we may also move part of the
application to the front end, as shown in Figure 2.17(c). An example where
this makes sense is where the application makes use of a form that needs to
be filled in entirely before it can be processed. The front end can then check
the correctness and consistency of the form, and where necessary interact
with the user. Another example of the organization of Figure 2.17(c), is that of
a word processor in which the basic editing functions execute on the client
side where they operate on locally cached, or in-memory data, but where the
advanced support tools such as checking the spelling and grammar execute
on the server side.
    In many client-server environments, the organizations shown in Fig-
ure 2.17(d) and Figure 2.17(e) are particularly popular. These organizations
are used where the client machine is a PC or workstation, connected through
a network to a distributed file system or database. Essentially, most of the

application is running on the client machine, but all operations on files or
database entries go to the server. For example, many banking applications
run on an end-user’s machine, where the user prepares transactions and such.
Once finished, the application contacts the database on the bank’s server and
uploads the transactions for further processing. Figure 2.17(e) represents the
situation where the client’s local disk contains part of the data. For example,
when browsing the Web, a client can gradually build a huge cache on local
disk of most recent inspected Web pages.

  Note 2.5 (More information: Is there something like the best organization?)
  We note that there has been a strong trend to move away from the configurations
  shown in Figure 2.17(d) and Figure 2.17(e) in those cases, that client software is
  placed at end-user machines. Instead, most of the processing and data storage
  is handled at the server side. The reason for this is simple: although client
  machines do a lot, they are also more problematic to manage. Having more
  functionality on the client machine means that a wide range of end users will
  need to be able to handle that software. This implies that more effort needs to
  be spent on making software resilient to end-user behavior. In addition, client-
  side software is dependent on the client’s underlying platform (i.e., operating
  system and resources), which can easily mean that multiple versions will need
  to be maintained. From a systems-management perspective, having what are
  called fat clients is not optimal. Instead, the thin clients as represented by the
  organizations shown in Figure 2.17(a)–(c) are much easier, perhaps at the cost of
  less sophisticated user interfaces and client-perceived performance.
      Does this mean the end of fat clients? Not in the least. For one thing, there
  are many applications for which a fat-client organization is often still the best. We
  already mentioned office suites, but also many multimedia applications require
  that processing is done on the client’s side. Moreover, when end users need
  to operate offline, we see that installing applications will be necessary. Second,
  with the advent of advanced Web browsing technology, it is now much easier
  to dynamically place and manage client-side software by simply uploading (the
  sometimes very sophisticated) scripts to the client. Combined with the fact
  that this type of client-side software runs in well-defined commonly deployed
  environments, and thus that platform dependency is much less of an issue, we
  see that the counter-argument of management complexity is often no longer
  valid. This has led to the deployment of virtual desktop environments, which we
  discuss further in Chapter 3.
      Finally, note that moving away from fat clients does not imply that we no
  longer need distributed systems. On the contrary, what we continue to see is
  that server-side solutions are becoming increasingly more distributed as a single
  server is being replaced by multiple servers running on different machines. Cloud
  computing is a good example in this case: the complete server side is being
  executed in data centers, and generally on multiple servers.

   When distinguishing only client and server machines as we did so far, we
miss the point that a server may sometimes need to act as a client, as shown

in Figure 2.18, leading to a (physically) three-tiered architecture.

Figure 2.18: An example of an application server AS acting as client for a
database server DS.

    In this architecture, traditionally programs that form part of the process-
ing layer are executed by a separate server, but may additionally be partly
distributed across the client and server machines. A typical example of where
a three-tiered architecture is used is in transaction processing. A separate
process, called the transaction processing monitor, coordinates all transactions
across possibly different data servers.
    Another, but very different example where we often see a three-tiered
architecture is in the organization of Websites. In this case, a Web server
acts as an entry point to a site, passing requests to an application server
where the actual processing takes place. This application server, in turn,
interacts with a database server. We already came across such an organization
when discussing this book’s Website and the facilities for generating and
downloading a personalized copy.

2.3.3   Example: The Network File System
Many distributed files systems are organized like client-server architectures,
with Sun Microsystem’s Network File System (NFS) being one of the most
widely deployed ones for Unix systems [Callaghan, 2000; Haynes, 2015;
Noveck and Lever, 2020].
    The basic idea behind NFS is that each file server provides a standardized
view of its local file system. In other words, it should not matter how that
local file system is implemented; each NFS server supports the same model.
This approach has been adopted for other distributed files systems as well.
NFS comes with a communication protocol that allows clients to access the
files stored on a server, thus allowing a heterogeneous collection of processes,
possibly running on different operating systems and machines, to share a
common file system.
    The model underlying NFS and similar systems is that of a remote file
service. In this model, clients are offered transparent access to a file system
that is managed by a remote server. However, clients are normally unaware

of the actual location of files. Instead, they are offered an interface to a file
system that is similar to the interface offered by a conventional local file
system. In particular, the client is offered only an interface containing various
file operations, but the server is responsible for implementing those operations.
This model is therefore also referred to as the remote access model. It is
shown in Figure 2.19(a).

                                                                   1. File moved to client
     Client                      Server               Client                      Server

                                                                                  Old file

                                                                                  New file

              Requests from
              client to access    File stays   2. Accesses are
                                                                    3. When client is done,
                 remote file      on server       done on client
                                                                       file is returned to
                                                                       server

                    (a)                                               (b)

Figure 2.19: (a) The remote access model. (b) The upload/download model.
    In contrast, in the upload/download model a client accesses a file locally
after having downloaded it from the server, as shown in Figure 2.19(b) When
the client is finished with the file, it is uploaded back to the server again so
that it can be used by another client. The Internet’s FTP service can be used
this way when a client downloads a complete file, modifies it, and then puts
it back.
    NFS has been implemented for numerous operating systems, although the
Unix versions are predominant. For virtually all modern Unix systems, NFS
is generally implemented following the architecture shown in Figure 2.20.
    A client accesses the file system using the system calls provided by its local
operating system. However, the local Unix file system interface is replaced
by an interface to the Virtual File System (VFS), which by now is a de facto
standard for interfacing to different (distributed) file systems [Kleiman, 1986].
Virtually all modern operating systems provide VFS, and not doing so more
or less forces developers to largely reimplement huge parts of an operating
system when adopting a new file-system structure. With NFS, operations on
the VFS interface are either passed to a local file system, or passed to a separate
component known as the NFS client, which takes care of handling access to
files stored at a remote server. In NFS, all client-server communication is done
through so-called remote procedure calls (RPCs). As mentioned before, an
RPC is essentially a standardized way to let a client on a machine A make an
ordinary call to a procedure that is implemented on another machine B. We
discuss RPCs extensively in Chapter 4. The NFS client implements the NFS
file system operations as remote procedure calls to the server. Note that the
operations offered by the VFS interface can be different from those offered by

                     Client                                    Server

            System call layer                            System call layer

            Virtual file system                          Virtual file system
                (VFS) layer                                  (VFS) layer

      Local file                                                         Local file
  system interface            NFS client          NFS server         system interface

                              RPC client          RPC server
                                stub                stub

                Network

Figure 2.20: The basic NFS architecture for Unix systems.

the NFS client. The whole idea of the VFS is to hide the differences between
various file systems.
    On the server side, we see a similar organization. The NFS server is
responsible for handling incoming client requests. The RPC component at
the server converts incoming requests to regular VFS file operations that
are subsequently passed to the VFS layer. Again, the VFS is responsible for
implementing a local file system in which the actual files are stored.
    An important advantage of this scheme is that NFS is largely independent
of local file systems. It does not matter whether the operating system at the
client or server uses a Unix file system, a Windows file system, or even an old
MS-DOS file system. The only important issue is that these file systems are
compliant with the file system model offered by NFS. For example, MS-DOS
with its short file names cannot be used to implement an NFS server in a fully
transparent way.

2.3.4   Example: The Web
The architecture of Web-based distributed systems is not fundamentally dif-
ferent from other distributed systems. However, it is interesting to see how
the initial idea of supporting distributed documents has evolved since its in-
ception in the 1990s. Documents turned from being purely static and passive
to dynamically generated content. Furthermore, recently, many organizations
have begun supporting services instead of just documents.

Simple Web-based systems
Many Web-based systems are still organized as relatively simple client-server
architectures. The core of a Web site is formed by a process that has access to a

local file system storing documents. The simplest way to refer to a document
is by a reference called a uniform resource locator (URL). It specifies where
a document is located by embedding the DNS name of its associated server
along with a file name by which the server can look up the document in its
local file system. Furthermore, a URL specifies the application-level protocol
for transferring the document across the network.
    A client interacts with Web servers through a browser, which is responsible
for properly displaying a document. Furthermore, a browser accepts input
from a user mostly by letting the user select a reference to another document,
which it then subsequently fetches and displays. The communication between
a browser and Web server is standardized: they both adhere to the HyperText
Transfer Protocol (HTTP). This leads to the overall organization shown in
Figure 2.21.

Figure 2.21: The overall organization of a traditional Web site.

    Let us zoom in a bit into what a document actually is. Perhaps the simplest
form is a standard text file. In that case, the server and browser have barely
anything to do: the server copies the file from the local file system and
transfers it to the browser. The latter, in turn, merely displays the content of
the file ad verbatim without further ado.
    More interesting are Web documents that have been marked up, which is
usually done in the HyperText Markup Language, or simply HTML. In that
case, the document includes various instructions expressing how its content
should be displayed, similar to what one can expect from any decent word-
processing system (although those instructions are normally hidden from the
end user). For example, instructing text to be emphasized is done by the
following markup:
      <emph>Emphasize this text</emph>
There are many more of such markup instructions. The point is that the
browser understands these instructions and will act accordingly when dis-
playing the text.

    Documents can contain much more than just markup instructions. In
particular, they can have complete programs embedded, of which JavaScript
is the one most often deployed. In this case, the browser is warned that there
is some code to execute as in:

      <script type=”text/javascript”>....</script>

and as long as the browser has an appropriate embedded interpreter for the
specified language, everything between “<script>” and “</script>” will be
executed as any other program. The main benefit of including scripts is that
it allows for much better interaction with the end user, including sending
information back to the server. (The latter, by the way, has always been
supported in HTML through forms.)
    Much more can be said about Web documents, but this is not the place to
do so. A good introduction on how to build Web-based applications can be
found in [Sebesta, 2015].

Multitiered architectures
The Web started out as the relatively simple two-tiered client-server system
shown in Figure 2.21. By now, this simple architecture has been extended to
support much more sophisticated means of documents. In fact, one could
justifiably argue that the term “document” is no longer appropriate. For one,
most things that we get to see in our browser has been generated on the spot
as the result of sending a request to a Web server. Content is stored in a
database at the server’s side, along with client-side scripts and such, to be
composed on-the-fly into a document which is then subsequently sent to the
client’s browser. Documents have thus become completely dynamic.
    One of the first enhancements to the basic architecture was support for
simple user interaction by the Common Gateway Interface or simply CGI.
CGI defines a standard way by which a Web server can execute a program
taking user data as input. Usually, user data come from an HTML form; it
specifies the program that is to be executed at the server side, along with
parameter values that are filled in by the user. Once the form has been
completed, the program’s name and collected parameter values are sent to
the server, as shown in Figure 2.22.
    When the server sees the request, it starts the program named in the
request and passes it the parameter values. At that point, the program simply
does its work and generally returns the results in the form of a document that
is sent back to the user’s browser to be displayed.
    CGI programs can be as sophisticated as a developer wants. For example,
as shown in Figure 2.22 many programs operate on a database local to the
Web server. After processing the data, the program generates an HTML
document and returns that document to the server. The server will then pass
the document to the client. An interesting observation is that to the server,

Figure 2.22: The principle of using server-side CGI programs.

it appears as if it is asking the CGI program to fetch a document. In other
words, the server does nothing but delegate the fetching of a document to an
external program.
    The main task of a server used to be handling client requests by simply
fetching documents. With CGI programs, fetching a document could be
delegated in such a way that the server would remain unaware of whether
a document had been generated on the fly, or actually read from the local
file system. Note that we have just described a two-tiered organization of
server-side software.
    However, servers nowadays do much more than just fetching documents.
One of the most important enhancements is that servers can also process a
document before passing it to the client. In particular, a document may contain
a server-side script, which is executed by the server when the document has
been fetched locally. The result of executing a script is sent along with the
rest of the document to the client. The script itself is not sent. In other words,
using a server-side script changes a document by essentially replacing the
script with the results of its execution. To make matters concrete, take a look
at a simple example of dynamically generating a document. Assume a file is
stored at the server with the following content:

      <strong> <?php echo $_SERVER[’REMOTE_ADDR’]; ?> </strong>

The server will examine the file and subsequently process the PHP code (be-
tween “<?php” and “?>”) replacing the code with the address of the requesting
client. Much more sophisticated settings are possible, such as accessing a
local database and subsequently fetching content from that database to be
combined with other dynamically generated content.

2.4    Symmetrically distributed system architectures
Multitiered client-server architectures are a direct consequence of dividing
distributed applications into a user interface, processing components, and

data-management components. The different tiers correspond directly with
the logical organization of applications. In many business environments,
distributed processing is equivalent to organizing a client-server application
as a multitiered architecture. We refer to this type of distribution as vertical
distribution. The characteristic feature of vertical distribution is that it is
achieved by placing logically different components on different machines. The
term is related to the concept of vertical fragmentation as used in distributed
relational databases, where it means that tables are split columnwise, and
subsequently distributed across multiple machines [Özsu and Valduriez, 2020].

    Again, from a systems-management perspective, having a vertical distri-
bution can help: functions are logically and physically split across multiple
machines, where each machine is tailored to a specific group of functions.
However, vertical distribution is only one way of organizing client-server
applications. In modern architectures, it is often the distribution of the clients
and the servers that counts, which we refer to as horizontal distribution. In
this type of distribution, a client or server may be physically split up into
logically equivalent parts, but each part is operating on its own share of the
complete data set, thus balancing the load. In this section, we will take a look
at a class of modern system architectures that support horizontal distribution,
known as peer-to-peer systems.

    From a high-level perspective, the processes that constitute a peer-to-peer
system are all equal. This means that the functions that need to be carried
out are represented by every process that constitutes the distributed system.
As a consequence, much of the interaction between processes is symmetric:
each process will act as a client and a server at the same time (which is also
referred to as acting as a servant).

    Given this symmetric behavior, peer-to-peer architectures revolve around
the question of how to organize the processes in an overlay network [Tarkoma,
2010]: a network in which the nodes are formed by the processes and the links
represent the possible communication channels (which are often realized as
TCP connections). A node may not be able to communicate directly with an
arbitrary other node, but is required to send messages through the available
communication channels. Two types of overlay networks exist: those that are
structured and those that are not. These two types are surveyed extensively
in Lua et al. [2005] along with numerous examples. Buford and Yu [2010]
additionally includes an extensive list of various peer-to-peer systems. Aberer
et al. [2005] provide a reference architecture that allows for a more formal
comparison of the different types of peer-to-peer systems. A survey taken from
the perspective of content distribution is provided by Androutsellis-Theotokis
and Spinellis [2004]. Finally, Buford et al. [2009], Tarkoma [2010] and Vu et al.
[2010] go beyond the level of surveys and form adequate textbooks for initial
or further study.

2.4.1      Structured peer-to-peer systems
As its name suggests, in a structured peer-to-peer system the nodes (i.e.,
processes) are organized in an overlay that adheres to a specific, deterministic
topology: a ring, a binary tree, a grid, etc. This topology is used to efficiently
look up data. Characteristic for structured peer-to-peer systems, is that they
are generally based on using a so-called semantic-free index. What this means
is that each data item that is to be maintained by the system, is uniquely
associated with a key, and that this key is subsequently used as an index. To
this end, it is common to use a hash function so that we get:

                     key(data item) = hash(data item’s value).

The peer-to-peer system as a whole is now responsible for storing (key,value)
pairs. To this end, each node is assigned an identifier from the same set
of all possible hash values, and each node is made responsible for storing
data associated with a specific subset of keys. In essence, the system is
thus seen to implement a distributed hash table, generally abbreviated to a
DHT [Balakrishnan et al., 2003].
   Following this approach now reduces the essence of structured peer-to-
peer systems to being able to look up a data item by its key. That is, the
system provides an efficient implementation of a function lookup that maps a
key to an existing node:

                           existing node = lookup(key).

This is where the topology of a structured peer-to-peer system plays a crucial
role. Any node can be asked to look up a given key, which then boils down to
efficiently routing that lookup request to the node responsible for storing the
data associated with the given key.
    To clarify these matters, let us consider a simple peer-to-peer system with
a fixed number of nodes, organized into a hypercube. A hypercube is an
n-dimensional cube. The hypercube shown in Figure 2.23 is four-dimensional.
It can be thought of as two ordinary cubes, each with 8 vertices and 12 edges.
To expand the hypercube to five dimensions, we would add another set of
two interconnected cubes to the figure, connect the corresponding edges in
the two halves, and so on.
    For this (admittedly naive) system, each data item is associated with one
of the 16 nodes. This can be achieved by hashing the value of a data item to a
key k ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , 24 − 1}. Now suppose that the node with identifier 0111
is requested to look up the data having key 14, corresponding to the binary
value 1110. In this example, we assume that the node with identifier 1110 is
responsible for storing all data items that have key 14. What node 0111 can
simply do, is forward the request to a neighbor who is closer to node 1110. In
this case, this is either node 0110 or node 1111. If it picks a node 0110, that

Figure 2.23: A simple peer-to-peer system organized as a four-dimensional
hypercube.

node will then forward the request directly to a node 1110 from where the
data can be retrieved.

  Note 2.6 (Example: The Chord system)
  The previous example illustrates two things: (1) the use of a hashing function to
  identify the node responsible for storing some data item, and (2) the routing along
  the topology of a peer-to-peer system when looking up a data item given its key.
  However, it is not a very realistic example, if only for the reason that we assumed
  that the total set of nodes is fixed. Let us therefore consider a more realistic
  example of a structured peer-to-peer system that is considered as belonging to
  the foundations for many other such systems.
      In the Chord system [Stoica et al., 2003] the nodes are logically organized
  in a ring such that a data item with an m-bit key k is mapped to the node with
  the smallest (again, also m bit) identifier id ≥ k. This node is referred to as the
  successor of key k and denoted as succ(k). Keys and identifiers are typically 128
  or 160 bits long. Figure 2.24 shows a much smaller Chord ring, where m = 5 and
  with nine nodes {1, 4, 9, 11, 14, 18, 20, 21, 28}. The successor of key 7 is equal to
  9. Likewise, succ(5) = 9, but also succ(9) = 9. In Chord, each node maintains
  shortcuts to other nodes. A shortcut appears as a directed edge from one node
  to another. How these shortcuts are constructed is explained in Chapter 6. The
  construction is done in such a way that the length of the shortest path between
  any pair of nodes is of order O(log N ), where N is the total number of nodes.
      To look up a key, a node will try to forward the request “as far as possible,” but
  without passing it beyond the node responsible for that key. To clarify, suppose
  that in our example Chord ring, node 9 is asked to look up the node responsible
  for key 3 (which is node 4). Node 9 has four shortcuts: to nodes 11, 14, 18, and 28,
  respectively. As the node 28 is the farthest node 9 knows about and still preceding
  the one responsible for key 3, it will get the lookup request. Node 28 has three
  shortcuts: to nodes 1, 4, and 14, respectively. Note that node 28 has no knowledge
  about the existence of nodes between nodes 1 and 4. For this reason, the best
  what it can do is forward the request to the node 1. The latter knows that its
  successor in the ring is node 4, and thus that this is the node responsible for the
  key 3, to which it will subsequently forward the request.

Figure 2.24: The organization of nodes and data items in Chord.

       Now suppose that a node, with the unique identifier u, wants to join a Chord
  overlay. To that end, it contacts an arbitrary node and requests it to look up u,
  that is, return the value v= succ(u). At that point, node u will simply need to
  insert itself between the predecessor of v and v itself, thus becoming the new
  predecessor of v. During this process, shortcuts from u to other nodes will be
  established, but also some existing ones previously directed toward v will now be
  adjusted to point to u (again, details are deferred until later chapters). Obviously,
  any data item with key k stored at v but for which succ(k) is now equal to u is
  transferred from v to u. Leaving is just as simple: node u informs its departure to
  its predecessor and successor, and transfers its data items to succ(u).
       We return to Chord in more detail in Section 6.2.3 when discussing the
  resolution of random bit strings to network addresses.

2.4.2      Unstructured peer-to-peer systems
Structured peer-to-peer systems attempt to maintain a specific, deterministic
overlay network. In contrast, in an unstructured peer-to-peer system, each
node maintains an ad hoc list of neighbors. The resulting overlay resembles
what is known as a random graph: a graph in which an edge ⟨u, v⟩ between
two nodes u and v exists only with a certain probability P[⟨u, v⟩]. Ideally, this
probability is the same for all pairs of nodes, but in practice a wide range of
distributions is observed.
    In an unstructured peer-to-peer system, when a node joins, it often contacts
a well-known node to obtain a starting list of other peers in the system. This
list can then be used to find more peers, and perhaps ignore others, and so

on. In practice, a node generally changes its local list almost continuously.
For example, a node may discover that a neighbor is no longer responsive
and that it needs to be replaced. There may be other reasons, which we will
describe shortly.
    Unlike structured peer-to-peer systems, looking up data cannot follow a
predetermined route when lists of neighbors are constructed in an ad hoc
fashion. Instead, in an unstructured peer-to-peer systems, we really need
to resort to searching for data [Risson and Moors, 2006]. Let us look at two
extremes and consider the case in which we are requested to search for specific
data (e.g., identified by keywords).

Flooding: In the case of flooding, an issuing node u simply passes a request
     for a data item to all its neighbors. A request will be ignored when its
     receiving node, say v, had seen it before. Otherwise, v searches locally
     for the requested data item. If v has the required data, it can either
     respond directly to the issuing node u, or send it back to the original
     forwarder, who will then return it to its original forwarder, and so on. If
     v does not have the requested data, it forwards the request to all of its
     own neighbors.
     Obviously, flooding can be expensive, for which reason a request often
     has an associated time-to-live or TTL value, giving the maximum num-
     ber of hops a request is allowed to be forwarded. Choosing the right
     TTL value is crucial: too small means that a request will stay close to the
     issuer and may thus not reach a node having the data. Too large incurs
     high communication costs.
     As an alternative to setting TTL values, a node can also start a search
     with an initial TTL value of 1, meaning that it will first query only its
     neighbors. If no, or not enough results are returned, the TTL is increased,
     and a new search is initiated.
Random walks: At the other end of the search spectrum, an issuing node u
    can simply try to find a data item by asking a randomly chosen neighbor,
    say v. If v does not have the data, it forwards the request to one of its
    randomly chosen neighbors, and so on. The result is known as a random
    walk [Gkantsidis et al., 2006; Lv et al., 2002]. Obviously, a random walk
    imposes much less network traffic, yet it may take much longer before
    a node is reached that has the requested data. To decrease the waiting
    time, an issuer can simply start n random walks simultaneously. Indeed,
    studies show that in this case, the time it takes before reaching a node
    that has the data drops approximately by a factor n. Lv et al. [2002]
    reports that relatively small values of n, such as 16 or 64, turn out to be
    effective.
     A random walk also needs to be stopped. To this end, we can either again
     use a TTL, or alternatively, when a node receives a lookup request, check

      with the issuer whether forwarding the request to another randomly
      selected neighbor is still needed.

Note that neither method relies on a specific comparison technique to decide
when requested data has been found. For structured peer-to-peer systems,
we assumed the use of keys for comparison; for the two approaches just
described, any comparison technique would suffice.
   Between flooding and random walks lie policy-based search methods.
For example, a node may decide to keep track of peers who responded
positively, effectively turning them into preferred neighbors for succeeding
queries. Likewise, we may want to restrict flooding to fewer neighbors, but in
any case give preference to neighbors having many neighbors themselves.

  Note 2.7 (Advanced: Flooding versus random walks)
  When giving the matter some thought, it may come as a surprise that people have
  even considered a random walk as an alternative way to search. At first instance,
  it would seem like a technique resembling the search for a needle in a haystack.
  However, we need to realize that in practice we are dealing with replicated data,
  and even for minimal replication factors and different replication distributions,
  studies show that deploying random walks is not only effective, it can also be
  much more efficient in comparison to flooding.
      To see why, we closely follow the model described in Lv et al. [2002] and
  Cohen and Shenker [2002]. Assume there are a total of N nodes and that each data
  item is replicated across r randomly chosen nodes. A search consists of repeatedly
  selecting a node at random until the item is found. If P[k] is the probability that
  the item is found after k attempts, we have
                                             r     r
                                P[ k ] =       (1 − ) k −1 .
                                             N     N
  Let the average search size S be the expected number of nodes that need to be
  probed before finding the requested data item:
                 N             N
                                         r     r
            S = ∑ k · P[ k ] = ∑ k ·       (1 − )k−1 ≈ N/r for 1 ≪ r ≤ N.
                k =1          k =1
                                         N     N

  By simply replicating every data item to each node, S = 1 and it is clear that a
  random walk will always outperform flooding even for TTL values of 1. More
  realistically, however, is to assume that r/N is relatively low, such as 0.1%,
  meaning that the average search size would be approximately 1000 nodes.
      To compare this to flooding, assume that each node, on average, forwards a
  request to d randomly selected neighbors. After one step, the request will have
  arrived at d nodes, each of who will forward it to another d − 1 nodes (assuming
  that the node from where the request came is skipped), and so on. In other words,
  after k steps, and considering that a node can receive the request more than once,
  we will have reached (at most) the following number of nodes:

                                     R ( k ) = d ( d − 1 ) k −1

  Various studies show that R(k) is a good estimate for the actual number of nodes
  reached, as long as we have only a few number of flooding steps. Of these nodes,
  we can expect a fraction of r/N to have the requested data item, meaning that
  when Nr · R(k) ≥ 1, we will most likely have found a node that has the data item.
      To illustrate, let r/N = 0.001 = 0.1%, which means that S ≈ 1000. With
  flooding to, on average, d = 10 neighbors, we would require at least 4 flooding
  steps, reaching some 7290 nodes, which is considerably more than the 1000 nodes
  required when using a random walk. Only with d = 33 will we need to contact
  approximately also 1000 nodes in k = 2 flooding steps and having r/N · R(k) ≥ 1.
      The obvious drawback of deploying random walks, is that it may take much
  longer before an answer is returned.

2.4.3   Hierarchically organized peer-to-peer networks
Notably in unstructured peer-to-peer systems, locating relevant data items
can become problematic as the network grows. The reason for this scalability
problem is simple: as there is no deterministic way of routing a lookup request
to a specific data item, essentially the only technique a node can resort to
is searching for the request by flooding or randomly walking through the
network. As an alternative, many peer-to-peer systems have proposed to
make use of special nodes that maintain an index of data items.
    There are other situations in which abandoning the symmetric nature of
peer-to-peer systems is sensible. Consider a collaboration of nodes that offer
resources to each other. For example, in a collaborative Content Delivery
Network (CDN), nodes may offer storage for hosting copies of Web documents
allowing Web clients to access pages nearby, and thus to access them quickly.
What is needed is a means to find out where documents can be stored best.
In that case, making use of a broker that collects data on resource usage
and availability for several nodes that are in each other’s proximity allows
selecting a node quickly with sufficient resources.
    Nodes such as those maintaining an index or acting as a broker are
generally referred to as super peers. As the name suggests, super peers
are often also organized in a peer-to-peer network, leading to a hierarchical
organization, as explained in Yang and Garcia-Molina [2003]. A simple
example of such an organization is shown in Figure 2.25. In this organization,
every regular peer, now referred to as a weak peer, is connected as a client to
a super peer. All communication from and to a weak peer proceeds through
that peer’s associated super peer.
    Often, the association between a weak peer and its super peer is fixed:
whenever a weak peer joins the network, it attaches to one of the super peers
and remains attached until it leaves the network. Obviously, it is expected that
super peers are long-lived processes with high availability. To compensate for
potential unstable behavior of a super peer, backup schemes can be deployed,

Figure 2.25: A hierarchical organization of nodes into a super-peer network.

such as pairing every super peer with another one and requiring weak peers
to attach to both.
    Having a fixed association with a super peer may not always be the best
solution. For example, in the case of file-sharing networks, it may be better
for a weak peer to attach to a super peer that maintains an index of files
that the weak peer is currently interested in. In that case, chances are bigger
that when a weak peer is looking for a specific file, its super peer will know
where to find it. Garbacki et al. [2010] describe a relatively simple scheme in
which the association between weak peer and strong peer can change as weak
peers discover better super peers to associate with. In particular, a super peer
returning the result of a lookup operation is given preference over other super
peers.
    As we have seen, peer-to-peer networks offer a flexible means for nodes
to join and leave the network. However, with super-peer networks a new
problem is introduced, namely how to select the nodes that are eligible to
become super peer. This problem is closely related to the leader-election
problem, which we discuss in Section 5.4.

2.4.4      Example: BitTorrent
Let us consider the widely popular BitTorrent file-sharing system [Cohen,
2003] as an example of a (largely) unstructured peer-to-peer system. BitTorrent
is a file-downloading system. Its principle working is shown in Figure 2.26.
The basic idea is that when an end user is looking for a file, she downloads
chunks of the file from other users until the downloaded chunks can be as-
sembled, yielding the complete file. An important design goal was to ensure
collaboration. In most file-sharing systems, a significant fraction of partici-
pants merely download files but otherwise contribute close to nothing [Adar
and Huberman, 2000; Saroiu et al., 2003; Yang et al., 2005], a phenomenon
referred to as free riding. To prevent this situation, in BitTorrent a file can

   Client node
                        K out of N nodes

        Lookup(F)                                                          Node 1

  A BitTorrent                                List of nodes                Node 2
  Web page or             torrent file
                                             with (chunks of)
 search engine             for file F
                                                   file F
  Web server              File server           Tracker
                                                                           Node N

Figure 2.26: The principle working of BitTorrent [adapted with permission
from Pouwelse et al. [2005].

be downloaded only when the downloading client is providing content to
someone else.
    To download a file, a user needs to access a global directory, which is
generally just one of a few well-known Websites. Such a directory contains
references to what are called torrent files. A torrent file contains the informa-
tion that is needed to download a specific file. In particular, it contains a link
to what is known as a tracker, which is a server that is keeping an accurate
account of active nodes that have (chunks of) the requested file. An active
node is one that is currently downloading the file as well. Obviously, there
will be many trackers, although there will generally be only a single tracker
per file (or collection of files).
    Once the nodes have been identified from where chunks can be down-
loaded, the downloading node effectively becomes active. At that point, it
will be forced to help others, for example by providing chunks of the file it
is downloading that others do not yet have. This enforcement comes from a
simple rule: if a node P notices that a node Q is downloading more than it
is uploading, P can decide to decrease the rate at which it sends data to Q.
This scheme works well, provided P has something to download from Q. For
this reason, nodes are often supplied with references to many other nodes,
putting them in a better position to trade data.
    Clearly, BitTorrent combines centralized with decentralized solutions. As
it turns out, the bottleneck of the system is easily formed by the trackers.
In an alternative implementation of BitTorrent, a node also joins a separate
structured peer-to-peer system (i.e., a DHT) to assist in tracking file downloads.
In effect, a central tracker’s load is now distributed across the participating
nodes, with each node acting as a tracker for a relatively small set of torrent
files. The original function of the tracker coordinating the collaborative
downloading of a file is retained. However, we note that in many BitTorrent
systems used today, the tracking functionality has actually been minimized to
a one-time provisioning of peers currently involved in downloading the file.
From that moment on, the newly participating peer will communicate only

with those peers and no longer with the initial tracker. The initial tracker for
the requested file is looked up in the DHT through a so-called magnet link.
We return to DHT-based lookups in Section 6.2.3.

2.5     Hybrid system architectures
Real-world distributed systems are complex in the sense that they combine a
myriad of architectures: centralized features are combined with peer-to-peer
features are combined with hierarchical organizations, etc. The complexity
is aggravated by the fact that many distributed systems cross organizational
boundaries, leading to truly decentralized solutions in which even no single
organization can take responsibility for a system’s operation. In this section,
we will take a closer look into these complex, hybrid system architectures.

2.5.1      Cloud computing
Organizations in charge of running data centers have been seeking ways for
opening up their resources to customers. Eventually, this led to the concept of
utility computing by which a customer could upload tasks to a data center
and be charged on a per-resource basis. Utility computing formed the basis
for what is now commonly referred to as cloud computing.
    Following Vaquero et al. [2008], cloud computing is characterized by an
easily usable and accessible pool of virtualized resources. Which and how
resources are used can be configured dynamically, providing the basis for
scalability: if more work needs to be done, a customer can simply acquire
more resources. The link to utility computing is formed by the fact that cloud
computing is generally based on a pay-per-use model in which guarantees are
offered by customized service-level agreements (SLAs). Keeping it simple,
clouds are organized into four layers, as shown in Figure 2.27.

Hardware: The lowest layer is formed by the means to manage the necessary
    hardware: processors, routers, but also power and cooling systems. It is
    generally implemented at data centers and contains the resources that
    customers normally never get to see directly.

Infrastructure: This is an important layer forming the backbone for most
      cloud computing platforms. It deploys virtualization techniques (dis-
      cussed in Section 3.2) to provide customers an infrastructure consisting
      of virtual storage and computing resources. Indeed, nothing is what
      it seems: cloud computing evolves around allocating and managing
     virtual storage devices and virtual servers.

Platform: One could argue that the platform layer provides to a cloud-
      computing customer what an operating system provides to application
      developers, namely the means to easily develop and deploy applications

                     that need to run in a cloud. In practice, an application developer is
                     offered a vendor-specific API, which includes calls to uploading and ex-
                     ecuting a program in that vendor’s cloud. In a sense, this is comparable
                     to the Unix exec family of system calls, which take an executable file as
                     a parameter and pass it to the operating system to be executed.
                     Furthermore, like operating systems, the platform layer provides higher-
                     level abstractions for storage and such. For example, as we discussed,
                     the Amazon S3 storage system [Murty, 2008; Culkin and Zazon, 2022]
                     is offered to the application developer in the form of an API allowing
                     (locally created) files to be organized and stored in buckets. By storing a
                     file in a bucket, that file is automatically uploaded to the Amazon cloud.

Application: Actual applications run in this layer and are offered to users
     for further customization. Well-known examples include those found
     in office suites (text processors, spreadsheet applications, presentation
     applications, and so on). It is important to realize that these applica-
     tions are again executed in the vendor’s cloud. As before, they can be
     compared to the traditional suite of applications that are shipped when
     installing an operating system.

Cloud-computing providers offer these layers to their customers through
various interfaces (including command-line tools, programming interfaces,
and Web interfaces), leading to three different types of services:

            • Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) covering the hardware and infra-
              structure layer.
            • Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) covering the platform layer.
            • Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) in which their applications are covered.

                                                                               Google docs
 Software
            aa Svc

                               Web services, multimedia, business apps         Gmail
                                                                               YouTube, Flickr
                                               Application
                                                                               MS Azure
                               Software framework (Java/Python/.Net)           Google App engine
                                        Storage (databases)
 Platform
  aa Svc

                                              Platforms
                                                                               Amazon S3
                             Computation (VM), storage (block, file)           Amazon EC2
                                             Infrastructure
 Infrastructure
     aa Svc

                                   CPU, memory, disk, bandwidth                Datacenters
                                               Hardware

Figure 2.27: The organization of clouds (adapted from Zhang et al. [2010]).

As of now, making use of clouds is relatively easy, and we discuss in later
chapters more concrete examples of interfaces to cloud providers. As a
consequence, cloud computing as a means for outsourcing local computing
infrastructures has become a serious option for many enterprises.
    From the perspective of a system architecture, which deals with config-
uring (micro)services across some infrastructure, one may argue that in the
case of cloud computing, we are dealing with a highly advanced client-server
architecture. However, let it be noted that the actual implementation of a
server is generally completely hidden from the client: it is often unclear where
the server actually is, and even whether the server is actually implemented
in a fully distributed manner (which it often is). To further illustrate this
point, the notion of a Function-as-a-Service, or simply FaaS, allows a client to
execute code without bothering even with starting a server to handle the code
(see also Shahrad et al. [2019]).

2.5.2      The edge-cloud architecture
In the advent of increasingly more network-connected devices and the emer-
gence of the Internet-of-Things (IoT) many became aware of the fact that we
may need more than just cloud computing. Edge computing was born. There
is a lot to say about edge computing, and much has already been said. And
as is the case with so many topics in distributed systems, it simply takes a
few years before things settle down a bit. In this section, we take a look at
edge computing from an architectural perspective and will return to various
elements throughout the book, often without even explicitly mentioning edge
computing. An excellent overview of edge computing is given by Yousefpour
et al. [2019] and the interested reader is referred to that paper to get a better
grip on its nomenclature. We deliberately take a simplified and broad view
of edge computing, using it as a general term for most of the things sitting
between the devices that comprise the Internet-of-Things and the services typi-
cally offered through cloud computing. In this sense, we follow the discussion
as presented by Horner [2021].
    As its name suggests, edge computing deals with the placement of services
“at the edge” of the network. This edge is often formed by the boundary
between enterprise networks and the actual Internet, for example, as provided
by an Internet Service Provider (ISP). For example, many universities reside
on a campus consisting of various buildings, each having their own local
network, in turn connected through a campuswide network. As part of the
campus, there may be multiple on-premise services for storage, computing,
security, lectures, and so on. On-premise means that the local IT department
is responsible for hosting those services on servers directly hooked up to the
campus network. Much of the traffic related to those services will never leave
the campus network, and the network together with its servers and services
form a typical edge infrastructure.

    At the same time, such servers may be connected to those of other univer-
sities and perhaps even making use of, again, other servers. In other words,
instead of setting up connections between universities in a peer-to-peer fash-
ion, we also see configurations in which various universities share services
through a logically centralized infrastructure. Such an infrastructure may be
situated “in the cloud,” but it may equally well have been set up through a
regional infrastructure using locally available data centers. As we move closer
to cloud infrastructures, the term fog computing is often used. We thus see an
overall picture emerge as the one shown in Figure 2.28, where the boundaries
between cloud and edge are becoming blurred.

Figure 2.28: A collection of infrastructures involving edge devices, edge
infrastructures and cloud infrastructures, and a possible setup between two
enterprise edge infrastructures, an intermediate edge infrastructure, and a
cloud infrastructure.

   Many configurations for an edge infrastructure easily come to mind, rang-
ing from infrastructures needed to keep track of your activities, layered
video-streaming infrastructures, gaming infrastructures, etc. What all of these
have in common is that there is some smart end device that one way or the
other needs to (eventually) connect to a service hosted somewhere in the
cloud. The question then pops up why an edge infrastructure is needed at all.
Logically, it seems much simpler to just connect to the cloud service directly
using existing and often excellent networking facilities. Let us take a critical
look at a few arguments.

Latency and bandwidth What should have become clear from our examples
is that edge infrastructures are considered to be close to the end devices.
Closeness can be measured in terms of latency and often also bandwidth.
Throughout the decades, bandwidth, or actually lack of bandwidth, has

always been used as an argument for introducing solutions close to specific
devices. However, if anything has become clear all this time, is that available
bandwidth continues to increase, now reaching the point that one should
seriously question how problematic it actually is, and whether installing
and maintaining edge infrastructures for having insufficient bandwidth is
a good reason. Nevertheless, there are situations in which closeness to end
devices is actually needed to guarantee quality of service. The canonical
example is formed by video services: the closer the video sources are, the
better bandwidth guarantees can be given, reducing issues such as jitter.
    More problematic is when Mother Nature gets in our way. This may easily
happen when dealing with latency. It may take 100 ms to reach a cloud,
rendering many interactive applications quite useless. One such important
application is (semi-)autonomous driving. A car will need to continuously
observe its environment through a myriad of sensors and react accordingly.
Having to coordinate its movements through the cloud is not acceptable from
a real-time aspect alone. This example also illustrates that cars may need to
detect each other beyond the capabilities of their sensors, for example, when
heading toward a junction with clear visibility. In a real-time system, cars may
be able to provide their current position to a local edge infrastructure and
reveal themselves to each other when approaching the junction.
    Other examples in which latency plays a crucial role easily come to mind.
Overcoming latency is one of the most compelling reasons for developing
edge infrastructures.

Reliability Many argue that cloud connectivity is simply not reliable enough
for many applications, for which reason edge infrastructures should be de-
ployed. To what extent this is a valid argument remains to be seen. The fact
is that for many networked applications, connectivity is generally good and
reliable, if not excellent. Of course, there are situations in which relying on
24/7 reliability is not an option. This may be the case for hospitals, factories,
and other critical settings in general. Yet, in those cases, measures have been
traditionally already taken and to what extent edge computing brings in
anything new is not always clear.

Security and privacy Finally, many argue that edge solutions enhance secu-
rity and privacy. It all depends. One could argue that if a cloud solution is not
secure, then there is no reason why an edge solution would be. An implicit
assumption that many people make is that an edge infrastructure is owned by
a specific organization and operates within the (protected) network bound-
aries of that organization. In that case, it often does indeed become simpler to
protect data and operations, yet one should ask whether such protection is
sufficient. As we shall discuss in Chapter 9, simply trying to protect assets
by developing a secure wall around an organization does not help against

insider attacks, whether they are intended or not. A same reasoning holds
for privacy: if we cannot protect personal data in the cloud, then why would
an edge infrastructure suffice for privacy? A thorough discussion on the role
and position of privacy in the edge and edge devices is given by Hong [2017].
From that discussion, it is clear that there is still considerable work to be done.
    However, there may be another reason related to security and privacy why
edge infrastructures are needed. In many cases, organizations are simply not
allowed, for whatever regulatory reasons, to place data in the cloud or have
data be processed by a cloud service. For example, medical records may have
to be kept on premise on certified servers and with strict audit procedures in
place. In this case, an organization will have to resort to maintaining an edge
infrastructure.
    Introducing additional layers between end devices and cloud infrastructures
opens a whole can of worms compared to the relatively simple situation of
just having to deal with cloud computing. For the latter, one can argue that
the cloud provider to a considerable extent decides where and how a service
is actually implemented. In practice, we will be dealing with a data center
in which the (micro)services that make up the entire service are distributed
across multiple machines.
    Matters become more intricate in the case of edge computing. In this case,
the client organization will now have to make informed decisions on what
to do where. Which services need to be placed on premise on a local edge
infrastructure, and which can be moved to the cloud? To what extent does an
edge infrastructure offer facilities for virtual resources, akin to the facilities
offered in cloud computing? Moreover, where we may be able to assume that
computational and storage resources are in abundance when dealing with a
cloud, this is not necessarily the case for an edge infrastructure. In practice,
the latter simply have less hardware resources available, but often also offer
less flexibility in terms of available platforms.
    By and large, allocating resources in the case of edge computing appears
to be much more challenging in comparison to clouds. As summarized
by Hong and Varghese [2019], we are dealing with limitations when it comes to
resources, higher degrees of hardware heterogeneity, and much more dynamic
workloads, which, when taken together, have led to a higher demand of
orchestration. Moreover, where from a client’s perspective the cloud appears
to be hiding many of its internal intricacies, this is necessarily no longer the
case, making it much more difficult to do the orchestration [Bittencourt et al.,
2018]. Orchestration boils down to the following (see also Taleb et al. [2017]):

   • Resource allocation: specific services require specific resources. The
     question is then to guarantee the availability of the resources required to
     perform a service. Typically, resources amount to CPU, storage, memory,
     and networking facilities.

   • Service placement: regardless the availability of resources, it is impor-
     tant to decide when and where to place a service. This is notably relevant
     for mobile applications, for in that case finding the edge infrastructure
     that is closest to that application may be crucial. A typical use case is
     that of video conferencing, for which the encoding is often not done on
     the mobile device, but at an edge infrastructure. In practice, one needs
     to decide at which edges the service should be installed. An extensive
     overview of service placement in the case of edge computing is provided
     by Salaht et al. [2020].
   • Edge selection: related to service placement is deciding which edge
     infrastructure should be used when the service needs to be offered. It
     may seem logical to use the edge infrastructure closest to the end device,
     but all kinds of circumstances may ask for an alternative solution, for
     example the connectivity of that edge to the cloud provider.

Other issues play a role as well, but it should be clear by now that the edge-
cloud architecture is much more demanding than one might initially think it
to be. Moreover, the different perspectives on how the continuum between end
devices and the cloud should be filled with edge components and solutions
has still to converge [Antonini et al., 2019].

2.5.3      Blockchain architectures
An upcoming and much debated type of distributed system is that of so-called
blockchains. Blockchain systems enable the registration of transactions, for
which reason they are also referred to as distributed ledgers. The latter is
actually more accurate, with blockchains forming one of different ways for
implementing distributed ledgers.
    The key issue in transaction systems is that a transaction is validated,
effectuated, and subsequently stored for various auditing purposes. For
example, Alice may decide to create a transaction stating that she transfers
$10 to Bob’s account. Normally, she would go to a bank, where she would
have to sign the transaction to prove that she really wants it to be carried
out. Whether this all happens physically or digitally does not really matter.
The bank will check whether she has enough credit, whether Bob is eligible
for receiving the money, and assuming everything is fine, will subsequently
transfer the money. A record of the transaction is kept for all kinds of auditing
purposes. Note that transactions in blockchains systems are taken very broad.
Besides monetary transactions, systems have been developed for registering
identification documents, registering resource usage and allocation, electronic
voting, and sharing health records, to name a few.
    The bank operates as a trusted third party. An important design as-
sumption for blockchains is that participating parties can, in principle, not
be trusted. This also excludes having a trusted third party that handles all

transactions. We will return to trust in Section 9.4, and concentrate on the
implications lack of trust has for the architecture of a system.
    In the case of blockchains, we assume there is a (potentially very large)
set of participants who jointly register transactions among them in a publicly
available ledger. In this way, any participant can see what has happened and
also verify the validity of a transaction. For example, in a blockchain system
for digital coins, each having a unique and unforgeable ID, any participant
should be able to check whether a coin has already been spent by checking all
transactions that have taken place since the beginning.

Figure 2.29: The principle operation of a blockchain.

    To this end, when Alice wants to transfer $10 to Bob, she essentially tells
all the participants in the blockchain system about this intent, thus allowing
volunteers to validate the intended transaction. This is shown as Step 1 in
Figure 2.29. To avoid having to check every transaction separately one-by-one
as they are submitted, a validator groups several transactions into a block to
increase efficiency, shown as Step 2 in Figure 2.29. If everything goes well, i.e.,
the transactions in the block are considered to be valid, the validator securely
protects the block against any modifications, and appends the now immutable
block to the chain of other blocks with validated transactions. It does so
by broadcasting the validated block to all participants, shown as Step 3 in
Figure 2.29.
    An important observation is that there is logically only a single chain of
blocks with validated transactions. Each block is immutable, in the sense
that if an adversary decides to modify any transaction from any block in that
chain, the modification can never go unnoticed. Securely protecting blocks of
transactions against modifications, but also securely appending a block to an
existing list, are well-understood techniques, which we will explain further

in Section 9.4.3. The immutability of a block makes it an ideal fit for massive
replication: it will never be changed anyway, so someone may just as well store
it locally to make verification as simple as possible. Effectively, the logically
single chain of immutable blocks may be physically massively replicated
across the Internet among all participating parties. This is precisely what
happens: each block is broadcast to every participating node in a blockchain,
as we just explained.
     What differentiates so many blockchain systems from each other is de-
ciding on which node(s) may actually carry out validation tasks. In other
words, we need to figure out who is allowed to append a block of validated
transactions to the existing chain. Appending such a block means that there
is global consensus on fulfilled transactions. It is therefore important that we
also reach consensus on which validator can move ahead. All others will have
to do their validation over again, as their transactions may be affected by the
newly appended ones and thus may need to be revisited.
     Deciding on which validator can move ahead requires (distributed) con-
sensus. In principle, there are three options:

   1. A centralized solution, in which a trusted third party validates transac-
      tions as before.
   2. A distributed solution, in which a small, preselected group of processes
      takes over the role of a trusted third party.
   3. A fully decentralized solution, in which, in principle, all participating
      nodes in the blockchain jointly reach consensus without any (distributed)
      third party.

These three options are shown in Figure 2.30. As mentioned, each node
participating in the blockchain is assumed to have a full copy locally available.
    Obviously, a centralized architecture for a blockchain does not fit its design
goals, which state that there is essentially no place for a trusted third party.
The distributed architecture is an interesting one. In this case, there is a
relatively small group of nodes that are permissioned to validate transactions.
For blockchains, it is important to realize that none of these permissioned
nodes are assumed to be trusted, yet they are assumed to run a consensus
protocol that can withstand malicious behavior. Specifically, if there are n
permissioned nodes, then it is assumed that at most k ≤ (n − 1)/3 will fail
and perhaps act maliciously. One problem with such so-called permissioned
blockchains is that n is quite limited, in practice, to less than a few tens of
nodes.
    Finally, in so-called permissionless blockchains all nodes collectively
participate to validate transactions. In practice, this means that all nodes who
want to validate transactions are engaged in a process called leader election.
The process elected as leader appends a block to the current chain (and is

                                 (a) Centralized

                        (b) Distributed (permissioned)

                       (c) Decentralized (permissionless)

Figure 2.30: The three different organizations of blockchains: (a) centralized,
(b) distributed, (c) fully decentralized. Filled nodes represent validators; other
nodes are participants not engaged in validation.

often rewarded for that). In practice, not all participating nodes will want to
act as validator, if only because the leader-election algorithm is costly in terms
of resources. We return to leader elections in Section 5.4.
    The architecture of a blockchain system is thus seen to be quite complex. In
a permissioned system, we have a few tens of nodes for validating transactions.
None of these nodes needs to be individually trusted beforehand, yet it may
be argued that they form a centralized, fault-tolerant distributed group. Trust

is needed in so far that we need to assume that not too many of those
nodes act maliciously or collude against any decisions they should make.
On the other hand, permissionless blockchains may be viewed as being fully
decentralized, but here we see that special measures are needed to guarantee
some form of fairness among willing validators. In fact, through the dynamics
of permissionless blockchains, we often see that, in practice, only a relatively
few number of nodes can carry out validation tasks, effectively also leading to
a more centralized system. An overview of the various settings in blockchains
from the perspective of architectures is given by Xu et al. [2017].

2.6    Summary
Distributed systems can be organized in many ways. We can make a dis-
tinction between software architecture and system architecture. The latter
considers where the components that constitute a distributed system are
placed across the various machines. The former is more concerned about the
logical organization of the software: how do components interact, in what
ways can they be structured, how can they be made independent, and so on?
    A keyword when talking about architectures is architectural style. A
style reflects the basic principle that is followed in organizing the interaction
between the software components comprising a distributed system. Important
styles include layering, service-oriented styles, and styles in which handling
events are prominent, exemplified by are known as publish-subscribe styles.
    There are many organizations of distributed systems. An important class is
where machines are divided into clients and servers. A client sends a request
to a server, who will then produce a result that is returned to the client. The
client-server architecture reflects the traditional way of modularizing software,
in which a module calls the functions available in another module. By placing
different components on different machines, we obtain a natural physical
distribution of functions across a collection of machines.
    Client-server architectures are often highly centralized. In decentralized
architectures, we often see an equal role played by the processes that constitute
a distributed system, also known as peer-to-peer systems. In peer-to-peer
systems, the processes are organized into an overlay network, which is a
logical network in which every process has a local list of other peers that
it can communicate with. The overlay network can be structured, in which
case deterministic schemes can be deployed for routing messages between
processes. In unstructured networks, the list of peers is more or less random,
implying that search algorithms need to be deployed for locating data or other
processes.
    In hybrid architectures, elements from centralized and decentralized orga-
nizations are combined. A typical example is that of cloud computing, which
logically follows a client-server architecture, but where the server is generally

completely distributed across a data center. In the last decade, we have seen a
strong emergence of what is known as edge computing. Edge infrastructures
form several steps between end devices and clouds and are demanding from
the view point of organizing and configuring distributed systems. Finally, as
an example in which decentralization plays a prominent role, the increasing
popular blockchain architecture illustrates yet another class of hybrid system
architectures.

