   03

PROCESSES

    In this chapter, we take a closer look at how the different types of processes
play a crucial role in distributed systems. The concept of a process originates
from the field of operating systems, where it is generally defined as a program
in execution. From an operating-system perspective, the management and
scheduling of processes are perhaps the most important issues to deal with.
However, when it comes to distributed systems, other issues turn out to be
equally or more important.
    We start with extensively discussing threads and their role in distributed
systems. As it turns out, threads play a crucial role in obtaining performance
in multicore and multiprocessor environments, but also help in structuring
clients and servers. There are many cases where we see threads being replaced
by processes and using the underlying operating system for guaranteeing
protection and facilitating communication. Nevertheless, when performance
is at stake, threads continue to play an important role.
    Since a few years, the concept of virtualization has regained much pop-
ularity. Virtualization allows an application, and possibly also its complete
environment including the operating system, to run concurrently with other
applications, but highly independent of the underlying hardware and plat-
forms, leading to a high degree of portability. Moreover, virtualization helps
in isolating failures caused by errors or security problems. It is an important
concept for distributed systems, and we pay attention to it in a separate
section.
    Client-server organizations are important in distributed systems. In this
chapter, we take a closer look at typical organizations of both clients and
servers. We also pay attention to general design issues for servers, including
those typically used in object-based distributed systems. A widely used Web
server is Apache, to which we pay separate attention. The organization of
server clusters remains important, especially when they need to collaboratively
provide the illusion of a single system. we will discuss examples of how to
achieve this perspective, including wide-area servers like PlanetLab.
    An important issue, especially in wide-area distributed systems, is moving
processes between different machines. Process migration or more specifically,
code migration, can help in achieving scalability, but can also help to configure
clients and servers dynamically. What is actually meant by code migration
and what its implications are is also discussed in this chapter.

3.1    Threads
Although processes form a building block in distributed systems, practice
indicates that the granularity of processes as provided by the operating
systems on which distributed systems are built is not sufficient. Instead, it
turns out that having a finer granularity in the form of multiple threads of
control per process makes it much easier to build distributed applications

and to get better performance. In this section, we take a closer look at the
role of threads in distributed systems and explain why they are so important.
More on threads and how they can be used to build applications can be found
in [Lewis and Berg, 1998; Stevens, 1999; Robbins and Robbins, 2003]. Herlihy
and Shavit [2008] is highly recommended to learn more about multithreaded
concurrent programming in general.

3.1.1   Introduction to threads
To understand the role of threads in distributed systems, it is important
to understand what a process is, and how processes and threads relate. To
execute a program, an operating system creates a number of virtual processors,
each one for running a different program. To keep track of these virtual
processors, the operating system has a process table, containing entries to
store CPU register values, memory maps, open files, accounting information,
privileges, etc. Jointly, these entries form a process context.
    A process context can be viewed as the software analog of the hardware’s
processor context. The latter consists of the minimal information that is
automatically stored by the hardware to handle an interrupt, and to later
return to where the CPU left off. The processor context contains at least the
program counter, but sometimes also other register values such as the stack
pointer.
    A process is often defined as a program in execution, that is, a program
that is currently being executed on one of the operating system’s virtual
processors. An important issue is that the operating system takes great care
to ensure that independent processes cannot maliciously or inadvertently
affect the correctness of each other’s behavior. In other words, the fact
that multiple processes may be concurrently sharing the same CPU and
other hardware resources is made transparent. Usually, the operating system
requires hardware support to enforce this separation.
    This concurrency transparency comes at a price. For example, each time a
process is created, the operating system must create a complete independent
address space. Allocation can mean initializing memory segments by, for
example, zeroing a data segment, copying the associated program into a text
segment, and setting up a stack for temporary data. Likewise, switching
the CPU between two processes may require some effort as well. Apart
from saving the data as currently stored in various registers (including the
program counter and stack pointer), the operating system will also have to
modify registers of the Memory Management Unit (MMU) and invalidate
address translation caches, such as in the Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB).
In addition, if the operating system supports more processes than it can
simultaneously hold in main memory, it may have to swap processes between
main memory and disk before the actual switch can take place.

    Like a process, a thread executes its own piece of code, independently
of other threads. However, in contrast to processes, no attempt is made to
achieve a high degree of concurrency transparency if this would result in
performance degradation. Therefore, a thread system generally maintains only
the minimum information to allow a CPU to be shared by several threads. In
particular, a thread context often consists of nothing more than the processor
context, along with some other information for thread management. For
example, a thread system may keep track of the fact that a thread is currently
blocked on a mutex variable, so as not to select it for execution. Information
that is not strictly necessary to manage multiple threads is generally ignored.
For this reason, protecting data against inappropriate access by threads within
a single process is left entirely to application developers. We thus see that a
processor context is contained in a thread context, and that, in turn, a thread
context is contained in a process context.
    There are two important implications of deploying threads, as we just
sketched. First, the performance of a multithreaded application need hardly
ever be worse than that of its single-threaded counterpart. In fact, often, mul-
tithreading even leads to a performance gain. Second, because threads are not
automatically protected against each other the way processes are, development
of multithreaded applications requires additional intellectual effort. Proper
design and keeping things simple, as usual, help a lot. Unfortunately, current
practice does not demonstrate that this principle is equally well understood.

Thread usage in nondistributed systems
Before discussing the role of threads in distributed systems, let us first consider
their usage in traditional, nondistributed systems. There are several benefits
to multithreaded processes that have increased the popularity of using thread
systems.
    The most important benefit comes from the fact that in a single-threaded
process, whenever a blocking system call is executed, the process as a whole is
blocked. To illustrate, consider an application such as a spreadsheet program,
and assume that a user continuously and interactively wants to change values.
An important property of a spreadsheet program is that it maintains the func-
tional dependencies between different cells, often from different spreadsheets.
Therefore, whenever a cell is modified, all dependent cells are automatically
updated. When a user changes the value in a single cell, such a modification
can trigger a large series of computations. If there is only a single thread of
control, computation cannot proceed while the program is waiting for input.
Likewise, it may be difficult to provide input while dependencies are being
calculated. The easy solution is to have at least two threads of control: one
for handling interaction with the user and one for updating the spreadsheet.
Meanwhile, a third thread could be used for backing up the spreadsheet to
disk while the other two are doing their work.

    Another advantage of multithreading is that it becomes possible to exploit
parallelism when executing the program on a multiprocessor or multicore
system. In that case, each thread is assigned to a different CPU or core, while
shared data are stored in shared main memory. When properly designed,
such parallelism can be transparent: the process will run equally well on a
uniprocessor system, albeit slower. Multithreading for parallelism is becoming
increasingly important with the availability of relatively cheap multiprocessor
and multicore computers. Such computer systems are typically used for
running servers in client-server applications, but are by now also extensively
used in devices such as smartphones.
    Multithreading is also useful in the context of large applications. Such
applications are often developed as a collection of cooperating programs,
each to be executed by a separate process. This approach is typical for a
Unix environment. Cooperation between programs is implemented through
interprocess communication (IPC) mechanisms. For Unix systems, these
mechanisms typically include (named) pipes, message queues, and shared
memory segments (see also Stevens and Rago [2005]). The major drawback of
all IPC mechanisms is that communication often requires relatively extensive
context switching, shown at three different points in Figure 3.1.

                               Process A        Process B

S1: Switch from user space
    to kernel space
                                                                 S3: Switch from kernel
                                                                     space to user space

                             Operating system

                                            S2: Switch context from
                                                process A to process B

Figure 3.1: Context switching as the result of IPC.

    Because IPC requires kernel intervention, a process will generally first
have to switch from user mode to kernel mode, shown as S1 in Figure 3.1.
This requires changing the memory map in the MMU, as well as flushing the
TLB. Within the kernel, a process context switch takes place (S2 in the figure),
after which the other party can be activated by switching from kernel mode to
user mode again (S3 in Figure 3.1). The latter switch again requires changing
the MMU map and flushing the TLB.
    Instead of using processes, an application can also be constructed such
that different parts are executed by separate threads. Communication between
those parts is entirely dealt with by using shared data. Thread switching can

sometimes be done entirely in user space, although in other implementations,
the kernel is aware of threads and schedules them. The effect can be a dramatic
improvement in performance.
    Finally, there is also a pure software engineering reason to use threads:
many applications are simply easier to structure as a collection of cooperating
threads. Think of applications that need to perform several (more or less
independent) tasks, like our spreadsheet example discussed previously.

  Note 3.1 (Advanced: The cost of a context switch)
  There have been many studies on measuring the performance effects of context
  switches. As in so many cases with measuring computer systems, finding the
  ground truth is not easy. Tsafrir [2007] notes that handling clock ticks has become
  more or less ubiquitous in operating systems, making it an excellent candidate
  to measure overheads. A clock handler is activated once every T milliseconds by
  a clock interrupt. Common values for T range between 0.5 and 20 milliseconds,
  corresponding to interrupt frequencies of 2000 Hz and 50 Hz, respectively. The
  handler typically assists in realizing various timing and CPU usage services, sends
  alarm signals, and assists in preempting running tasks for fair CPU sharing. By
  simply varying the frequency by which the hardware generates an interrupt, one
  can easily get an impression of the incurred overhead.
      To measure the performance effects of an interrupt, a distinction is made
  between direct overhead and indirect overhead. The direct overhead consists of
  the time it takes to do the actual context switch, along with the time it takes for
  the handler to do its work and subsequently switching back to the interrupted
  task. The indirect overhead is everything else, and is mainly caused by cache
  perturbations (to which we will return shortly). For various Intel processors,
  Tsafrir [2007] found that the time to switch context is in the order of 0.5–1
  microsecond, and that the handler itself takes in the order of 0.5–7 microseconds
  to do its work, depending strongly on the implementation.

                               (a)           (b)           (c)

Figure 3.2: The organization of the cache when dealing with interrupts:
      (a) before the context switch, (b) after the context switch, and (c) after
      accessing block D. (Adapted from Liu and Solihin [2010].)

      However, it turns out that the direct overhead is not really that influential. In
  a complimentary study, Liu and Solihin [2010] make clear that context switching
  can greatly perturbate the cache, resulting in a loss of performance in comparison
  to the situation before an interrupt occurred. In fact, for the simple case of clock

  interrupts, Tsafrir [2007] measured an indirect overhead of approximately 80%.
  To understand what is going on, consider the data organizations as sketched in
Figure 3.2. Assume the cache is organized such that a least-recently used block of
  data is removed from the cache when room is needed for a fresh data block.
      Figure 3.2(a) shows the situation before the interrupt occurs. After the inter-
  rupt has been handled, block D may have been evicted from the cache, leaving a
  hole as shown in Figure 3.2(b). Accessing block D will copy it back into the cache,
  possibly evicting block C, and so on. In other words, even a simple interrupt may
  cause a considerable, and relatively long-lasting reorganization of the cache, in
  turn, affecting the overall performance of an application.

  1   from multiprocessing import Process
  2   from time import *
  3   from random import *
  4
  5   def sleeper(name):
  6       t = gmtime()
  7       s = randint(1,20)
  8       txt = str(t.tm_min)+’:’+str(t.tm_sec)+’ ’+name+’ is going to sleep for ’+str(s)+’ seconds’
  9       print(txt)
 10       sleep(s)
 11       t = gmtime()
 12       txt = str(t.tm_min)+’:’+str(t.tm_sec)+’ ’+name+’ has woken up’
 13       print(txt)
 14
 15   if __name__ == ’__main__’:
 16       p = Process(target=sleeper, args=(’eve’,))
 17       q = Process(target=sleeper, args=(’bob’,))
 18       p.start(); q.start()
 19       p.join(); q.join()

                                               (a)
 40:23 eve is going to sleep for 14 seconds
 40:23 bob is going to sleep for 4 seconds
 40:27 bob has woken up
 40:37 eve has woken up

                                               (b)
Figure 3.3: (a) A simple example in which two processes are started, and
(b) the output after a run.

A simple example in Python
To make matters more concrete, let us look at a simple example in Python,
also to illustrate the differences between processes and threads. Consider the
code shown in Figure 3.3(a), which shows how we start to separate processes

in Python using the multiprocessing package. The core of the example is
formed by the function sleeping which simply puts the calling process to
sleep for a randomly chosen number of seconds.

  1   from multiprocessing import Process
  2   from threading import Thread
  3
  4   shared_x = random.randint(10,99)
  5
  6   def sleeping(name):
  7       global shared_x
  8       s = randint(1,20)
  9       sleep(s)
 10       shared_x = shared_x + 1
 11
 12   def sleeper(name):
 13       sleeplist = list()
 14       for i in range(3):
 15           subsleeper = Thread(target=sleeping, args=(name+’ ’+str(i),))
 16           sleeplist.append(subsleeper)
 17
 18        for s in sleeplist: s.start()
 19        for s in sleeplist: s.join()

                                               (a)
 eve sees shared x being 71
 53:21 eve 0 is going to sleep for 20 seconds
 bob sees shared x being 84
 53:21 eve 1 is going to sleep for 15 seconds
 53:21 eve 2 is going to sleep for 3 seconds
 53:21 bob 0 is going to sleep for 8 seconds
 53:21 bob 1 is going to sleep for 16 seconds
 53:21 bob 2 is going to sleep for 8 seconds
 53:24 eve 2 has woken up, seeing shared x being 72
 53:29 bob 0 has woken up, seeing shared x being 85
 53:29 bob 2 has woken up, seeing shared x being 86
 53:36 eve 1 has woken up, seeing shared x being 73
 53:37 bob 1 has woken up, seeing shared x being 87
 bob sees shared x being 87
 53:41 eve 0 has woken up, seeing shared x being 74
 eve sees shared x being 74

                                               (b)
Figure 3.4: (a) A multithreading example in which two processes are started,
each with three threads, and (b) the output after a run.

   To create two processes, we call the operation Process in lines 16 and 17,
respectively, to subsequently start each of them. The join operation tells the

main process to wait until the newly created processes have finished. A possi-
ble output is shown in Figure 3.3(b), indicating the time in “minutes:seconds”
format when each process outputs some text.
    The differences between threads and processes can be observed when we
extend our example as shown in Figure 3.4 (where we have left out many
statements for recording time and printing text). In this case, we again start
two processes, named eve and bob (the code is the same as lines 15–19 in
Figure 3.3 and has been omitted for clarity). Each process subsequently
starts three threads, each, in turn, executing the function sleeping. The
main difference is that there is now a shared variable shared_x. (To keep
matters simple, we incorrectly assume that the assignment in line 10 is atomic.
We explain atomic operations in detail in Chapter 5). What the output in
Figure 3.4 shows is that this is a variable shared among the threads in a single
process, but not shared between the two processes eve and bob. In other words,
each process has its own instance of shared_x.
    The output also shows that the sleep operation works at the thread level
as well as the process level. In this case, each thread is suspended for a few
seconds, yet the process hosting that thread is not blocked when sleep is
called. Instead, another thread is scheduled (who subsequently also calls
sleep). How this has been implemented is transparent to the programmer.
Likewise, it is also transparent to what extent different threads are executed
on different cores, if available, of the used CPU. If we had started 1000 threads
per process, we would still see accurate timing. However, if we would replace
the call to sleep with a busy waiting loop, such as in:

       c = s * 26000000
       for i in range(c):
           x = x + 1.0

we would see that the thread execution may be completely serialized per
process, whereas each process would be assigned to a separate core and thus
run in parallel. What exactly is done, depends on the underlying operating
system and the used Python runtime system. The standard implementations
of Python assign all threads within a single process to just one core.

Thread implementation
Threads are often provided in the form of a thread package. Such a package
contains operations to create and destroy threads, as well as operations on
synchronization variables such as mutexes and condition variables. There are
basically two approaches to implement a thread package. The first approach
is to construct a thread library that is executed entirely in user space. The
second approach is to have the kernel be aware of threads and schedule them.
    A user-level thread library has several advantages. First, it is cheap to
create and destroy threads. Because all thread administration is kept in the

user’s address space, the price of creating a thread is primarily determined
by the cost for allocating memory to set up a thread stack. Analogously,
destroying a thread mainly involves freeing memory for the stack, which is
no longer used. Both operations are cheap.
    A second advantage of user-level threads is that switching thread context
can often be done in just a few instructions. Basically, only the values of
the CPU registers need to be stored and subsequently reloaded with the
previously stored values of the thread to which it is being switched. There is
no need to change memory maps, flush the TLB, do CPU accounting, and so
on. Switching thread context is done when two threads need to synchronize,
for example, when entering a section of shared data. However, as discussed in
Note 3.1, much of the overhead of context switching is caused by perturbing
memory caches.
    A major drawback of user-level threads comes from deploying the many-
to-one threading model: multiple threads are mapped to a single schedulable
entity. We already saw this with our simple multithreaded Python example
in Figure 3.4. As a consequence, the invocation of a blocking system call
will immediately block the entire process to which the thread belongs, and
thus also all the other threads in that process. As we explained, threads are
particularly useful to structure large applications into parts that could be
logically executed at the same time. In that case, blocking on I/O should not
prevent other parts to be executed in the meantime. For such applications,
user-level threads are of no help.
    These problems can be mostly circumvented by implementing threads in
the operating system’s kernel, leading to what is known as the one-to-one
threading model in which every thread is a schedulable entity. The price to
pay is that every thread operation (creation, deletion, synchronization, etc.),
will have to be carried out by the kernel, requiring a system call. Switching
thread contexts may now become as expensive as switching process contexts.
However, because the performance of context switching is generally dictated
by ineffective use of memory caches, and not by the distinction between the
many-to-one or one-to-one threading model, many operating systems now
offer the latter model, if only for its simplicity.

  Note 3.2 (Advanced: Many-to-many threading model)
  An alternative to the two threading extremes is a hybrid form of user-level and
  kernel-level threads, a so-called many-to-many threading model. In the following,
  we simplify our terminology and speak of user threads and kernel threads. A
  kernel thread runs in the context of a single process, and there can be several
  kernel threads per process. In addition to managing kernel threads, a runtime
  system also offers a user-level thread package, offering applications the usual
  operations for creating and destroying threads. In addition, the package provides
  facilities for thread synchronization, such as mutexes and condition variables. The

  important issue is that the thread package is implemented entirely in user space:
  all operations on threads are carried out without intervention of the kernel.
       The thread package can be shared by multiple kernel threads, as shown in
Figure 3.5. This means that each kernel thread can be running its own (user level)
  thread. Multithreaded applications are constructed by creating user and kernel
  threads, and subsequently assigning each user thread to a kernel thread.
       The combination of user threads and kernel threads works as follows. The
  thread package has a single routine to schedule the next thread. When creating a
  kernel thread (which is done through a system call), the kernel thread is given its
  own stack, and is instructed to execute the scheduling routine searching for a user
  thread to execute. If there are several kernel threads, then each of them executes
  the scheduler. The thread table, which is used to keep track of the current set of
  threads, is thus shared by the kernel threads. Protecting this table to guarantee
  mutually exclusive access is done through mutexes that are implemented entirely
  in user space. In other words, synchronization between kernel threads does not
  require any kernel support. A thread table is often implemented as a ready queue.

Figure 3.5: Combining kernel-level and user-level threads.

      When a kernel thread finds a runnable user thread, it switches context to that
  thread. Meanwhile, other kernel threads may be looking for other runnable user
  threads as well. If a user thread needs to block on a mutex or condition variable,
  it does the necessary administration and eventually calls the scheduling routine.
  When another runnable user thread has been found, a context switch is made
  to that thread. The beauty of all this is that the kernel thread executing the user
  thread need not be informed: the context switch is implemented completely in
  user space and appears to the kernel thread as normal program code.
      Now let us see what happens when a user thread does a blocking system
  call. In that case, execution changes from user mode to kernel mode, but still
  continues in the context of the current kernel thread. At the point where the
  current kernel thread can no longer continue, the operating system may decide to
  switch context to another kernel thread, which also implies that a context switch
  is made back to user mode. The selected kernel thread will simply continue where
  it had previously left off.
      There are several advantages to using kernel threads with a user-level thread
  package. First, creating, destroying, and synchronizing threads is relatively cheap

  and involves no kernel intervention at all. Second, provided that a process has
  enough kernel threads, a blocking system call will not suspend the entire process.
  Third, there is no need for an application to know about the kernel threads. All it
  sees are user threads. Fourth, kernel threads can be easily used in multiprocessing
  environments by executing different kernel threads on different CPUs or different
  cores. This multiprocessing can be hidden entirely from the application.
      The approach just sketched is actually the general form of combining user
  and kernel threads. This approach has been implemented in the Go program-
  ming language [Donovan and Kernighan, 2015]. The libfibre runtime system
  described and evaluated by Karsten and Barghi [2020] is also exemplary for the
  many-to-many threading model. A slightly different approach can be found in
  Arachne [Qin et al., 2018]. Arachne hides the kernel threads from applications,
  but instead assumes that an application can get full insight in the cores that have
  been assigned. It assigns one kernel thread per allocated core. An important
  consequence is that Arachne does not provide support for blocking I/O calls.

    As a final note, it is important to realize that using threads is one way
of organizing simultaneous and concurrent executions within an application.
In practice, we often see that applications are constructed as a collection of
concurrent processes, jointly making use of the interprocess facilities offered by
an operating system (see also [Robbins and Robbins, 2003; Stevens, 1999]). A
good example of this approach is the organization of the Apache Web server,
which, by default, starts with a handful of processes for handling incoming
requests. Each process forms a single-threaded instantiation of the server, yet
is capable of communicating with other instances through standard means.
    As argued by Srinivasan [2010], using processes instead of threads has
the important advantage of separating the data space: each process works on
its own part of data and is protected from interference from others through
the operating system. The advantage of this separation should not be un-
derestimated: thread programming is considered to be notoriously difficult
because the developer is fully responsible for managing concurrent access
to shared data. Using processes, data spaces, in the end, are protected by
hardware support. If a process attempts to access data outside its allocated
memory, the hardware will raise an exception, which is then further processed
by the operating system. No such support is available for threads concurrently
operating within the same process.

3.1.2      Threads in distributed systems
An important property of threads is that they can provide a convenient
means of allowing blocking system calls without blocking the entire process
in which the thread is running (assuming we do not have a many-to-one
threading model). This property makes threads particularly attractive to use
in distributed systems, as it makes it much easier to express communication

in the form of maintaining multiple logical connections at the same time.
We illustrate this point by taking a closer look at multithreaded clients and
servers, respectively.

Multithreaded clients
To establish a high degree of distribution transparency, distributed systems
that operate in wide-area networks may need to conceal long interprocess
message propagation times. The round-trip delay in a wide-area network can
easily be in the order of hundreds of milliseconds, or sometimes even seconds.
     The usual way to hide communication latencies is to initiate communica-
tion and immediately proceed with something else. A typical example where
this happens is in Web browsers. Often, a Web document consists of an HTML
file containing plain text along with a collection of images, icons, etc. To fetch
each element of a Web document, the browser has to set up a TCP/IP con-
nection, read the incoming data, and pass it to a display component. Setting
up a connection as well as reading incoming data are inherently blocking
operations. When dealing with long-haul communication, we also have the
disadvantage that the time for each operation to complete may be long.
     A Web browser often starts with fetching the HTML page and subsequently
displays it. To hide communication latencies as much as possible, some
browsers start displaying data while it is still coming in. While the text is
made available to the user, including the facilities for scrolling and such, the
browser continues with fetching other files that make up the page, such as
the images. The latter are displayed as they are brought in. The user need
thus not wait until all the components of the entire page are fetched before
the page is made available.
     In effect, it is seen that the Web browser is doing several tasks simulta-
neously. As it turns out, developing the browser as a multithreaded client
simplifies matters considerably. As soon as the main HTML file has been
fetched, separate threads can be activated to take care of fetching the other
parts. Each thread sets up a separate connection to the server and pulls
in the data. Setting up a connection and reading data from the server can
be programmed using the standard (blocking) system calls, assuming that
a blocking call does not suspend the entire process. As is also illustrated
in [Stevens, 1998], the code for each thread is the same and, above all, simple.
Meanwhile, the user notices only delays in the display of images and such,
but can otherwise browse through the document.
     There is another important benefit to using multithreaded Web browsers,
in which several connections can be opened simultaneously. In the previous
example, several connections were set up to the same server. If that server is
heavily loaded, or just plain slow, no real performance improvements will be
noticed compared to pulling in the files that make up the page strictly one
after the other.

    However, often, Web servers have been replicated across multiple machines,
where each server provides the same set of Web documents. The replicated
servers are located at the same site, and are known under the same name.
When a request for a Web page comes in, the request is forwarded to one of
the servers, often using a round-robin strategy or some other load-balancing
technique. When using a multithreaded client, connections may be set up
to different replicas, allowing data to be transferred in parallel, effectively
establishing that the entire Web document is fully displayed in a much shorter
time than with a nonreplicated server. This approach is possible only if the
client can handle truly parallel streams of incoming data. Threads are ideal
for this purpose.

  Note 3.3 (Advanced: Exploiting client-side threads for performance)
  Although there are obvious opportunities for using threads to reach high perfor-
  mance, it is interesting to see whether multithreading is effectively exploited. In a
  study to see to what extent multiple threads put a multicore processor to work,
  Blake et al. [2010] looked at the execution of various applications on modern
  architectures. Browsers, like many other client-side applications, are interactive
  innately, for which reason the expected processor idle time may be quite high. To
  properly measure to what extent a multicore processor is being used, Blake et al.
  used a metric known as thread-level parallelism (TLP). Let ci denote the fraction
  of time that exactly i threads are being executed simultaneously. Thread-level
  parallelism is then defined as:

                                           ∑iN=1 i · ci
                                   TLP =
                                            1 − c0
  where N is the maximum number of threads that (can) execute at the same time.
  In their study, a typical Web browser at that time had a TLP value between 1.5
  and 2.5, meaning that to effectively exploit parallelism, the client machine should
  have two or three cores, or likewise, 2–3 processors.
      These results are interesting when considering that modern Web browsers
  create hundreds of threads, and that tens of threads are active at the same time
  (note that an active thread is not necessarily running; it may be blocked waiting for
  an I/O request to complete). We thus see that multithreading is used to organize
  an application, but that this multithreading is not leading to dramatic performance
  improvements through hardware exploitation. That browsers can be effectively
  designed for exploiting parallelism is shown, for example, by Meyerovich and
  Bodik [2010]. By adapting existing algorithms, the authors manage to establish
  several-fold speedups.

Multithreaded servers
Although there are important benefits to multithreaded clients, the main use
of multithreading in distributed systems is found at the server side. Practice

shows that multithreading not only simplifies server code considerably, but
also makes it much easier to develop servers that exploit parallelism to attain
high performance, even on uniprocessor systems. However, with modern
multicore processors, multithreading for parallelism is an obvious path to
follow.
    To understand the benefits of threads for writing server code, consider the
organization of a file server that occasionally has to block waiting for the disk.
The file server normally waits for an incoming request for a file operation,
subsequently carries out the request, and then sends back the reply. One
possible, and particularly popular, organization is shown in Figure 3.6. Here,
one thread, the dispatcher, reads incoming requests for a file operation. The
requests are sent by clients to a well-known end point for this server. After
examining the request, the server chooses an idle (i.e., blocked) worker thread
and hands it the request.

Figure 3.6: A multithreaded server organized in a dispatcher/worker model.

    The worker proceeds by performing a blocking read on the local file system,
which may cause the thread to be suspended until the data are fetched from
disk. If the thread is suspended, another thread is selected to be executed. For
example, the dispatcher may be selected to acquire more work. Alternatively,
another worker thread can be selected that is now ready to run.
    Now consider how the file server might have been written without threads.
One possibility is to have it operate as a single thread. The main loop of the
file server gets a request, examines it, and carries it out to completion before
getting the next one. While waiting for the disk, the server is idle and does
not process any other requests. Consequently, requests from other clients
cannot be handled. In addition, if the file server is running on a dedicated
machine, as is commonly the case, the CPU is simply idle while the file server
is waiting for the disk. The net result is that many fewer requests per time
unit can be processed. Thus threads gain considerable performance, but each
thread is programmed sequentially, in the usual way.
    So far, we have seen two possible designs: a multithreaded file server

and a single-threaded file server. A third alternative is to run the server as
a big single-threaded finite-state machine. When a request comes in, the
one and only thread examines it. If it can be satisfied from the in-memory
cache, fine, but if not, the thread must access the disk. However, instead
of issuing a blocking disk operation, the thread schedules an asynchronous
(i.e., nonblocking) disk operation for which it will be later interrupted by the
operating system. To make this work, the thread will record the status of the
request (namely, that it has a pending disk operation), and continues to see if
there were any other incoming requests that require its attention.
     Once a pending disk operation has been completed, the operating system
will notify the thread, who will then, in due time, look up the status of the
associated request and continue processing it. Eventually, a response will be
sent to the originating client, again using a nonblocking call to send a message
over the network.
     In this design, the “sequential process” model that we had in the first
two cases is lost. Every time the thread needs to do a blocking operation, it
needs to record exactly where it was in processing the request, possibly also
storing additional state. Once that has been done, it can start the operation
and continue with other work. Other work means processing newly arrived
requests, or post-processing requests for which a previously started operation
has completed. Of course, if there is no work to be done, the thread may
indeed block. In effect, we are simulating the behavior of multiple threads
and their respective stacks the hard way. The process is being operated as
a finite-state machine that gets an event and then reacts to it, depending on
what is in it.

                     Model                      Characteristics
           Multithreading            Parallelism, blocking system calls
           Single-threaded process   No parallelism, blocking system calls
           Finite-state machine      Parallelism, nonblocking system calls

Figure 3.7: Three ways to construct a server.

    It should now be clear what threads have to offer. They make it possible to
retain the idea of sequential processes that make blocking system calls and still
achieve parallelism. Blocking system calls make programming easier as they
appear as just normal procedure calls. In addition, multiple threads allow for
parallelism and thus performance improvement. The single-threaded server
retains the ease and simplicity of blocking system calls, but may severely
hinder performance in terms of number of requests that can be handled
per time unit. The finite-state machine approach achieves high performance
through parallelism, but uses nonblocking calls, which are generally hard to
program and thus to maintain. These models are summarized in Figure 3.7.

   Again, note that instead of using threads, we can also use multiple pro-
cesses to organize a server (leading to the situation that we actually have a
multiprocess server). The advantage is that the operating system can offer
more protection against accidental access to shared data. However, if pro-
cesses need to communicate a lot, we may see a noticeable adverse effect on
performance in comparison to using threads.

3.2     Virtualization
Threads and processes can be seen as a way to do more things at the same
time. In effect, they allow us to build (pieces of) programs that appear to be
executed simultaneously. On a single-processor (single core) computer, this
simultaneous execution is, of course, an illusion. As there is only a single
CPU, only an instruction from a single thread or process will be executed at
a time. By rapidly switching between threads and processes, the illusion of
parallelism is created.
    This separation between having a single CPU and being able to pretend
there are more can be extended to other resources as well, leading to what
is known as resource virtualization. This virtualization has been applied for
many decades, but has received renewed interest as (distributed) computer
systems have become more commonplace and complex, leading to the sit-
uation that application software is mostly always outliving its underlying
systems software and hardware.

3.2.1    Principle of virtualization
In practice, every (distributed) computer system offers a programming inter-
face to higher-level software, as shown in Figure 3.8(a). There are many types
of interfaces, ranging from the basic instruction set as offered by a CPU to the
vast collection of application programming interfaces that are shipped with
many current middleware systems. In its essence, virtualization deals with
extending or replacing an existing interface to mimic the behavior of another
system, as shown in Figure 3.8(b). We will come to discuss technical details
on virtualization shortly, but let us first concentrate on why virtualization is
important.

Virtualization and distributed systems
One of the most important reasons for introducing virtualization, back in the
1970s, was to allow legacy software to run on expensive mainframe hardware.
The software not only included various applications, but in fact also the
operating systems they were developed for. This approach toward supporting
legacy software has been successfully applied on the IBM 370 mainframes (and

                     (a)                              (b)

Figure 3.8: (a) General organization between a program, interface, and system.
(b) General organization of virtualizing system A on top of B.

their successors) that offered a virtual machine to which different operating
systems had been ported.
    As hardware became cheaper, computers became more powerful, and the
number of different operating system flavors was reducing, virtualization
became less of an issue. However, matters have changed again since the
late 1990s. First, while hardware and low-level systems software change
reasonably fast, software at higher levels of abstraction (e.g., middleware and
applications), are often much more stable. In other words, we are facing
the situation that legacy software cannot be maintained in the same pace as
the platforms it relies on. Virtualization can help here by porting the legacy
interfaces to the new platforms, and thus immediately opening up the latter
for large classes of existing programs.
    Equally important is the fact that networking has become completely
pervasive. It is hard to imagine that a modern computer is not connected to
a network. In practice, this connectivity requires that system administrators
maintain a large and heterogeneous collection of server computers, each one
running very different applications, which can be accessed by clients. At
the same time, the various resources should be easily accessible to these
applications. Virtualization can help a lot: the diversity of platforms and
machines can be reduced by essentially letting each application run on its
own virtual machine, possibly including the related libraries and operating
system, which, in turn, run on a common platform.
    This last type of virtualization provides a high degree of portability and
flexibility. For example, in order to realize content delivery networks that
can easily support replication of dynamic content, Awadallah and Rosenblum
[2002] have argued that management becomes much easier if edge servers
would support virtualization, allowing a complete site, including its environ-

ment, to be dynamically copied. These arguments are still valid, and indeed,
portability is perhaps the most important reason why virtualization plays
such a key role in many distributed systems.
    Finally, an important reason for virtualization is that it provides an ad-
ditional means of isolating code, which is particularly relevant in the case
of cloud computing. At the same time, virtualization also introduces new
security threats.

  Note 3.4 (Discussion: Stable software?)
  Although there is indeed a lot of legacy software that can benefit from stable
  interfaces to rapidly changing underlying hardware, it is a mistake to believe that
  the software for widely available services hardly changes. With the increasing
  shift toward server-side computing in the form of Software-as-a-Service (SaaS),
  much software can be maintained for a relatively homogeneous platform, owned
  entirely by the organization offering the associated service. As a consequence,
  maintaining software products can be much easier, as there is much lesser need
  to distribute changes to potentially millions of customers. In fact, changes may
  rapidly succeed each other following changes in available hardware and platform,
  but without any client actually noticing downtimes [Barroso et al., 2018].

Types of virtualization
There are many ways in which virtualization can be realized. An overview
of these various approaches is described by Smith and Nair [2005a]. A more
recent account is described by Bugnion et al. [2017], which provides many
technical details on the realization of various forms of virtualization. To
understand the differences in virtualization, it is important to realize that
computer systems generally offer four different types of interfaces, at three
different levels:

   1. An interface between the hardware and software, referred to as the in-
      struction set architecture (ISA), forming the set of machine instructions.
      This set is divided into two subsets:
        • Privileged instructions, which are allowed to be executed only by
          the operating system.
        • General instructions, which can be executed by any program.
   2. An interface consisting of system calls as offered by an operating system.
   3. An interface consisting of library calls, generally forming what is known
      as an application programming interface (API). Often, the aforemen-
      tioned system calls are hidden by an API.

These different types are shown in Figure 3.9. The essence of virtualization is
to mimic the behavior of these interfaces.

Figure 3.9: Various interfaces offered by computer systems.

    Virtualization can take place in two different ways. First, we can build a
runtime system that essentially provides an abstract instruction set that is to
be used for executing applications. Instructions can be interpreted (as is the
case for the Java runtime environment), but could also be emulated, as is done
for running Windows applications on Unix platforms. Note that in the latter
case, the emulator will also have to mimic the behavior of system calls, which
has proven to be generally far from trivial. This type of virtualization, shown
in Figure 3.10(a), leads to what Smith and Nair [2005a] call a process virtual
machine, stressing that virtualization is only for a single process.

             (a)                       (b)                          (c)

Figure 3.10: (a) A process virtual machine. (b) A native virtual machine
monitor. (c) A hosted virtual machine monitor.

    An alternative approach toward virtualization, shown in Figure 3.10(b),
is to provide a system that is implemented as a layer shielding the original
hardware, but offering the complete instruction set of that same (or other
hardware) as an interface. This leads to what is known as a native virtual
machine monitor. It is called native because it is implemented directly on
top of the underlying hardware. Note that the interface offered by a virtual
machine monitor can be offered simultaneously to different programs. As

a result, it is now possible to have multiple, and different guest operating
systems run independently and concurrently on the same platform.
    A native virtual machine monitor will have to provide and regulate access
to various resources, like external storage and networks. Like any operating
system, this implies that it will have to implement device drivers for those
resources. Rather than doing all this effort anew, a hosted virtual machine
monitor will run on top of a trusted host operating system as shown in Fig-
ure 3.10(c). In this case, the virtual machine monitor can make use of existing
facilities provided by that host operating system. It will generally have to be
given special privileges instead of running as a user-level application. Using
a hosted virtual machine monitor is highly popular in modern distributed
systems such as data centers and clouds.
    As argued by Rosenblum and Garfinkel [2005], virtual machines are impor-
tant in the context of reliability and security for (distributed) systems. As they
allow for the isolation of a complete application and its environment, a failure
caused by an error or security attack need no longer affect a complete machine.
In addition, as we also mentioned before, portability is greatly improved as
virtual machines provide a further decoupling between hardware and soft-
ware, allowing a complete environment to be moved from one machine to
another. We return to migration in Section 3.5.

  Note 3.5 (Advanced: On the performance of virtual machines)
  Virtual machines perform surprisingly well. In fact, many studies show that
  modern virtual machines perform close to running applications directly on the
  host operating system. Let us take a closer look at what is going under the hood
  of virtual machines. A detailed and comprehensive account of virtual machines is
  provided by Smith and Nair [2005b].
       Part of the answer to performance issues is shown in Figure 3.11, which forms
  an extension of Figure 3.10(c): a large part of the code constituting a virtual
  machine monitor, guest operating system, and application is running natively on
  the underlying hardware. In particular, all general (i.e., unprivileged) machine
  instructions are directly executed by the underlying machine.
       This approach is not new and is founded on research by Popek and Goldberg
  [1974] who formalized the requirements for the efficient execution of virtual
  machines. In a nutshell, Popek and Goldberg assumed that the underlying
  machine provided at least two modes of operation (system and user mode), that
  a subset of the instructions could be executed only in system mode, and that
  memory addressing was relative (i.e., a physical address was obtained by adding
  a relative address to an offset found in a relocation register). A distinction was
  further made between two types of instructions. A privileged instruction is an
  instruction that is characterized by the fact that if and only if executed in user
  mode, it causes a trap to the operating system. Nonprivileged instructions are
  all other instructions.

Figure 3.11: Applications, guest operating system, virtual machine moni-
      tor, and host operating system on a single hardware platform.

      Given these formal assumptions, Popek and Goldberg defined two classes
  of special instructions. A control-sensitive instruction is one that may affect
  the configuration of a machine. A typical example is an instruction that affects
  the memory layout, for example, by changing the memory offset as stored in a
  relocation register. Another example is instructions that affect the interrupt table,
  containing pointers to interrupt handlers.
      A behavior-sensitive instruction is one whose effect is partially determined
  by the context in which it is executed. For example, Intel x86 processors have
  instructions that may, or may not, affect certain registers depending on whether
  that instruction is executed in system mode or user mode. An example given
  in [Smith and Nair, 2005b] is that of the POPF instruction, which may set an
  interrupt-enabled flag, but only when executed in system mode.
      We now have the following important result:
           For any conventional computer, a virtual machine monitor may be con-
           structed if the set of sensitive instructions for that computer is a subset of
           the set of privileged instructions.
  What this says is that as long as sensitive instructions are caught when executed
  in user mode, we can safely run all nonsensitive instructions natively on the
  underlying hardware. This also means that when designing instruction sets, if
  we take care that the above requirement is met, we will not be unnecessarily
  obstructing efficient virtualization of that instruction set.
      Unfortunately, not all instruction sets have privileged-only sensitive instruc-
  tions, including perhaps the most popular one, namely the Intel x86 instruction set.
  As it turns out, this set has 17 sensitive instructions that are not privileged [Robin
  and Irvine, 2000]. In other words, each of these instructions can be executed in
  user mode without causing a trap to the operating system, yet affect the way
  that the operating system is managing its resources. In these cases, there are
  essentially two solutions.
      The first solution is to emulate all instructions. Of course, this would have
  a serious adverse effect on performance. To circumvent problems, an approach
  implemented in VMWare [Sugerman et al., 2001], is to scan the executable and
  to insert code around the nonprivileged sensitive instructions to divert control

  to the virtual machine monitor. There, appropriate emulation will take place, for
  example, by considering the context in which the instruction was to be executed.
  The effect is that full virtualization can take place, meaning that execution can
  take place without changing the guest operating system, nor the application itself.
      An alternative solution is to apply paravirtualization, which requires the
  guest operating system to be modified. In particular, the guest operating system is
  modified such that all side effects of running nonprivileged sensitive instructions
  in user mode, which would normally be executed in system mode, are dealt
  with. For example, code can be rewritten such that these instructions simply no
  longer occur, or if they do, that their semantics are the same regardless whether
  being executed in user or system mode. Paravirtualization has been adopted by
  Xen [Barham et al., 2003; Chisnall, 2007].

3.2.2   Containers
Virtual machines offer a means to run applications relying on a specific
operating environment, including its instruction set and operating system,
to run independently across different platforms. As we have seen, this may
require significant efforts to ensure portability and performance. However,
often we see that applications are relatively stable when it comes to the used
instruction set and operating system, yet do rely on specific libraries and other
support software. In these cases, what we really want is to allow different
applications to run side-by-side, yet each uses its own environment of support
software without even noticing that there be other applications with a different
environment. This is where containers come into the game.1
    A container can be thought of a collection of binaries (also called images)
that jointly constitute the software environment for running applications. The
easiest way to think of a container is what a user would get to see when
logging into, for example, a Unix system: it will consist of several standard
directories containing executable programs, libraries, documentation, etc. A
naive implementation of a container would be to copy an entire environment
for a specific use case and install it as a subdirectory of, say, the root file
system. Using a command such as chroot, the user would then be diverted to
that subdirectory and run various applications, with this subdirectory now
acting as the root. An application would see exactly the libraries and other
dependencies it needed, while applications in other containers would have
their own view on what the operating system is offering. In this sense, a
container effectively virtualizes the software environment for an application.
    However, this naive implementation is certainly not enough from a virtual-
ization perspective. For one, applications and processes operating in different
    1 The material in this section has been inspired by Julia Evans’s wonderful material at

wizardzines.com.

containers need to be isolated from each other. Likewise, simply copying an
entire environment is not very efficient, certainly not because we may expect
that many libraries and such are the same across different containers. Finally,
it is important that an operating system hosting containers has some control
over the usage of its own resources. All of these aspects are handled in Unix
environments (i.e., notably Linux) through three important mechanisms:

   • Namespaces, by which a collection of processes associated with a con-
     tainer is given their own view of identifiers and such, independent of
     other containers.
   • Union file system, which allows to, literally, combine several file systems
     into a layered fashion with only the highest layer allowing for write
     operations (and the one being part of a container).
   • Control groups, or simply cgroups, by which resource restrictions can
     be imposed upon a collection of processes.

   Let us look a bit deeper into each of these mechanisms. Namespaces are
necessary for giving a process running inside a container the illusion that it is
on its own. As such, namespaces are important for isolating containers from
each other. Perhaps the one most illustrative is setting the PID namespace.
As every machine has only a single init process (with PID equal to 1), every
container should see its own “init” process. This is established through the
Unix unshare command:

      unshare --pid --fork --mount-proc bash

will bring the calling process into a new shell in which the command ps -ef
yields:

           UID        PID   PPID C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
           root         1      0 0 06:27 pts/0    00:00:00 bash
           root         2      1 0 06:27 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -ef

Indeed, we see that there now seems to be a new collection of processes with
just one having PID equal to 1. All other processes have become invisible
when working from this new shell.
    Another important mechanism is efficient sharing of existing file systems.
Many containers will be based on a common instance of an operating system,
say Ubuntu 20.04. Instead of copying that entire environment and installing it
as a subdirectory as explained above, we can use it as a base layer and stack
other parts on top of it. For example, we may decide to replace the entire
collection of subdirectories that constitute PHP7.4 for an older version by
simply stacking those directories on top the ones for version 7.4. The result is
that a PHP application will be using the older version. Note that this approach
is very similar to mounting a file system at a directory dir. Anything that was

contained in dir will no longer be visible until the file system is unmounted
again. Indeed, taking the union of file systems is done through successive
calls to the mount system call, with each layer being mounted in read-only
mode. Only the top layer can be written to, and will need to be explicitly
saved when a running container finishes.
    Finally, to control what a container can actually use, Unix systems offer
cgroups. In essence, when creating a control group, the collection of processes
running in that group may be restricted to the amount of main memory that
they can use, the priority when it comes to using the CPU, etc. In this way,
the hosting operating system can prevent that a single container is using too
much of its resources, preventing perhaps other containers to do their work.
    There are many other things related to isolate containers and properly
restrict what processes can do within a container. In the end, a container can
be thought of an archive of files that are placed somewhere in a filesystem,
together with a specific stack of common, shared, existing read-only subdi-
rectories. Processes running inside the context of a container are presented
with a view that their context is the only one (through the use of namespaces)
and they have certain abilities when it comes tot using resources (through
cgroups, but also restrictions when it comes to, for example, system calls).
This view is summarized in Figure 3.12. Besides the material from Julia Evans
at wizardzines.com, the interested reader is referred to [Pahl et al., 2019] for
an overview of container technologies.

Figure 3.12: The organization of a container within a hosting environment.

  Note 3.6 (Example: PlanetLab)
  There are many examples of container technologies, yet at this point it is interesting
  to look at a specific case where the technology was used for developing a wide-
  area cluster of computers, even before it became popular in the context of cloud

  computing. PlanetLab was a collaborative distributed system in which different
  organizations each donated one or more computers, adding up to a total of
  hundreds of nodes. Together, these computers formed a 1-tier server cluster, where
  access, processing, and storage could all take place on each node individually.
  Management of PlanetLab was by necessity almost entirely distributed. The
  project closed down in 2020.

  General organization In PlanetLab, a participating organization donated one
  or more nodes (i.e., computers) that were subsequently shared among all Plan-
  etLab users. Each node was organized as shown in Figure 3.13. There are two
  important components [Bavier et al., 2004; Peterson et al., 2006]. The first one
  is the virtual machine monitor (VMM), which is an enhanced Linux operating
  system, essentially one capable of supporting containers along the lines sketched
  above. The enhancements mainly comprise adjustments for supporting the second
  component, namely (Linux) Vservers. A Vserver is essentially a container in
  execution.

Figure 3.13: The basic organization of a PlanetLab node.

      The Linux VMM ensured that Vservers were separated: processes in different
  Vservers are executed concurrently and independently, each making use only of
  the software packages and programs available in their own environment. The
  isolation between processes in different Vservers is strict. For example, two
  processes in different Vservers could have the same user ID, but this did not imply
  that they would stem from the same user. This separation considerably eased
  supporting users from different organizations that wanted to use PlanetLab as,
  for example, a testbed to experiment with entirely different distributed systems
  and applications. Note that this separation is precisely the one that is realized
  through the unshare command.
      To support such experimentation, PlanetLab used slices, each slice being
  a set of Vservers, each Vserver running on a different node, as illustrated in
Figure 3.14. A slice can thus be thought of as a virtual server cluster, implemented
  by a collection of containers connected through a wide-area network.

      Central to managing PlanetLab resources was the node manager. Each node
  had such a manager, implemented by a separate Vserver, whose only task was to
  create other Vservers on the node it managed and to control resource allocation.
  To create a new slice, each node would also run a slice creation service (SCS),
  which, in turn, could contact the node manager requesting it to create a Vserver
  and to allocate resources. The node manager itself could not be contacted directly
  over a network, allowing it to concentrate only on local resource management. In
  turn, the SCS would not accept slice-creation requests from just anybody. Only
  specific slice authorities were eligible for requesting the creation of a slice. Each
  slice authority would have access rights to a collection of nodes. The simplest
  model was that there is only a single, centralized slice authority that is allowed
  to request slice creation on all nodes. In practice, we saw that this slice authority
  was the one used to get a user up-and-running on PlanetLab.

Figure 3.14: The principle of a PlanetLab slice, showing sets of associated
      Vservers across different nodes.

      Keeping track of resources was done by a resource specification, or rspec for
  short. An rspec specified a time interval during which certain resources had been
  allocated. Resources include disk space, file descriptors, inbound and outbound
  network bandwidth, transport-level end points, main memory, and CPU usage.
  An rspec was identified through a globally unique 128-bit identifier known as a
  resource capability (rcap). Given an rcap, the node manager could look up the
  associated rspec in a local table.
      Resources were bound to slices. In other words, to make use of resources, it
  was necessary to create a slice. Each slice was associated with a service provider,
  which can best be seen as an entity having an account on PlanetLab. Every slice
  could then be identified by a (principal_id, slice_tag) pair, where the principal_id
  identified the provider and slice_tag being an identifier chosen by the provider.

  Vservers Let us now turn our attention to PlanetLab’s Vservers, which have
  been described and evaluated by Soltesz et al. [2007]. A Vserver was organized
  as a container. The primary task of a Vserver was therefore to merely support a
  group of processes and keep that group isolated from processes running under
  the jurisdiction of another Vserver.
      An important advantage of the container-based approach toward virtualiza-
  tion, in comparison to running separate guest operating systems, is that resource
  allocation could generally be much simpler. In particular, it was possible to
  overbook resources by allowing for dynamic resource allocation, just as is done

  with allocating resources to normal processes. Normally, when using a guest
  operating system, the guest will have to be allocated a fixed number of resources
  in advance (notably main memory). When considering that the nodes provided
  by participating PlanetLab organizations were required to have only a few GByte
  of main memory, it is not hard to imagine that memory would be a scarce re-
  source. It was therefore necessary to dynamically allocate memory to allow tens
  of containers to be running at the same time on a single node. Vservers were
  ideal for this type of resource management; operating systems are much harder
  to support in such cases. Of course, this could not prevent a Vserver from using
  too much memory on a busy node. The PlanetLab policy in that case was simple:
  the Vserver, hogging memory when swap space was almost filled, was reset.

  PlanetLab status Although the official PlanetLab closed down in 2020, a similar
  system is running worldwide as EdgeNet. Not surprisingly, where Vservers were
  containers avant-la-lettre, that technology has been replaced in EdgeNet by modern
  container technology, namely Docker in combination with Kubernetes.

3.2.3      Comparing virtual machines and containers
Ever since containers became popular, mainly caused by their introduction
through Docker, an oftentimes heated debate has been going on what is better:
virtual machines or containers? This debate has been hindered through the
improper use of terminology, such as lightweight containers versus heavyweight
virtual machines, immediately leading to often unsubstantiated performance
statements (suggesting that heavyweight means slow). However, life is not so
simple and understanding the technology of virtual machines as well as those
of containers can help in making better judgments on when to use which
technology. In this section, let us take a closer look at one specific, important
aspect: performance. We return to portability later when discussing code
migration.
    Measuring the performance of any system requires looking at a multitude
of criteria. Obvious ones include CPU and memory usage. Likewise, various
I/O measurements are needed to get a good insight into how well a system
is performing, in particular accessing disks and network I/O. On top of
this, we need to ask ourselves how measurements are carried out. In other
words, which workloads or benchmarks are used to evaluate and compare
the performing systems.
    A systematic study on comparing Linux containers (LXC) against Linux
virtual machines (KVM) was conducted by Sharma et al. [2016]. If we just look
at a baseline comparison in which an application is running either within a
container or on top of a virtual machine, differences can be observed in favor
of containers, yet these differences are not that big, except when it comes to
I/O. In that case, we see that virtual machines perform significantly less than

containers. This should not come as a surprise, as notably with traditional I/O,
the operating system plays a crucial role: it has to execute many privileged
instructions.
    Nevertheless, even the obvious may come with surprises. In a more recent
study on comparing different container technologies with virtual-machine
approaches, van Rijn and Rellermeyer [2021] demonstrate that the differences
between the two may often be close to negligible, even when looking at disk
and network I/O. There are several reasons for this small difference, but
one is that the host operating system caches results in main memory. In
other words, when actually performing I/O operations, many subsequent
operations are performed on in-memory data instead of data that is stored
on disk. This makes benchmarking more difficult, yet also reflects realistic
application-driven behavior. Furthermore, when running actual application-
level benchmarks, such as those available for mysql, differences may exist, but
can be small. Nevertheless, depending on the actual I/O behavior, the overall
conclusion is that virtual machines do impose more overhead in comparison
to containers.
    Of course, it is more natural that several applications run side-by-side. The
question then is to what extent the performance of one application influences
that of another. In effect, this aspect boils down to the question how well
scheduling resources among competitors actually is. In this case, the general
trend is that containerization has more difficulty isolating independent appli-
cations and that scheduling for CPU usage as well as for disk performance is
handled better through virtual machines.
    What van Rijn and Rellermeyer [2021] and other recent studies show is
that over the years many improvements have been made and that there is
no real need for virtualization techniques to perform significantly slower in
comparison to running applications directly on top of the hosting operating
system.

3.2.4   Application of virtual machines to distributed systems
From the perspective of distributed systems, the most important applica-
tion of virtualization lies in cloud computing. As we already mentioned in
Section 1.3.1, cloud providers offer roughly three different types of services:

   • Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) covering the basic infrastructure
   • Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) covering system-level services
   • Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) containing actual applications

Virtualization plays a key role in IaaS. Instead of renting out a physical
machine, a cloud provider will rent out a virtual machine (monitor) that
may, or may not, be sharing a physical machine with other customers. The
beauty of virtualization is that it allows for almost complete isolation between

customers, who will indeed have the illusion that they have just rented a
dedicated physical machine. Isolation is, however, never complete, if only
for the fact that the actual physical resources are shared, in turn leading to
observable lower performance.
    To make matters concrete, let us consider the Amazon Elastic Compute
Cloud, or simply EC2. EC2 allows one to create an environment consisting
of several networked virtual servers, thus jointly forming the basis of a
distributed system. To make life easy, there is a (large) number of pre-
configured machine images available, referred to as Amazon Machine Images,
or simply AMIs. An AMI is an installable software package consisting of an
operating-system kernel along with several services. An example of a simple,
basic AMI is a LAMP image, consisting of a Linux kernel, the Apache Web
server, a MySQL database system, and PHP libraries. More elaborate images
containing additional software are also available, as well as images based on
other Unix kernels or Windows. In this sense, an AMI is essentially the same
as a boot disk (although there are a few important differences, to which we
return shortly).
    An EC2 customer needs to select an AMI, possibly after adapting or
configuring one. An AMI can then be launched, resulting in what is called an
EC2 instance: the actual virtual machine that can be used to host a customer’s
applications. An important issue is that a customer will hardly ever know
exactly where an instance is actually being executed. Obviously, it is running
on a single physical machine, but where that machine is located remains
hidden. The closest one can get to pinpoint the location where an instance
should run is by selecting one of a few regions provided by Amazon (US,
South America, Europe, Asia).
    To communicate, each instance obtains two IP addresses: a private one that
can be used for internal communication between different instances, making
use of EC2’s internal networking facilities, and a public IP address allowing
any Internet clients to contact an instance. The public address is mapped to
the private one using standard network-address translation (NAT) technology.
A simple way to manage an instance is to make use of an SSH connection, for
which Amazon provides the means for generating the appropriate keys.
    The EC2 environment in which an instance is executed provides different
levels of the following services:

   • CPU: allows selecting the number and type of core, including GPUs
   • Memory: defines how much main memory is allocated to an instance
   • Storage: defines how much local storage is allocated
   • Platform: distinguishes between 32-bit or 64-bit architectures
   • Networking: sets the bandwidth capacity that can be used

In addition, extra resources can be requested, such as an additional networking
interface. The local storage that comes with an instance is transient: when
the instance stops, all the data stored locally is lost. To prevent data loss, a
customer will need to explicitly save data to a persistent store, for example,
by making use of Amazon’s Simple Storage Service (S3). An alternative is to
attach a storage device that is mapped to Amazon’s Elastic Block Store (EBS).
Again, this is yet another service, but one that can be used in the form of a
virtual block device that is simply mounted as one would mount an additional
hard disk. When an instance is stopped, all data that was stored on EBS will
persist. And just as one would expect, an EBS device can be (re)mounted to
any other instance as well.
    It should be clear by now that, without having gone into any significant
level of detail, the IaaS as offered by EC2 allows a customer to create a (po-
tentially large) number of virtual machines, each configured with resources
as needed, and capable of exchanging messages through an IP network. In
addition, these virtual machines can be accessed from anywhere over the
Internet (provided a client has the proper credentials). As such, Amazon
EC2, like many other IaaS providers, offers the means to configure a com-
plete distributed system consisting of networked virtual servers and running
customer-supplied distributed applications. At the same time, those customers
will not need to maintain any physical machine, which by itself is often al-
ready a huge gain, as we will encounter at several occasions throughout this
text. One can indeed argue that virtualization lies at the core of modern cloud
computing.

3.3     Clients
In the previous chapters we discussed the client-server model, the roles of
clients and servers, and the ways they interact. Let us now take a closer look
at the anatomy of clients and servers, respectively. We start in this section
with a discussion of clients. Servers are discussed in the next section.

3.3.1    Networked user interfaces
A major task of client machines is to provide the means for users to interact
with remote servers. There are roughly two ways in which this interaction can
be supported. First, for each remote service, the client machine will have a
separate counterpart that can contact the service over the network. A typical
example is a calendar running on a user’s smartphone that needs to synchro-
nize with a remote, possibly shared calendar. In this case, an application-level
protocol will handle the synchronization, as shown in Figure 3.15(a).
   A second solution is to provide direct access to remote services by offer-
ing only a convenient user interface. Effectively, this means that the client
machine is used only as a terminal with no need for local storage, leading

to an application-neutral solution as shown in Figure 3.15(b). In the case of
networked user interfaces, everything is processed and stored at the server.
This thin-client approach has received much attention with the increase in
Internet connectivity and the use of mobile devices. Thin-client solutions are
also popular as they ease the task of system management.

                                     (a)

                                     (b)

Figure 3.15: (a) A networked application with its own protocol. (b) A general
solution to allow access to remote applications.

Example: The X window system
Perhaps one of the oldest and still widely used networked user interfaces is
the X Window System. The X Window System, generally referred to simply as
X, is used to control bit-mapped terminals, which include a monitor, keyboard,
and a pointing device such as a mouse. Next to supporting traditional
terminals as can be found with desktop computers and workstations, X also
supports modern devices such a touchscreens on tablets and smartphones. In
a sense, X can be viewed as that part of an operating system that controls the
terminal. The heart of the system is formed by what we shall call the X kernel.
It contains all the terminal-specific device drivers, and as such, is generally
highly hardware dependent.
    The X kernel offers a relatively low-level interface for controlling the
screen, but also for capturing events from the keyboard and mouse. This

interface is made available to applications as a library called Xlib. Its organi-
zation is shown in Figure 3.16. Note that Xlib is hardly ever used directly by
applications, which instead deploy toolkits implemented on top of Xlib.

Figure 3.16: The basic organization of the X Window System.

    The interesting aspect of X is that the X kernel and the X applications need
not necessarily reside on the same machine. In particular, X provides the X
protocol, which is an application-level communication protocol by which an
instance of Xlib can exchange data and events with an X kernel. For example,
Xlib can send requests to the X kernel for creating or killing a window, setting
colors, and defining the type of cursor to display, among many other requests.
In turn, the X kernel will react to local events such as keyboard and mouse
input by sending event packets back to Xlib.
   Several applications can communicate at the same time with the X kernel.
There is one specific application that is given special rights, known as the
window manager. This application can dictate the “look and feel” of the
display as it appears to the user. For example, the window manager can
prescribe how each window is decorated with extra buttons, how windows
are to be placed on the display, and so on. Other applications will have to
adhere to these rules. In practice, this means that much of the interaction
between an application and an X terminal is redirected through a window
manager.
    It is interesting to note how the X window system actually fits into client-
server computing. From what we have described so far, it should be clear
that the X kernel receives requests to manipulate the display. It gets these
requests from (possibly remote) applications. In this sense, the X kernel acts
as a server, while the applications play the role of clients. This terminology
has been adopted by X, and although strictly speaking it is correct, it can
easily lead to confusion.

Thin-client network computing
Obviously, applications manipulate a display using the specific display com-
mands as offered by X. These commands are generally sent over the network
where they are subsequently executed by the X kernel. By its nature, ap-
plications written for X should preferably separate application logic from
user-interface commands. Unfortunately, this is often not the case. As re-
ported by Lai and Nieh [2002] it turns out that much of the application logic
and user interaction are tightly coupled, meaning that an application will send
many requests to the X kernel for which it will expect a response before being
able to make a next step. This synchronous behavior may adversely affect
performance when operating over a wide-area network with long latencies.
    There are several solutions to this problem. One is to re-engineer the
implementation of the X protocol, as is done with NX [Pinzari, 2003]. An
important part of this work concentrates on bandwidth reduction by reducing
the size of X messages. To this end, messages are considered to consist of
a fixed part, which is treated as an identifier, and a variable part. Often,
multiple messages will have the same identifier, in which case they will often
contain similar data. This property can be used to send only the differences
between messages having the same identifier. By having the sender and
receiver maintain identifiers, decoding at the receiver can be readily applied.
Bandwidth reductions up to a factor 1000 have been reported, which allows X
to also run through low-bandwidth links of only 9600 kbps.
    As an alternative to using X, researchers and practitioners have also sought
to let an application completely control the remote display, that is, up to the
pixel level. This approach is also referred to as controlling a remote desktop.
Changes in the bitmap are then sent over the network to the display, where
they are immediately transferred to the local frame buffer. A well-known
example of this approach is Virtual Network Computing (VNC) [Richardson
et al., 1998], which has been around ever since the late 1990s. Obviously, letting
the application control the display requires sophisticated encoding techniques
to prevent bandwidth availability to become a problem. For example, consider
displaying a video stream at 30 frames per second on a simple 320 × 240
screen. If each pixel is encoded by 24 bits, then without an efficient encoding
scheme, we would need a bandwidth of approximately 53 Mbps. In practice,
various encoding techniques are used, yet choosing the best one is generally
application dependent.

3.3.2      Virtual desktop environment
As cloud computing further matured, and notably the number of cloud
applications was growing, it became opportune to actually turn the cloud into
a virtual desktop environment for end users. The only thing needed was
the client-side software to access that desktop environment. One of the first

providers of this model was Google with the introduction of Chrome OS. The
basic idea is simple: let the browser provide the local desktop interface. Next
to the browser, multiple stand-alone applications can be available of which
each, in principle, eventually operates with a cloud-based counterpart. In this
sense, the desktop is actually akin to what is offered by modern smartphones.
With an increasing trend to transform applications to browser extensions, we
can see that the browser is taking over the role of an operating system’s user
interface.

The anatomy of a Web browser

To get a better appreciation of what is going on, let us take a closer look at
the anatomy of the Chrome browser, which has been reported to be the most
widely used among all browsers.2 The Chrome browser is an intricate piece of
software consisting of over 25 million lines of code, comparable to the size of
the Linux kernel. Where in the beginning the Web consisted of merely simple
HTML pages, we are now dealing with not only a highly advanced markup
language, but also an array of tools for interaction and client-side scripting
languages. A high-level overview of how the Chrome browser works is shown
in Figure 3.17.
     At the core, we see the resource loader, responsible for fetching content
from a Web server. It generally starts with fetching an HTML file and subse-
quently, in parallel, sets up connections for other material referenced in that
page. This is typically done through separate threads. Note that the resource
loader will need to partially parse the original HTML file to discover which
other content it needs to fetch. Most of the parsing, however, is done by a
separate component that constructs what is known as a Document Object
Model, or DOM for short. In essence, a DOM is a tree representation of the
HTML file.
     Where the DOM can be said to represent structure, actual styling infor-
mation is provided by a separate document. For example, it may state that
every paragraph should be represented in a specific color and in a specific
font. This information is parsed separately and essentially added to the DOM,
leading to a render tree. This tree contains all the information for the next step:
determining exactly where the various elements in the tree will be displayed.
In particular, geometric regions need to be computed for different parts of the
DOM, but also where lines will be broken (and considering language-specific
issues such as reading text from left to right, or vice versa as is the case with
Hebrew or Arabic. Line breaking, in turn, requires exact computations for
which the styling component will need to take font characteristics into account.
It is not difficult to see that the process of determining the layout can become

   2 See gs.statcounter.com.

                     HTML files
                     CSS files
                      Scripts
                      Images
                        ...

      Resource
       loader                       Web server
                     HTTP(S)

        HTML                         Make           Painting &
                    Styling                                          Compositing
       parsing                      layout         rasterization

                                                                    Image   Text

                         Render                                              List
                                                                    Movie
      DOM                tree

                                    Execute                              User
                                     scripts                          interaction

Figure 3.17: An overview of how the Chrome browser renders a Web page
(adapted from Pourghassemi [2021]).

quite complex when, for example, floating images or multiple columns need
to be rendered.
    Once the layout has been determined, the painting component, takes the
layout instructions and constructs a program consisting of paint operations,
like drawRectangle(x,y,height,width). There are many of such operations,
which are subsequently executed by a rasterization process which fills in
all the details for every pixel on the screen, notably, of course, its color.
Rasterization also takes the embedded images into account (and based on the
information provided by the painting process) ensures that each pixel on an
embedded image gets properly displayed. What we have not shown explicitly
in Figure 3.17, is that the DOM is actually decomposed into several layers,
and that each layer is eventually rasterized separately. As a result, the layers
need to be composed into a final image that can be displayed. Meanwhile, the
compositor can interact with the user, who may be scrolling through a page.
    Last, yet certainly not least, every browser now has a separate component
for handling scripts, that is, executable code. A popular scripting language
for client-side Web applications is JavaScript, but increasingly more often we
also see WebAssembly codes [Sletten, 2022]. The latter offer performance that

can be close to executing native code, certainly in combination with actual
compilations. The generated code is always restricted to the permissions the
browser has, making it (relatively) safe. The power of being able to run code
inside a browser cannot be underestimated. It forms the core of giving the
illusion to an end user that she is indeed running an application on the local
desktop. We return to this phenomenon below.
    Although we have skipped many details, it should be clear that actually
rendering a Web page is a highly complex endeavor. Furthermore, it is not
difficult to imagine that many of the elements just described, such as raster-
izing layers, can be done in parallel and perhaps even on special processors,
such a GPU. This is precisely what a modern Web browser does: spawning
threads and processes, not only to provide more structure and organization
to this immense complex software, but also to make sure that the rendering
as a whole is done efficiently.
    In fact, modern Web browsers also use processes to protect various parts
of their code from each other. For example, the whole rendering in Chrome
is done by a separate process (i.e., the components HTML parsing, styling,
making the layout, painting, and compositing are taken together), while raster-
ization is separated to make use of a possibly available GPU. The rasterization
process communicates with the main process through message passing. More-
over, every browser tab gets its own renderer process. To improve security,
each renderer is running in a separate sandbox: a protection mechanism that
precludes direct communication with the underlying operating system. We
return to sandboxes when discussing mobile code.

Browsers and applications

As we already indicated, having a browser is often sufficient for offering a
virtual desktop environment. Important is the fact that browsers can execute
scripts as the client-side part of an otherwise remote application. Such scripts
can largely handle everything that is needed to provide the illusion that a
user is working on a local machine. This is precisely what Chrome OS offers.
However, things become a bit more complicated when local resources are
truly needed for offering a desktop environment. The first type of resources
that come to mind are related to media: camera, microphone, speakers, etc.
Many Web-based applications will ask the user for permission to use those
resources.
    It is often also possible to run applications natively on the computer
hosting the client-side desktop. In essence, this is what happens with modern
smartphones. Native applications (also referred to as mobile apps) operate as
any other locally executing application. Their main advantage over running
Web-based applications is that, in principle, a user can work offline. However,
by simply examining how many mobile apps are useful when there is no

network connectivity already illustrates that working offline is not assumed
to be the default.
    A development that is gradually emerging is that of using Progressive Web
apps (PWA). These applications use the browser as their hosting environment,
yet appear as an ordinary mobile app. In a nutshell, what a PWA does is move
a lot of the server-side content that is not dependent on (high quality) network
connectivity, to the client where it is subsequently cached. The effect is that
many of these apps, which can run in the browser or even appear as a mobile
app (i.e., the browser user interface itself is hidden) can be executed much
faster and comparable to that of their mobile-app counterpart. Furthermore,
because much less needs to be communicated with the server, many PWAs
can operate well even when the quality of the network is at stake.
    By and large, we see that virtual desk environments are moving extremely
thin clients to ones that are hosts to much more functionality, and for which
communication over the Internet has been highly optimized. As we mentioned
before, a major advantage over the traditional fat clients that have mainly
locally installed applications is that management of browser-based apps is
much easier: the server can simply upload new parts to the client as needed.

3.3.3      Client-side software for distribution transparency
Client software comprises more than just user interfaces. Often, parts of the
processing and data level in a client-server application are executed on the
client side as well. A special class is formed by embedded client software,
such as for automatic teller machines (ATMs), cash registers, barcode readers,
TV set-top boxes, etc. In these cases, the user interface is a relatively small part
of the client software, in contrast to the local processing and communication
facilities.
    Besides the user interface and other application-related software, client
software comprises components for achieving distribution transparency.
Ideally, a client should not be aware that it is communicating with remote
processes. In contrast, distribution is often less transparent to servers for
reasons of performance and correctness.
    Access transparency is generally handled through the generation of a
client stub from an interface definition of what the server has to offer. The
stub provides the same interface as the one available at the server, but hides
the possible differences in machine architectures, as well as the actual commu-
nication. The client stub transforms local calls to messages that are sent to the
server, and vice versa transforms messages from the server to return values as
one would expect when calling an ordinary procedure.
    There are different ways to handle location, migration, and relocation
transparency . Using a convenient naming system is crucial. Often, coopera-
tion with client-side software is also important. For example, when a client is
already bound to a server, the client can be directly informed when the server

changes location. In this case, the client’s middleware can hide the server’s
current network location from the user, and also transparently rebind to the
server if necessary. At worst, the client’s application may notice a temporary
loss of performance.
    Similarly, many distributed systems implement replication transparency
employing client-side solutions. For example, imagine a distributed system
with replicated servers, Such replication can be achieved by forwarding a
request to each replica, as shown in Figure 3.18. Client-side software can
transparently collect all responses and pass a single response to the client
application.

Figure 3.18: Transparent replication of a server using a client-side solution.

    Regarding failure transparency, masking communication failures with
a server is typically done through client middleware. For example, client
middleware can be configured to repeatedly attempt to connect to a server, or
perhaps try another server after several attempts. There are even situations
in which the client middleware returns data it had cached during a previous
session, as is sometimes done by Web browsers that fail to connect to a server.
    Finally, concurrency transparency can be handled through special inter-
mediate servers, notably transaction monitors, and requires less support from
client software.

3.4     Servers
Let us now take a closer look at the organization of servers. In the following
pages, we first concentrate on a number of general design issues for servers,
followed by a discussion on server clusters.

3.4.1    General design issues
A server is a process implementing a specific service on behalf of a collection
of clients. In essence, each server is organized in the same way: it waits for an

incoming request from a client and subsequently ensures that the request is
taken care of, after which it waits for the next incoming request.

Concurrent versus iterative servers
There are several ways to organize servers. In the case of an iterative server,
the server itself handles the request and, if necessary, returns a response to the
requesting client. A concurrent server does not handle the request itself, but
passes it to a separate thread or another process, after which it immediately
waits for the next incoming request. A multithreaded server is an example of
a concurrent server. An alternative implementation of a concurrent server is to
fork a new process for each new incoming request. This approach is followed
in many Unix systems. The thread or process that handles the request is
responsible for returning a response to the requesting client.

Contacting a server: end points
Another issue is where clients contact a server. In all cases, clients send
requests to an end point, also called a port, at the machine where the server
is running. Each server listens to a specific end point. How do clients know
the end point of a service? One approach is to globally assign end points for
well-known services. For example, servers that handle Internet FTP requests
always listen to TCP port 21. Likewise, an HTTP server for the World Wide
Web will always listen to TCP port 80. These end points have been assigned
by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), and are documented
in [Reynolds and Postel, 1994]. With assigned end points, the client needs to
find only the network address of the machine where the server is running.
Name services can be used for that purpose.
    There are many services that do not require a preassigned end point.
For example, a time-of-day server may use an end point that is dynamically
assigned to it by its local operating system. In that case, a client will first
have to look up the end point. One solution is to have a special daemon
running on each machine that runs servers. The daemon keeps track of the
current end point of each service implemented by a co-located server. The
daemon itself listens to a well-known end point. A client will first contact the
daemon, request the end point, and then contact the specific server, as shown
in Figure 3.19(a).
    It is common to associate an end point with a specific service. However,
actually implementing each service by means of a separate server may be
a waste of resources. For example, in a typical Unix system, it is common
to have many servers running simultaneously, with most of them passively
waiting until a client request comes in. Instead of having to keep track of so
many passive processes, it can be more efficient to have a single superserver
listening to each end point associated with a specific service, as shown in

                                        (a)

                                        (b)

Figure 3.19: (a) Client-to-server binding using a daemon. (b) Client-to-server
binding using a superserver.

Figure 3.19(b). For example, the inetd daemon in Unix listens to a number of
well-known ports for Internet services. When a request comes in, the daemon
forks a process to handle it. That process will exit when finished.

Interrupting a server
Another issue that needs to be considered when designing a server is whether
and how a server can be interrupted. For example, consider a user who has
just decided to upload a huge file to an FTP server. Then, suddenly realizing
that it is the wrong file, she wants to interrupt the server to cancel further data
transmission. There are several ways to do this. One approach that works only
too well in the current Internet (and is sometimes the only alternative) is for
the user to abruptly exit the client application (which will automatically break
the connection to the server), immediately restart it, and pretend nothing
happened. The server will eventually tear down the old connection, thinking
the client has probably crashed.
    A much better approach for handling communication interrupts is to
develop the client and server such that it is possible to send out-of-band
data, which is data that is to be processed by the server before any other data
from that client. One solution is to let the server listen to a separate control
end point to which the client sends out-of-band data, while at the same time
listening (with a lower priority) to the end point through which the normal

data passes. Another solution is to send out-of-band data across the same
connection through which the client is sending the original request. In TCP,
for example, it is possible to transmit urgent data. When urgent data are
received at the server, the latter is interrupted (e.g., through a signal in Unix
systems), after which it can inspect the data and handle them accordingly.

Stateless versus stateful servers
A final, important design issue, is whether the server is stateless. A stateless
server does not keep information on the state of its clients, and can change its
own state without having to inform any client [Birman, 2012]. A Web server,
for example, is stateless. It merely responds to incoming HTTP requests, which
can be either for uploading a file to the server or (most often) for fetching
a file. When the request has been processed, the Web server forgets the
client completely. Likewise, the collection of files that a Web server manages
(possibly in cooperation with a file server), can be changed without clients
having to be informed.
    Note that in many stateless designs, the server actually does maintain
information on its clients, but crucial is the fact that if this information is
lost, it will not lead to a disruption of the service offered by the server. For
example, a Web server generally logs all client requests. This information is
useful, for example, to decide whether certain documents should be replicated,
and where they should be replicated to. Clearly, there is no penalty, other
than perhaps in the form of suboptimal performance if the log is lost.
    A particular form of a stateless design is where the server maintains what
is known as soft state. In this case, the server promises to maintain state on
behalf of the client, but only for a limited time. After that time has expired,
the server falls back to default behavior, thereby discarding any information it
kept on account of the associated client. An example of this type of state is
a server promising to keep a client informed about updates, but only for a
limited time. Thereafter, the client is required to poll the server for updates.
Soft-state approaches originate from protocol design in computer networks,
but can be equally applied to server design [Clark, 1989; Lui et al., 2004].
    In contrast, a stateful server generally maintains persistent information
on its clients. This means that the information needs to be explicitly deleted
by the server. A typical example is a file server that allows a client to keep
a local copy of a file, even for performing update operations. Such a server
would maintain a table containing (client, file) entries. Such a table allows the
server to keep track of which client currently has the update permissions on
which file, and thus possibly, also the most recent version of that file.
    This approach can improve the performance of read and write operations
as perceived by the client. Performance improvement over stateless servers
is often an important benefit of stateful designs. However, the example also
illustrates the major drawback of stateful servers. If the server crashes, it has

to recover its table of (client, file) entries, or otherwise it cannot guarantee
that it has processed the most recent updates on a file. In general, a stateful
server needs to recover its entire state as it was just before the crash. Enabling
recovery can introduce considerable complexity, as we discuss in Chapter 8.
In a stateless design, no special measures need to be taken at all for a crashed
server to recover. It simply starts running again, and waits for client requests
to come in.
     Ling et al. [2004] argue that one should actually make a distinction between
(temporary) session state and permanent state. The example above is typical
for session state: it is associated with a series of operations by a single user
and should be maintained for some time, but not indefinitely. As it turns
out, session state is often maintained in three-tiered client-server architectures,
where the application server actually needs to access a database server through
a series of queries before being able to respond to the requesting client. The
issue here is that no real harm is done if session state is lost, provided that
the client can simply re-issue the original request. This observation allows for
simpler and less reliable storage of state.
     What remains for permanent state is typically information maintained
in databases, such as customer information, keys associated with purchased
software, etc. However, for most distributed systems, maintaining session state
already implies a stateful design requiring special measures when failures do
happen and making explicit assumptions about the durability of state stored
at the server. We will return to these matters when discussing fault tolerance.
     When designing a server, the choice for a stateless or stateful design should
not affect the services provided by the server. For example, if files have to
be opened before they can be read from, or written to, then a stateless server
should one way or the other mimic this behavior. A common solution is that
the server responds to a read or write request by first opening the referred
file, then does the actual read or write operation, and immediately closes the
file again.
     In other cases, a server may want to keep a record of a client’s behavior so
that it can more effectively respond to its requests. For example, Web servers
sometimes offer the possibility to immediately direct a client to its favorite
pages. This approach is possible only if the server has history information on
that client. When the server cannot maintain state, a common solution is then
to let the client send along additional information on its previous accesses. In
the case of the Web, this information is transparently stored by the client’s
browser in what is called a cookie, which is a small piece of data containing
client-specific information that is of interest to the server. Cookies are never
executed by a browser; they are merely stored and sent to the server when
accessed a next time.
     The first time a client accesses a server, the latter sends a cookie along with
the requested Web pages back to the browser, after which the browser safely

tucks the cookie away. Each subsequent time the client accesses the server, its
cookie for that server is sent along with the request.

3.4.2      Object servers
Let us take a look at the general organization of object servers needed for
distributed objects. The important difference between a general object server
and other (more traditional) servers is that an object server by itself does not
provide a specific service. Specific services are implemented by the objects
that reside in the server. Essentially, the server provides only the means to
invoke local objects, based on requests from remote clients. As a consequence,
it is relatively easy to change services by simply adding and removing objects.
     An object server thus acts as a place where objects live. An object consists
of two parts: data representing its state and the code for executing its methods.
Whether these parts are separated, or whether method implementations are
shared by multiple objects, depends on the object server. Furthermore, there
are differences in the way an object server invokes its objects. For example,
in a multithreaded server, each object may be assigned a separate thread, or
a separate thread may be used for each invocation request. These and other
issues are discussed next.
     For an object to be invoked, the object server needs to know which code to
execute, on which data it should operate, whether it should start a separate
thread to take care of the invocation, and so on. A simple approach is to
assume that all objects look alike and that there is only one way to invoke
an object. Unfortunately, such an approach is generally inflexible and often
unnecessarily constrains developers of distributed objects.
     A much better approach is for a server to support different policies. Con-
sider, for example, a transient object: an object that exists only as long as
its server exists, but possibly for a shorter period of time. An in-memory,
read-only copy of a file could typically be implemented as a transient object.
Likewise, a calculator could also be implemented as a transient object. A
reasonable policy is to create a transient object at the first invocation request
and to destroy it as soon as no clients are bound to it anymore.
     The advantage of this approach is that a transient object will need a server’s
resources only as long as the object is really needed. The drawback is that
an invocation may take some time to complete because the object needs to
be created first. Therefore, an alternative policy is sometimes to create all
transient objects at the time the server is initialized, at the cost of consuming
resources even when no client is making use of the object.
     Similarly, a server could follow the policy that each of its objects is placed
in a memory segment of its own. In other words, objects share neither code
nor data. Such a policy may be necessary when an object implementation
does not separate code and data, or when objects need to be separated for
security reasons. In the latter case, the server will need to provide special

measures, or require support from the underlying operating system, to ensure
that segment boundaries are not violated.
    The alternative approach is to let objects at least share their code. For
example, a database containing objects that belong to the same class can be
efficiently implemented by loading the class implementation only once into
the server. When a request for an object invocation comes in, the server need
only fetch that object’s state and execute the requested method.
    Likewise, there are many policies regarding threading. The simplest
approach is to implement the server with only a single thread of control.
Alternatively, the server may have several threads, one for each of its objects.
Whenever an invocation request comes in for an object, the server passes the
request to the thread responsible for that object. If the thread is currently busy,
the request is temporarily queued.
    The advantage of this approach is that objects are automatically protected
against concurrent access: all invocations are serialized through the single
thread associated with the object. Neat and simple. Of course, it is also
possible to use a separate thread for each invocation request, requiring that
objects should have already been protected against concurrent access. Inde-
pendent of using a thread per object or thread per method is the choice of
whether threads are created on demand or the server maintains a pool of
threads. Generally, there is no single best policy. Which one to use depends
on whether threads are available, how much performance matters, etc.
    Decisions on how to invoke an object are commonly referred to as activa-
tion policies, to emphasize that often the object itself must first be brought
into the server’s address space (i.e., activated) before it can actually be in-
voked. What is needed then is a mechanism to group objects per policy. Such
a mechanism is sometimes called an object adapter, or alternatively an object
wrapper. An object adapter can best be thought of as software implementing
a specific activation policy. The main issue, however, is that object adapters
come as generic components to assist developers of distributed objects, and
which need only to be configured for a specific policy.
    An object adapter has one or more objects under its control. Because a
server should be capable of simultaneously supporting objects that require
different activation policies, several object adapters may reside in the same
server. When an invocation request is delivered to the server, the request is
first dispatched to the appropriate object adapter, as shown in Figure 3.20.
    An important observation is that object adapters are unaware of the specific
interfaces of the objects they control. Otherwise, they could never be generic.
The only issue that is important to an object adapter is that it can extract an
object reference from an invocation request, and subsequently dispatch the
request to the referenced object, but now following a specific activation policy.
As is also illustrated in Figure 3.20, rather than passing the request directly
to the object, an adapter hands an invocation request to the server-side stub

Figure 3.20: An object server supporting different activation policies.

of that object. The stub, also called a skeleton, is normally generated from
the interface definitions of the object, unmarshals the request and invokes the
appropriate method.
    An object adapter can support different activation policies by simply
configuring it at runtime. For example, in CORBA-compliant systems [OMG,
2001], it is possible to specify whether an object should continue to exist after
its associated adapter has stopped. Likewise, an adapter can be configured to
generate object identifiers, or to let the application provide one. An adapter
can also be configured to operate in single-threaded or multithreaded mode.
    Note that although in Figure 3.20 we have spoken about objects, we
have said nothing about what these objects actually are. In particular, it
should be stressed that as part of the implementation of such an object the
server may (indirectly) access databases or call special library routines. The
implementation details are hidden for the object adapter, who communicates
only with a skeleton. As such, the actual implementation may have nothing
to do with what we often see with language-level (i.e., compile-time) objects.
For this reason, a different terminology is generally adopted. A servant is the
general term for a piece of code that forms the implementation of an object.

Example: The Ice runtime system
Let us briefly consider the Ice distributed-object system, which has been partly
developed in response to the intricacies of commercial object-based distributed
systems [Henning, 2004]. An object server in Ice is nothing but an ordinary
process that simply starts with initializing the Ice runtime system. The basis

of the runtime environment is formed by what is called a communicator. A
communicator is a component that manages several basic resources, of which
the most important one is formed by a pool of threads. Likewise, it will
have associated dynamically allocated memory, and so on. In addition, a
communicator provides the means for configuring the environment. For
example, it is possible to specify maximum message lengths, maximum
invocation retries, and so on.
    Normally, an object server would have only a single communicator. How-
ever, when different applications need to be fully separated and protected
from each other, a separate communicator (with possibly a different config-
uration) can be created within the same process. At the very least, such an
approach would separate the different thread pools so that if one application
has consumed all its threads, then this would not affect the other application.
    A communicator is used to create an object adapter, such as shown in
Figure 3.21. In this example, we start with creating and initializing the runtime
environment, which returns a communicator. Using the communicator, an
object adapter is created. In this case, it is instructed to listen for incoming
TCP connections on port 11000. Note that the adapter is created in the context
of the just created communicator. We are now in the position to create objects
and add those to the adapter. In this case, we create two objects, object1
and object2, respectively. Both are added to the adapter, yet under different
names. What we see here, is that the adapter will be listening for incoming
requests on a single port, yet will use an object’s name to invoke the proper
object. Once the objects have been added, the adapter is activated, meaning
that, under the hood, a thread is activated that will start listening for incoming
requests.
    On the client side, we see that two printer objects are created, one for each
of their server-side counterparts. And, indeed, after starting the server and
then the client, the output on the server’s side will match:

      Object1 says: Hello World from printer1!
      Object2 says: Hello World from printer2!

Note that if we had associated printer2 in line 9 of the client with base1, the
output would have been:

      Object1 says: Hello World from printer1!
      Object1 says: Hello World from printer2!

In other words, printer2 would have been associated to object1 instead of
object2.
    This code does not yet show much differentiation in activation policies.
Policies can be changed by modifying the properties of an adapter. One family
of properties is related to maintaining an adapter-specific set of threads that
are used for handling incoming requests. For example, one can specify that

 1   import sys, Ice
 2   import Demo
 3
 4   class PrinterI(Demo.Printer):
 5       def __init__(self, t):
 6           self.t = t
 7
 8       def printString(self, s, current=None):
 9           print(self.t, s)
10
11   communicator = Ice.initialize(sys.argv)
12
13   adapter = communicator.createObjectAdapterWithEndpoints("SimpleAdapter", "default -p 11000")
14   object1 = PrinterI("Object1 says:")
15   object2 = PrinterI("Object2 says:")
16   adapter.add(object1, communicator.stringToIdentity("SimplePrinter1"))
17   adapter.add(object2, communicator.stringToIdentity("SimplePrinter2"))
18   adapter.activate()
19
20   communicator.waitForShutdown()

                                               (a)
 1   import sys, Ice
 2   import Demo
 3
 4   communicator = Ice.initialize(sys.argv)
 5
 6   base1 = communicator.stringToProxy("SimplePrinter1:default -p 11000")
 7   base2 = communicator.stringToProxy("SimplePrinter2:default -p 11000")
 8   printer1 = Demo.PrinterPrx.checkedCast(base1)
 9   printer2 = Demo.PrinterPrx.checkedCast(base2)
10   if (not printer1) or (not printer2):
11       raise RuntimeError("Invalid proxy")
12
13   printer1.printString("Hello World from printer1!")
14   printer2.printString("Hello World from printer2!")
15
16   communicator.waitForShutdown()

                                               (b)
Figure 3.21: (a) An example of creating a simple object server in Ice, and (b) a
corresponding client (slightly adapted from [ZeroC, 2022]).

there should always be only one thread, effectively serializing all accesses to
objects that have been added to the adapter.
   In the example above, an object is created as part of the application, after
which it is added to an adapter. Effectively, this means that an adapter may
need to support many objects at the same time, leading to potential scalability
problems. An alternative solution is to dynamically load objects into memory
when they are needed. To do this, Ice provides support for special objects
known as locators. A locator can be viewed as a special type of servant; it is

called when the adapter receives an incoming request for an object that has
not been explicitly added. In that case, the request is forwarded to the locator,
whose job is to further handle the request.
    To make matters more concrete, suppose a locator is handed a request
for an object of which the locator knows that its state is stored in a relational
database system. Of course, there is no magic here: the locator has been
programmed explicitly to handle such requests. In this case, the object’s
identifier may correspond to the key of a record in which that state is stored.
The locator will then simply do a lookup on that key, fetch the state, and will
then be able to further process the request.
    There can be more than one locator added to an adapter. In that case,
the adapter would keep track of which object identifiers would belong to the
same locator. Using multiple locators allows supporting many objects by a
single adapter. Of course, objects (or rather their state) would need to be
loaded at runtime, but this dynamic behavior would possibly make the server
itself relatively simple. More examples and detailed information on Ice can be
found in [ZeroC, 2022].

3.4.3   Example: The Apache Web server
An interesting example of a server that balances the separation between
policies and mechanisms is the Apache Web server. It is also an extremely
popular server, estimated to be used to host approximately 25% of all Websites.
Apache is a complex piece of software, and with the numerous enhancements
to the types of documents that are now offered on the Web, it is important
that the server be highly configurable and extensible, and at the same time
largely independent of specific platforms.
    Making the server platform independent is realized by essentially provid-
ing its own basic runtime environment, which is then subsequently imple-
mented for different operating systems. This runtime environment, known as
the Apache Portable Runtime (APR), is a library that provides a platform-
independent interface for file handling, networking, locking, threads, and so
on. When extending Apache, portability is largely guaranteed provided that
only calls to the APR are made and none to platform-specific libraries.
    From a certain perspective, Apache can be considered as a completely gen-
eral server tailored to produce a response to an incoming request. Of course,
there are all kinds of hidden dependencies and assumptions by which Apache
turns out to be primarily suited for handling requests for Web documents.
For example, as we mentioned, Web browsers and servers use HTTP as their
communication protocol. HTTP is virtually always implemented on top of
TCP, for which reason the core of Apache assumes that all incoming requests
adhere to a TCP-based connection-oriented way of communication. Requests
based on UDP cannot be handled without modifying the Apache core.

Figure 3.22: The general organization of the Apache Web server.

    Otherwise, the Apache core makes few assumptions on how incoming
requests should be handled. Its overall organization is shown in Figure 3.22.
Fundamental to this organization are modules. A module consists of one, or
several, functions that should be called for properly handling a request. This
raises several questions:

   1. How do we ensure that a function is called in the first place?
   2. How do we ensure that a function is called at the right moment?
   3. How do we prevent that a function is called for a request it was not
      supposed to handle?

The last question is actually the simplest: each function will be called (along
with the request), yet each function will return the value DECLINED if the
request was not meant for it.
    Getting a function to be called at all is handled through a hook, which
is a placeholder for a function. There is a hook for each function, and each
module provides the Apache core with a list of hooks to its functions. By
statically or dynamically linking modules to the Apache core, we establish a
connection between a hook and its associated function.
    For example, there is a hook to translate a URL to a local file name. Such a
translation will almost certainly need to be done when processing a request.
Likewise, there is a hook for writing information to a log, a hook for checking
a client’s identification, a hook for checking access rights, and a hook for

checking which MIME type the request is related to (e.g., to make sure that
the request can be properly handled). As shown in Figure 3.22, the hooks
are processed in a specific order. It is here that we explicitly see that Apache
enforces a specific flow of control concerning the processing of requests.
    Often, functions can be processed independently of each other: they
operate in perfect isolation on a request. However, this may not be generally
the case, for which Apache distinguishes a number of phases. When hooking
up a function to Apache, we need to specify whether that function should be
called in the beginning, the middle, or the end of the total request-processing
flow. If fine-grained control is necessary, one can also specify before or after
which other module a function should be called. However, it is easily seen
that trying to develop functions that operate in isolation (and are, in effect,
stateless) contributes to a modular design.
    Much more on the Apache Web server can be found in the (by now some-
what outdated) book by Laurie and Laurie [2002], as well as the developer’s
documentation provided by Apache itself.

3.4.4   Server clusters
In Chapter 1, we briefly discussed cluster computing as one of the many
appearances of distributed systems. We now take a closer look at the organiza-
tion of server clusters, along with the salient design issues. We first consider
common server clusters that are organized in local-area networks. A special
group is formed by wide-area server clusters, which we subsequently discuss.

Local-area clusters
Simply put, a server cluster is nothing else but a collection of machines
connected through a network, where each machine runs one or more servers.
The server clusters that we consider here, are the ones in which the machines
are connected through a local-area network, often offering high bandwidth
and low latency.

General organization Often, a server cluster is logically organized into three
tiers, as shown in Figure 3.23. The first tier consists of a (logical) switch
through which client requests are routed. Such a switch can vary widely. For
example, transport-layer switches accept incoming TCP connection requests
and pass requests on to one of the servers in the cluster. A completely different
example is a Web server that accepts incoming HTTP requests, but that partly
passes requests to application servers for further processing only to later
collect results from those servers and return an HTTP response.
    As in any multitiered client-server architecture, many server clusters also
contain servers dedicated to application processing. In cluster computing,
these are typically servers running on high-performance hardware dedicated

              Logical switch           Application/compute servers            Distributed
            (possibly multiple)                                             file/database
                                                                                system

                          Dispatched
                            request
Client requests

                  First tier                   Second tier                 Third tier

Figure 3.23: The general organization of a three-tiered server cluster.

to delivering compute power. However, in the case of enterprise server
clusters, it may be the case that applications need only run on relatively
low-end machines, as the required compute power is not the bottleneck, but
access to storage is.
    This brings us to the third tier, which consists of data-processing servers,
notably file and database servers. Again, depending on the usage of the server
cluster, these servers may be running on specialized machines, configured for
high-speed disk access and having large server-side data caches.
    Of course, not all server clusters will follow this strict separation. It is
frequently the case that each machine is equipped with its own local storage,
often integrating application and data processing in a single server, leading
to a two-tiered architecture. For example, when dealing with streaming
media using a server cluster, it is common to deploy a two-tiered system
architecture, where each machine acts as a dedicated media server [Steinmetz
and Nahrstedt, 2004].
    When a server cluster offers multiple services, different machines may run
different application servers. As a consequence, the switch will have to be
able to distinguish services, or otherwise it cannot forward requests to the
proper machines. As a consequence, we may find that certain machines are
temporarily idle, while others are receiving an overload of requests. What
would be useful is to temporarily migrate services to idle machines. A solution
is to use virtual machines, allowing a relatively easy migration of services.

Request dispatching Let us now take a closer look at the first tier, consisting
of the switch, also known as the front end. An important design goal for
server clusters is to hide the fact that there are multiple servers. In other
words, client applications running on remote machines should have no need
to know anything about the internal organization of the cluster. This access

transparency is invariably offered through a single access point, in turn
implemented through some kind of hardware switch such as a dedicated
machine.
    The switch forms the entry point for the server cluster, offering a single
network address. For scalability and availability, a server cluster may have
multiple access points, where each access point is then realized by a separate
dedicated machine. We consider only the case of a single access point.
    In practice, we see two types of switches. In the case of transport-layer
switches, the switch accepts incoming TCP connection requests, and hands
off such connections to one of the servers. The client sets up a TCP connection
such that all requests and responses pass through the switch. The switch,
in turn, will set up a TCP connection with a selected server and pass client
requests to that server, and also accept server responses (which it will pass
on to the client). In effect, the switch sits in the middle of a TCP connection
between the client and a selected server, rewriting the source and destination
addresses when passing TCP segments. This approach is a form of network-
address translation (NAT) [Srisuresh and Holdrege, 1999].
    As an alternative, application-layer switches are used. As its name suggest,
an application-layer switch operates by inspecting the content of requests
instead of just looking at information available in TCP. For example, the
switch can inspect the actual URL in case of a Web server. This distinction
allows for developing server clusters in which dedicated machines can be
configured for handling, for example, video or other media, next to those
requiring access to specific databases, etc. In general, the more a switch knows
about what is being requested, the better it can decide on which server to
handle the request. An obvious drawback of application-layer switches is that
they may be slower than transport-layer switches. On the other hand, using
the right software and hardware, costs can be kept acceptable low. This is
demonstrated, for example, by the nginx server, which has been designed to
handle thousands of simultaneous connections and is used for many sites as
what is also called a reverse proxy [DeJonghe, 2022]. Note that the Apache
Web server can also be configured as an application-layer switch.

  Note 3.7 (Example: TCP handoff)
  In the days that request dispatching was relatively expensive, a simple and elegant
  way of ensuring that performance criteria could still be met, was by implementing
  TCP handoff. The idea is a switch can actually hand off the connection to a
  selected server such that all responses are directly communicated to the client
  without passing through the switch [Hunt et al., 1997; Pai et al., 1998]. The
  principle working is shown in Figure 3.24.
      When the switch receives a TCP connection request, it first identifies the best
  server for handling that request, and forwards the request packet to that server.
  The server, in turn, will send an acknowledgment back to the requesting client, but

  inserting the switch’s IP address as the source field of the header of the IP packet
  carrying the TCP segment. Note that this address rewriting is necessary for the
  client to continue executing the TCP protocol: it is expecting an answer back from
  the switch, not from some arbitrary server it has never heard of before. Clearly, a
  TCP-handoff implementation requires operating-system level modifications. TCP
  handoff is especially effective when responses are much larger than requests, as
  in the case of Web servers.

Figure 3.24: The principle of TCP handoff.

      It can already be seen that the switch can play an important role in distributing
  the load among the various servers. By deciding where to forward a request to,
  the switch also decides which server is to handle further processing of the request.
  The simplest load-balancing policy that the switch can follow is round robin: each
  time it picks the next server from its list to forward a request to. Of course, the
  switch will have to keep track to which server it handed off a TCP connection, at
  least until that connection is torn down. As it turns out, maintaining this state
  and handing off subsequent TCP segments belonging to the same TCP connection,
  may actually slow down the switch.

Wide-area clusters
We came across wide-area clusters in our discussion on PlanetLab (see Note 3.6):
an architecture in which participants contribute some (relatively simple) ma-
chines for hosting containers that are subsequently “sliced” across as many
machines as a client needs. Thereafter, the client is on her own. Much more
sophisticated and commercially deployed wide-area clusters exist today.
    A straightforward version is seen with cloud providers like Amazon
and Google, who manage several data centers placed at different locations
worldwide. As such, they can offer an end user the ability to build a wide-area
distributed system consisting of a potentially large collection of networked
virtual machines, scattered across the Internet. An important reason for
wanting such distributed systems is to provide locality: offering data and
services that are close to clients. An example where such locality is important
is streaming media: the closer a video server is located to a client, the easier

it becomes to provide high-quality streams. This approach is followed by
so-called cloud-based Content Delivery Networks, or simply CDNs, which
we will discuss shortly.
    An alternative is to have a single organization place servers across the
Internet, effectively negotiating with local ISPs to decide how to make use
of their facilities. This is the approach followed by the Akamai CDN [Dilley
et al., 2002; Nygren et al., 2010], in 2022 having some 400,000 servers spread
across 1350 ISPs and more than 135 countries.

The general organization of a CDN As CDNs form an important group of
distributed systems that make use of wide-area clusters, let us take a closer
look at how they are generally organized. We take a simplified view of the
Akamai organization, shown in Figure 3.25. More information on CDNs
can be found in [Passarella, 2012; Stocker et al., 2017] and [Zolfaghari et al.,
2021]. The basic idea is that there is an origin server that hosts a Website
with all its documents. As we will explain in Chapter 6, each document of
such a site is referred to by a URL containing the domain name of the origin
server, such as www.example.com. To access a document, the domain name
needs to be resolved to a network address, which is done by the Domain
Name System, which we will discuss in detail also in Chapter 6. To have
the content of the origin server be hosted by a CDN, Akamai first makes
sure that the domain name www.example.com is resolved to something like
www.example.com.akamai.net, which, in turn, will refer to an edge server that
is part of the Akamai CDN. To be able to still access the origin server, its
domain name will have to be changed to, say, org-www.example.com. The
principle is shown in Figure 3.25.
    The client first looks up the regular domain name, but is redirected to the

Figure 3.25: A simplified version of the working of the Akamai CDN.

akamai.net resolvers (step 1). The Akamai name resolvers will look up the
best edge server to serve the client, and return its network address (step 2).
This allows the client to contact the edge server (step 3), who is aware of the
new name of the origin server. If the requested content is not in the edge
server’s cache, it fetches documents from the origin server (step 4), caches
those documents and returns the requested ones to the client. More details
can be found in [Su et al., 2006].

Request dispatching This example already shows the importance of client-
request redirection. In principle, by properly redirecting clients, a CDN
can stay in control when it comes to client-perceived performance, but also
considering global system performance by, for example, avoiding that requests
are sent to heavily loaded servers. These so-called adaptive redirection
policies can be applied when information on the system’s current behavior is
provided to the processes that take redirection decisions.
    An important issue is whether request redirection is transparent to the
client or not. In essence, there are only three redirection techniques: TCP
handoff, DNS redirection, and HTTP redirection. We discussed TCP handoff
in Note 3.7. This technique is applicable only for server clusters and does not
scale to wide-area networks.
    DNS redirection is a transparent mechanism by which the client can be
kept completely unaware of where documents are located. Akamai’s two-level
redirection is one example of this technique. We can also directly deploy DNS
to return one of several addresses. Note, however, that DNS redirection can
be applied only to an entire site (or, more specifically, only at the level of a
domain name): the name of individual documents does not fit into the DNS
name space.
    Unfortunately, DNS redirection is not perfect for two reasons. First, a
client generally contacts the Domain Name System through a local DNS
server that then acts as a proxy for that client. As a consequence, not the
client’s IP address, but that of the local DNS server, is used to identify the
location of the client. Mao et al. [2002] have shown that there may be a huge
additional communication cost, as the local DNS server is often not that local.
Furthermore, even when clients are returned several options for selecting
an edge server, simply picking the first on the list, which is what normally
happens, may not be the best choice [Goel et al., 2015].
    Secondly, depending on the scheme that is used for resolving a domain
name, it may even be the case that the address of the local DNS server is not
even being used. Instead, it may happen that the DNS server that is deciding
on which IP address to return, may be fooled by the fact that the requester is
yet another DNS server acting as an intermediate between the original client
and the deciding DNS server (we will explain the details of this scheme in
Chapter 6. In those cases, locality awareness has been completely lost.

    Despite that DNS-based redirection may not always be very accurate, it
is widely deployed if only for the fact that it is relatively easy to implement
and also transparent to the client. In addition, there is no need to rely on
location-aware client-side software.
    HTTP redirection, finally, is a nontransparent mechanism. When a client
requests a specific document, it may be given an alternative URL as part of
an HTTP response message, to which it is then redirected. An important
observation is that this URL is visible to the client’s browser. In fact, the
user may decide to bookmark the referral URL, potentially rendering the
redirection policy useless.

3.5     Code migration
So far, we have been mainly concerned with distributed systems in which
communication is limited to passing data. However, there are situations
in which passing programs, sometimes even while they are being executed,
simplifies the design of a distributed system. In this section, we take a detailed
look at what code migration actually is.

3.5.1   Reasons for migrating code
Traditionally, code migration in distributed systems took place in the form
of process migration in which an entire process was moved from one node
to another [Milojicic et al., 2000]. Moving a running process to a different
machine is a costly and intricate task, and there had better be a good reason
for doing so. Let us first consider why one would even want to migrate code
from one machine to another.

Performance By far the most important reason for code migration has always
been performance. The basic idea is that overall system performance can
be improved if processes are moved from heavily loaded to lightly loaded
machines. Load is often expressed in terms of the CPU queue length or
CPU utilization, but other performance indicators are used as well. When
completing their survey, Milojicic et al. had already come to the conclusion
that process migration was no longer a viable option for improving distributed
systems.
    Instead of offloading machines, we can now witness that code is moved
to make sure that a machine is sufficiently loaded. In particular, migrating
complete virtual machines with their suite of applications to lightly loaded
machines to minimize the total number of nodes being used is common
practice in optimizing energy usage in data centers. Interestingly enough,
although migrating virtual machines may require more resources, the task
itself is far less intricate than migrating a process, as we discuss below.

    In general, load-distribution algorithms by which decisions are made con-
cerning the allocation and redistribution of tasks regarding a set of machines,
play an important role in compute-intensive systems. However, in many
modern distributed systems, optimizing computing capacity is less an issue
than, for example, trying to minimize communication. Moreover, due to the
heterogeneity of the underlying platforms and computer networks, perfor-
mance improvement through code migration is often based on qualitative
reasoning instead of mathematical models.
    Consider, as an example, a client-server system in which the server man-
ages a huge database. If a client application needs to perform many database
operations involving large quantities of data, it may be better to ship part
of the client application to the server and send only the results across the
network. Otherwise, the network may be swamped with the transfer of data
from the server to the client. In this case, code migration is assuming that it
generally makes sense to process data close to where those data reside.
    This same reason can be used for migrating parts of the server to the client.
For example, in many interactive database applications, clients need to fill in
forms that are subsequently translated into a series of database operations.
Processing the form at the client side, and sending only the completed form
to the server, can sometimes avoid that a relatively large number of small
messages need to cross the network. The result is that the client perceives
better performance, while at the same time the server spends less time on
form processing and communication. In the case of smartphones, moving
code to be executed at the handheld instead of the server may be the only
viable solution to obtain acceptable performance, both for the client and the
server (see Kumar et al. [2013] for a survey on offloading computations).
    Support for code migration can also help improve performance by ex-
ploiting parallelism, but without the usual intricacies related to parallel pro-
gramming. A typical example is searching for information in the Web. It is
relatively simple to implement a search query in the form of a small mobile
program, called a mobile agent, that moves from site to site. By making
several copies of such a program, and sending each off to different sites, we
may be able to achieve a linear speed-up compared to using just a single
program instance. However, Carzaniga et al. [2007] conclude that mobile
agents have never become successful because they did not really offer an
obvious advantage over other technologies.

Privacy and security Another reason for moving code to where the data is,
has to do with security. Recently, the canonical example for this approach
is found in federated learning. Federated learning comes from the need to
train machine-learning models, notably all kinds of variants of artificial neural
networks. To keep it simple, a neural network consists of a collection of nodes,
organized as a series of several layers, and having weighted links between

Figure 3.26: The principle of federated learning.

nodes of successive layers. Each node puts data on its outgoing links, which
is the result of a (relatively simple) computation that it gets from data on its
incoming links. Links have an adjustable weight. During a training phase,
the weights of the links are gradually computed by feeding the network with
data items for which it is known what the network should produce as a result.
By systematically adjusting the weights to minimize the difference between
what a network produces and what it should have produced, we eventually
establish a final model. That model can then be used on unknown data items,
for which we then take the produced result as a given.
    A traditional approach is to collect the training data at a centralized
location, often using specialized high-performance computers to construct
an acceptable model. Obviously, this could mean that sensitive data, such as
personal photo’s and such, needed to be handed out to an organization that
someone may not trust.
    In such cases, a better approach is to bring the (partially) trained model to
where the data is, and continue training with that local data. This will lead
to an updated model (i.e., the weights have been further adjusted because of
using new data). If several entities are involved in training with local data,
a server can simply collect the different models, aggregate the results, and
return an updated model to the local participants who can then continue
with training. This iterative process, sketched in Figure 3.26 stops when the
aggregated model is deemed sufficiently trained and fit for actual use.
    It must be said that federated learning is easier from a code-migration
perspective than, e.g., migrating processes. In general, the code involved in a
neural network is relatively straightforward, which makes it easier to have it
adopted by a local participant. This has been a high-level view on federated
learning, of which a good introduction is given by Zhang et al. [2021a]. As
described in Lyu et al. [2020], simply doing local training may not be sufficient
from a privacy and security perspective.

Flexibility There are other reasons for supporting code migration as well.
An important one is that of flexibility. The traditional approach to building
distributed applications is to partition the application into different parts, and
decide in advance where each part should be executed. This approach, for
example, has lead to different multitiered client-server applications discussed
in Chapter 2.
    However, if code can move between different machines, it becomes possible
to dynamically configure distributed systems. For example, suppose a server
implements a standardized interface to a file system. To allow remote clients
to access the file system, the server makes use of a proprietary protocol.
Normally, the client-side implementation of the file system interface, which is
based on that protocol, would need to be linked with the client application.
This approach requires that the software be readily available to the client at
the time the client application is being developed.
    An alternative is to let the server provide the client’s implementation no
sooner than is strictly necessary, that is, when the client binds to the server.
At that point, the client dynamically downloads the implementation, goes
through the necessary initialization steps, and subsequently invokes the server.
This principle is shown in Figure 3.27 (we note that the code repository is
generally located as part of the server). This model of dynamically moving
code from a remote site does require that the protocol for downloading
and initializing code is standardized. Furthermore, it is necessary that the
downloaded code can be executed on the client’s machine. Typically, scripts
that run in a virtual machine embedded in, for example, a Web browser, will
do the trick. Arguably, this form of code migration has been key to the success
of the dynamic Web. These and other solutions are discussed below and in
later chapters.

Figure 3.27: The principle of dynamically configuring a client to communicate
with a server.

   The important advantage of this model of dynamically downloading client-
side software is that clients need not have all the software preinstalled to talk

to servers. Instead, the software can be moved in as necessary, and likewise,
discarded when no longer needed. Another advantage is that as long as
interfaces are standardized, we can change the client-server protocol and its
implementation as often as we like. Changes will not affect existing client
applications that rely on the server.
    There are, of course, also disadvantages. The most serious one, which
we discuss in Chapter 9, has to do with security. Blindly trusting that the
downloaded code implements only the advertised interface while accessing
your unprotected hard disk and does not send the juiciest parts to heaven-
knows-who may not always be such a good idea. Fortunately, it is well
understood how to protect the client against malicious, downloaded code.

  Note 3.8 (More information: Moving away from thin-client computing?)
  By now, there is much more insight and expertise concerning transparent and
  safe dynamic migration of code to clients. As a result, the trend that we described
  in Note 2.5 of moving toward thin-client computing because managing client-
  side software often turned out to be cumbersome, has been partly reverted. By
  dynamically migrating client-side software, yet keeping the management of that
  software entirely at the server side (or rather, at its owner), having “richer” client-
  side software has become practically feasible. The most important domain where
  we see this happening is through applications running on smartphones. In fact,
  as soon as, for example, a bug is discovered, and update can take place. It is for
  this reason why many banks consider it safer to use a mobile app instead of a
  fixed piece of client-side software.

3.5.2   Models for code migration
Although code migration suggests that we move only code between machines,
the term actually covers a much richer area. Traditionally, communication in
distributed systems is concerned with exchanging data between processes.
Code migration in the broadest sense deals with moving programs between
machines, with the intention to have those programs be executed at the target.
In some cases, as in process migration, the execution status of a program,
pending signals, and other parts of the environment must be moved as well.
   To get a better understanding of the different models for code migration,
we use a framework proposed by Fuggetta et al. [1998]. In this framework, a
process consists of three segments. The code segment is the part that contains
the set of instructions that make up the program that is being executed. The
resource segment contains references to external resources needed by the
process, such as files, printers, devices, other processes, and so on. Finally, an
execution segment is used to store the current execution state of a process,
consisting of private data, the stack, and, of course, the program counter.

    A further distinction can be made between sender-initiated and receiver-
initiated migration. In sender-initiated migration, migration is initiated at
the machine where the code currently resides or is being executed. Typically,
sender-initiated migration is done when uploading programs to a compute
server. Another example is sending a query, or batch of queries, to a remote
database server. In receiver-initiated migration, the initiative for code mi-
gration is taken by the target machine. Java applets are an example of this
approach.
    Receiver-initiated migration is simpler than sender-initiated migration.
Often, code migration occurs between a client and a server, where the client
takes the initiative for migration. Securely uploading code to a server, as is
done in sender-initiated migration, often requires that the client has previ-
ously been registered and authenticated at that server. In other words, the
server is required to know all its clients, the reason being is that the client
will presumably want access to the server’s resources such as its disk. Pro-
tecting such resources is essential. In contrast, downloading code, as in the
receiver-initiated case, can often be done anonymously. Moreover, the server
is generally not interested in the client’s resources. Instead, code migration
to the client is done only for improving client-side performance. To that end,
only a limited number of resources need to be protected, such as memory and
network connections.
   This brings us to four different paradigms for code mobility, as shown in
Figure 3.28. Following Fuggetta et al. [1998], we make a distinction between
simple client-server computing, remote evaluation, code-on-demand, and
mobile agents. Figure 3.28 shows the situation at respectively the client and
the server, before and after execution of the mobile code.
    In the case of client-server computing, the code, execution state, and
resource segment are all located at the server, and after execution, only the
execution state at the server is generally modified. This state modification is
denoted using an asterisk. With the sender-initiated remote evaluation, the
client migrates code to the server where that code is executed and leading
to a modification of the execution state at the server. Code-on-demand is a
receiver-initiated scheme by which the client obtains code from the server,
with its execution modifying the client-side execution state and operating on
the client’s resources. Finally, mobile agents typically follow a sender-initiated
approach, moving code as well as execution state from the client to the server,
operating on both the client’s and the server’s resources. Running a mobile
agent will generally lead to modification of the associated execution state.
    The bare minimum for code migration is to provide only weak mobility.
In this model, it is possible to transfer only the code segment, along with
perhaps some initialization data. A characteristic feature of weak mobility
is that a transferred program is always started anew. This is what happens,
for example, with Java applets, which start from the same initial state. In

                     Before execution                  After execution
               Client           Server            Client            Server

                                  code                              code
     CS                           exec                              exec*
                               resource                           resource

                code                                                code
     REV                 −→       exec                      −→      exec*
                               resource                           resource

                                  code            code
     CoD        exec     ←−                       exec*     ←−
              resource                           resource

                code                                                code
     MA         exec     −→                                 −→      exec*
              resource         resource          resource         resource

            CS: Client-Server                   REV: Remote evaluation
            CoD: Code-on-demand                 MA: Mobile agents

Figure 3.28: Four different paradigms for code mobility.

other words, no history from where the migrated code left off at a previous
location is maintained by the underlying middleware. If such history needs to
be preserved, it will have to be encoded as part of the mobile application itself.
The benefit of weak mobility is its simplicity, as it requires only that the target
machine can execute the code segment. In essence, this boils down to making
the code portable. We return to these matters when discussing migration in
heterogeneous systems.
    In contrast to weak mobility, in systems that support strong mobility
the execution segment can be transferred as well. The characteristic feature
of strong mobility is that a running process can be stopped, subsequently
moved to another machine, and then resume execution exactly where it left off.
Clearly, strong mobility is much more general than weak mobility, but also
much more difficult to implement. In particular, when migrating a process,
the execution segment generally also contains data that is highly dependent
on a specific implementation of the underlying operating system. For example,
it may rely on information normally found in the operating system’s process
table. As a consequence, migrating to a different operating system, even one
that belongs to the same family as the source, may cause plenty of headaches.

    In the case of weak mobility, it also makes a difference if the migrated code
is executed by the target process, or whether a separate process is started.
For example, Java applets are simply downloaded by a Web browser and are
executed in the browser’s address space. The benefit of this approach is that
there is no need to start a separate process, thereby avoiding interprocess
communication at the target machine. The main drawback, obviously, is that
the target process needs to be protected against malicious or inadvertent code
executions, which may be reason enough to isolate the migrated code in a
separate process.
    Instead of moving a running process, also referred to as process migration,
strong mobility can also be supported by remote cloning. In contrast to
process migration, cloning yields an exact copy of the original process, but
now running on a different machine. The cloned process is executed in parallel
to the original process. In Unix systems, remote cloning takes place by forking
off a child process and letting that child continue on a remote machine. The
benefit of cloning is that the model closely resembles the one that is already
used in many applications. The only difference is that the cloned process
is executed on a different machine. In this sense, migration by cloning is a
simple way to improve distribution transparency.

3.5.3      Migration in heterogeneous systems
So far, we have tacitly assumed that the migrated code can be easily executed
at the target machine. This assumption is in order when dealing with homo-
geneous systems. In general, however, distributed systems are constructed
on a heterogeneous collection of platforms, each having their own operating
system and machine architecture.
    The problems coming from heterogeneity are in many respects the same
as those of portability. Not surprisingly, solutions are also very similar. For
example, at the end of the 1970s, a simple solution to alleviate many of the
problems of porting Pascal to different machines was to generate machine-
independent intermediate code for an abstract virtual machine [Barron, 1981].
That machine, of course, would need to be implemented on many platforms,
but it would then allow Pascal programs to be run anywhere. Although this
simple idea was widely used for some years, it never really caught on as the
general solution to portability problems for other languages, notably C.
    About 25 years later, code migration in heterogeneous systems is being
tackled by scripting languages and highly portable languages such as Java
and Python. In essence, these solutions adopt the same approach as was done
for porting Pascal. All such solutions have in common that they rely on a
(process) virtual machine that either directly interprets source code (as in
the case of scripting languages), or otherwise interprets intermediate code
generated by a compiler (as in Java). Being in the right place at the right time
is also important for language developers.

    Further developments have weakened the dependency on programming
languages. In particular, solutions have been proposed to migrate not only
processes, but to migrate entire computing environments. The basic idea
is to compartmentalize the overall environment and to provide processes
in the same part their own view on their computing environment. That
compartmentalization takes place in the form of virtual machine monitors
running an operating system and a suite of applications.
    With virtual machine migration, it becomes possible to decouple a com-
puting environment from the underlying system and actually migrate it to
another machine (see Medina and Garcia [2014] or Zhang et al. [2018] for
overviews on migration mechanisms for virtual machines). A major advantage
of this approach is that processes can remain ignorant of the migration itself:
they need not be interrupted in their execution, nor should they experience
any problems with used resources. The latter are either migrating along with
a process, or the way that a process accesses a resource is left unaffected (at
least, for that process).
    As an example, Clark et al. [2005] concentrated on real-time migration of a
virtualized operating system, typically something that would be convenient
in a cluster of servers where a tight coupling is achieved through a single,
shared local-area network. Under these circumstances, migration involves two
major problems: migrating the entire memory image and migrating bindings
to local resources.
    As to the first problem, there are, in principle, three ways to handle
migration (which can be combined):

   1. Pushing memory pages to the new machine and resending the ones that
      are later modified during the migration process.
   2. Stopping the current virtual machine; migrate memory, and start the
      new virtual machine.
   3. Letting the new virtual machine pull in new pages as needed, that is,
      let processes start on the new virtual machine immediately and copy
      memory pages on demand.

    The second option may lead to unacceptable downtime if the migrating
virtual machine is running a live service, that is, one that offers continuous
service. On the other hand, a pure on-demand approach as represented by
the third option may extensively prolong the migration period, but may also
lead to poor performance because it takes a long time before the working set
of the migrated processes has been moved to the new machine.
    As an alternative, Clark et al. [2005] propose to use a pre-copy approach
which combines the first option, along with a brief stop-and-copy phase as
represented by the second option. As it turns out, this combination can lead
to very low service downtimes.

    Concerning local resources, matters are simplified when dealing only with
a cluster server. First, because there is a single network, the only thing that
needs to be done is to announce the new network-to-MAC address binding, so
that clients can contact the migrated processes at the correct network interface.
Finally, if it can be assumed that storage is provided as a separate tier (like we
showed in Figure 3.23), then migrating binding to files is similarly simple, as
it effectively means reestablishing network connections.
    Matters become more intricate when we need to migrate a virtual machine
to another data center. Although the transfer of memory can be largely
done as before, we do need to actually transfer files to the target data center.
Somewhat problematic is also the network connectivity: one way or the other
clients need to be able to continue contacting the virtual machine while, and
after, its migration to the new destination. Zhang et al. [2018] mention various
solutions. In essence, many of these either boil down to extending the local
network to the target using techniques such as tunneling, or using techniques
that support transparent reassigning of network addresses (meaning that a
client uses dynamic rebinding to actual network addresses).

  Note 3.9 (Advanced: On the performance of live virtual machine migration)
  One potential problem with virtual-machine migration is that it may take consid-
  erable time. This by itself need not be bad, as long as the services that are running
  on the migrating virtual machine can continue to operate. An approach used in
  practice was briefly described above. First, memory pages are copied to the target
  machine, possibly sending updates of pages that were modified while copying
  took place (remember that copying lots of memory may take tens of seconds, even
  across a high-speed local network). Second, when most pages have been faithfully
  copied, the current machine is stopped, the remaining dirty pages are copied to
  the target, where the now exact copy can be started where the original left off.
      The downtime in which the remaining dirty pages need to be copied depends
  on the applications running on the virtual machine. Clark et al. [2005] report
  downtimes for specific configurations between 60 milliseconds and less than 4
  seconds. Voorsluys et al. [2009] come to similar values. However, what may be
  more interesting is to observe what the response time is of the service running
  on the virtual machine while the latter is being migrated. The model in this
  case is that the service continues to operate on the original machine until full
  migration has completed. However, we cannot ignore that migration itself is a
  resource-intensive operation, requiring considerable processing capacity as well
  as network bandwidth.
      Voorsluys et al. [2009] have observed that a complete migration may actually
  take tens of seconds, leading to a ten- to twentyfold increase in response time. In
  addition, we need to realize that during the migration, a service will be completely
  unavailable (i.e., unresponsive) for perhaps 4 seconds. The good news is that
  the response time goes up significantly only after the downtime to complete the
  migration, as shown in Figure 3.29.

3.6. SUMMARY                                                                       177

      Often, virtual machines are migrated to optimize the usage of actual machines.
  However, it may also be desirable to clone a virtual machine, for example because
  the workload for the current machine is becoming too high. Such cloning is very
  similar to using multiple processes in concurrent servers, by which a dispatcher
  process creates worker processes to handle incoming requests. This scheme was
  explained in Figure 3.6 when discussing multithreaded servers.

Figure 3.29: The effect on the response time of a service while migrating
      its underlying virtual machine. Adapted from Voorsluys et al. [2009].

       When cloning for this type of performance, it often makes more sense not to
  first copy memory pages, but, in fact, start with as few pages as possible as the
  service running on the cloned machine will essentially start anew. Note that this
  behavior is very similar to the usual parent-child behavior we see when forking a
  Unix process. Namely, the child will start with loading its own executable, thereby
  effectively cleaning the memory it inherited from its parent. This analogy inspired
  Lagar-Cavilla et al. [2009] to develop an analogous mechanism for forking a virtual
  machine. However, unlike the mechanism used traditionally for migrating virtual
  machines, their VM fork copies pages primarily on demand. The result is an
  extremely efficient cloning mechanism.
       It is thus seen that there is no single best way to place copies of a virtual
  machine on different physical machines: it very much depends on how and why
  a virtual machine is being deployed.

3.6   Summary

Processes play a fundamental role in distributed systems, as they form a
basis for communication between different machines. An important issue
is how processes are internally organized and, in particular, whether or not
they support multiple threads of control. Threads in distributed systems are
particularly useful to continue using the CPU when a blocking I/O operation
is performed. In this way, it becomes possible to build highly efficient servers
that run multiple threads in parallel, of which several may be blocking to wait
until disk I/O or network communication completes. In general, threads are

preferred over the use of processes when performance is at stake.
    Virtualization has since long been an important field in computer science,
but in the advent of cloud computing has regained tremendous attention. Pop-
ular virtualization schemes allow users to run a suite of applications on top
of their favorite operating system and configure complete virtual distributed
systems in the cloud. Impressively enough, performance remains close to run-
ning applications on the host operating system, unless that system is shared
with other virtual machines or when the virtual machine is I/O bound. The
flexible application of virtual machines has led to different types of services
for cloud computing, including infrastructures, platforms, and software —
all running in virtual environments. A special form of virtualization is that
of containerization, which boils down to providing an application with its
own environment (notably libraries and specific supporting programs) while
sharing the same operating system. By sharing the same operating system,
containers generally tend to perform better in the case of I/O-bound appli-
cations, yet it is fair to say that differences in performance between virtual
machines and containers is diminishing.
    Organizing a distributed application in terms of clients and servers has
proven to be useful. Client processes generally implement user interfaces,
which may range from simple displays to advanced interfaces that can handle
compound documents. Client software is furthermore aimed at achieving
distribution transparency by hiding details concerning the communication
with servers, where those servers are currently located, and whether servers
are replicated. In addition, client software is partly responsible for hiding fail-
ures and recovery from failures. An interesting phenomenon is the increasing
popularity of virtual desktop environments, by which an entire desktop more
or less runs in the cloud.
    Servers are often more intricate than clients, but are nevertheless subject
to only a relatively few design issues. For example, servers can either be
iterative or concurrent, implement one or more services, and can be stateless
or stateful. Other design issues deal with addressing services and mechanisms
to interrupt a server after a service request has been issued and is possibly
already being processed.
    Special attention needs to be paid when organizing servers into a cluster.
A common objective is to hide the internals of a cluster from the outside
world. This means that the organization of the cluster should be shielded
from applications. To this end, most clusters use a single entry point that
can hand off messages to servers in the cluster. A challenging problem is to
transparently replace this single entry point by a fully distributed solution.
    Advanced object servers have been developed for hosting remote objects.
An object server provides many services to basic objects, including facilities
for storing objects, or to ensure serialization of incoming requests. Another
important role is providing the illusion to the outside world that a collection

3.6. SUMMARY                                                                179

of data and procedures operating on that data correspond to the concept of an
object. This role is implemented by object adapters. Object-based systems have
come to a point where we can build entire frameworks that can be extended
for supporting specific applications. Java has proven to provide a powerful
means for setting up more generic services, exemplified by the highly popular
Enterprise Java Beans concept and its implementation.
    An exemplary server for Web-based systems is the one from Apache.
Again, the Apache server can be seen as a general solution for handling a
myriad of HTTP-based queries. By offering the right hooks, we essentially ob-
tain a flexibly configurable Web server. Apache has served as an example not
only for traditional Websites, but also for setting up clusters of collaborative
Web servers, even across wide-area networks.
    An important development is that of content delivery networks in wide-
area networks, which facilitate accessing data and other resources close to
clients. An essential component is ensuring that resources from an origin
server are copied to the proper edge servers transparently. To this end, the
combination of client-request redirection techniques and advanced nearby
caching is essential.
    Another important topic for distributed systems is the migration of code
between different machines. Two important reasons to support code migration
are increasing performance and flexibility. When communication is expensive,
we can sometimes reduce communication by shipping computations from
the server to the client, and let the client do as much local processing as
possible. Flexibility is increased if a client can dynamically download software
needed to communicate with a specific server. The downloaded software
can be specifically targeted to that server, without forcing the client to have
it preinstalled. Lately, we see that also privacy and security have become
reasons for migrating code, as is illustrated by federated learning.
    Code migration brings along problems related to usage of local resources
for which it is required that either resources are migrated as well, new bind-
ings to local resources at the target machine are established, or for which
systemwide network references are used. Another problem is that code mi-
gration requires that we take heterogeneity into account. Current practice
indicates that the best solution to handle heterogeneity is to use virtual ma-
chines. These can take either the form of process virtual machines as in the
case of, for example, Java, or through using virtual machine monitors that
effectively allow the migration of a collection of processes along with their
underlying operating system.

