     04

COMMUNICATION

    Interprocess communication is at the heart of all distributed systems. It
makes no sense to study distributed systems without carefully examining
the ways that processes on different machines can exchange information.
Communication in distributed systems has traditionally always been based on
low-level message passing as offered by the underlying network. Expressing
communication through message passing is more difficult than using prim-
itives based on shared memory, as available for nondistributed platforms.
Modern distributed systems often consist of thousands or even millions of
processes scattered across a network with unreliable communication, such as
the Internet. Unless the primitive communication facilities of computer net-
works are replaced by something else, development of large-scale distributed
applications is extremely difficult.

    In this chapter, we start by discussing the rules that communicating pro-
cesses must adhere to, known as protocols, and concentrate on structuring
those protocols in the form of layers. We then look at two widely used models
for communication: Remote Procedure Call (RPC), and Message-Oriented
Middleware (MOM). We also discuss the general problem of sending data to
multiple receivers, called multicasting.

   Our first model for communication in distributed systems is the remote
procedure call (RPC). An RPC aims at hiding most of the intricacies of message
passing, and is ideal for client-server applications. However, realizing RPCs
transparently is easier said than done. We look at several important details
that cannot be ignored, while diving into actual code to illustrate to what
extent distribution transparency can be realized such that performance is still
acceptable.

   In many distributed applications, communication does not follow the
rather strict pattern of client-server interaction. In those cases, it turns out
that thinking in terms of messages is more appropriate. The low-level com-
munication facilities of computer networks are in many ways not suitable,
again due to their lack of distribution transparency. An alternative is to use a
high-level message-queuing model, in which communication proceeds much
the same as in e-mail systems. Message-oriented communication is a subject
important enough to warrant a section of its own. We look at numerous
aspects, including application-level routing.

    Finally, since our understanding of setting up multicast facilities has im-
proved, novel and elegant solutions for data dissemination have emerged.
We pay separate attention to this subject in the last section of this chapter,
discussing traditional deterministic means of multicasting, as well as proba-
bilistic approaches as used in flooding and gossiping. The latter have been
receiving much attention over the past years due to their elegance, reliability,
and simplicity.

4.1     Foundations
Before we start our discussion on communication in distributed systems, we
first recapitulate some fundamental issues related to communication. In the
next section, we briefly discuss network communication protocols, as these
form the basis for any distributed system. Thereafter, we take a different
approach by classifying the different types of communication that usually
occur in distributed systems.

4.1.1   Layered Protocols
Due to the absence of shared memory, all communication in distributed
systems is based on sending and receiving (low level) messages. When
process P wants to communicate with process Q, it first builds a message in
its own address space. Then it executes a system call that causes the operating
system to send the message over the network to Q. Although this basic
idea sounds simple enough, to prevent chaos, P and Q have to agree on the
meaning of the bits being sent.

The OSI reference model
To make it easier to deal with the numerous levels and issues involved in
communication, the International Standards Organization (ISO) developed a
reference model that clearly identifies the various levels involved, gives them
standard names, and points out which level should do which job. This model
is called the Open Systems Interconnection Reference Model [Day and
Zimmerman, 1983] usually abbreviated as ISO OSI or sometimes just the OSI
model. It should be emphasized that the protocols that were developed as part
of the OSI model were never widely used and are essentially dead. However,
the underlying model itself has proved to be quite useful for understanding
computer networks. Although we do not intend to give a full description of
this model and all of its implications here, a brief introduction will be helpful.
For more details, see [Tanenbaum et al., 2021].
    The OSI model is designed to allow open systems to communicate. An
open system is one that is prepared to communicate with any other open
system by using standard rules that govern the format, contents, and meaning
of the messages sent and received. These rules are formalized in what are
called communication protocols. To allow a group of computers to commu-
nicate over a network, they must all agree on the protocols to be used. A
protocol is said to provide a communication service. There are two types of
such services. In the case of a connection-oriented service, before exchang-
ing data the sender and receiver first explicitly establish a connection, and
possibly negotiate specific parameters of the protocol they will use. When
they are done, they release (terminate) the connection. The telephone is a

typical connection-oriented communication service. With a connectionless
services, no setup in advance is needed. The sender just transmits the first
message when it is ready. Dropping a letter in a mailbox is an example of
making use of connectionless communication service. With computers, both
connection-oriented and connectionless communication are common.

Figure 4.1: Layers, interfaces, and protocols in the OSI model.

   In the OSI model, communication is divided into seven levels or layers, as
shown in Figure 4.1. Each layer offers one or more specific communication
services to the layer above it. In this way, the problem of getting a message
from A to B can be divided into manageable pieces, each of which can be
solved independently of the others. Each layer provides an interface to the
one above it. The interface consists of a set of operations that together define
the service the layer is prepared to offer. The seven OSI layers are:

Physical layer Deals with standardizing how two computers are connected
     and how 0s and 1s are represented.

Data link layer Provides the means to detect and possibly correct transmis-
     sion errors, as well as protocols to keep a sender and receiver in the
     same pace.

Network layer Contains the protocols for routing a message through a com-
    puter network, as well as protocols for handling congestion.

Transport layer Mainly contains protocols for directly supporting applica-
     tions, such as those that establish reliable communication, or support
     real-time streaming of data.

Session layer Provides support for sessions between applications.

Presentation layer Prescribes how data is represented in a way that is inde-
     pendent of the hosts on which communicating applications are running.

Application layer Essentially, everything else: e-mail protocols, Web access
    protocols, file-transfer protocols, and so on.

    When a process P wants to communicate with some remote process Q, it
builds a message and passes that message to the application layer as offered
to it through an interface. This interface will typically appear in the form of a
library procedure. The application layer software then adds a header to the
front of the message and passes the resulting message across the layer 6/7
interface to the presentation layer. The presentation layer, in turn, adds its
own header and passes the result down to the session layer, and so on. Some
layers add not only a header to the front, but also a trailer to the end. When
it hits the bottom, the physical layer actually transmits the message (which
by now might look as shown in Figure 4.2) by putting it onto the physical
transmission medium.

Figure 4.2: A typical message as it appears on the network.

    When the message arrives at the remote machine hosting Q, it is passed
upward, with each layer stripping off and examining its own header. Finally,
the message arrives at the receiver, process Q, which may reply to it using
the reverse path. The information in the layer-n header is used for the layer-n
protocol.
    In the OSI model, there are not two layers, but seven, as we saw in
Figure 4.1. The collection of protocols used in a particular system is called
a protocol suite or protocol stack. It is important to distinguish a reference
model from its actual protocols. As said, the OSI protocols were never popular,
in contrast to protocols developed for the Internet, such as TCP and IP.

  Note 4.1 (More information: Protocols in the OSI model)
  Let us briefly examine each of the OSI layers in turn, starting at the bottom.
  Instead of giving examples of OSI protocols, where appropriate, we will point out
  some Internet protocols used in each layer.

  Lower-level protocols The three lowest layers of the OSI protocol suite imple-
  ment the basic functions that encompass a computer network.
       The physical layer is concerned with transmitting the 0s and 1s. How many
  volts to use for 0 and 1, how many bits per second can be sent, and whether
  transmission can take place in both directions simultaneously are key issues in
  the physical layer. In addition, the size and shape of the network connector (plug),
  as well as the number of pins and meaning of each, are of concern here.
       The physical layer protocol deals with standardizing the electrical, optical,
  mechanical, and signaling interfaces so that when one machine sends a 0 bit it is
  actually received as a 0 bit and not a 1 bit. Many physical layer standards have
  been developed (for different media), for example, the USB standard for serial
  communication lines.
       The physical layer just sends bits. As long as no errors occur, all is well.
  However, real communication networks are subject to errors, so some mechanism
  is needed to detect and correct them. This mechanism is the main task of the data
  link layer. What it does is to group the bits into units, also called frames, and see
  that each frame is correctly received.
       The data link layer does its work by putting a special bit pattern on the start
  and end of each frame to mark them, as well as computing a checksum by adding
  up all the bytes in the frame in a certain way. The data link layer appends the
  checksum to the frame. When the frame arrives, the receiver recomputes the
  checksum from the data and compares the result to the checksum following
  the frame. If the two agree, the frame is considered correct and is accepted. If
  they disagree, the receiver asks the sender to retransmit it. Frames are assigned
  sequence numbers (in the header), so everyone can tell which is which.
       On a LAN, there is usually no need for the sender to locate the receiver. It just
  puts the message out on the network and the receiver takes it off. A wide-area
  network, however, consists of numerous machines, each with some number of
  lines to other machines, rather like a large-scale map showing major cities and
  roads connecting them. For a message to get from the sender to the receiver it
  may have to make a number of hops, at each one choosing an outgoing line to use.
  The question of how to choose the best path is called routing, and is essentially
  the primary task of the network layer.
       The problem is complicated by the fact that the shortest route is not always
  the best route. What really matters is the amount of delay on a given route, which,
  in turn, is related to the amount of traffic and the number of messages queued up
  for transmission over the various lines. The delay can thus change over the course
  of time. Some routing algorithms try to adapt to changing loads, whereas others
  are content to make decisions based on long-term averages.

      At present, the most widely used network protocol is the connectionless IP
  (Internet Protocol), which is part of the Internet protocol suite. An IP packet (the
  technical term for a message in the network layer) can be sent without any setup.
  Each IP packet is routed to its destination independent of all others. No internal
  path is selected and remembered.

  Transport protocols The transport layer forms the last part of what could be
  called a basic network protocol stack, in the sense that it implements all those
  services that are not provided at the interface of the network layer, but which are
  reasonably needed to build network applications. In other words, the transport
  layer turns the underlying network into something that an application developer
  can use.
       Packets can be lost on the way from the sender to the receiver. Although
  some applications can handle their own error recovery, others prefer a reliable
  connection. The job of the transport layer is to provide this service. The idea is
  that the application layer should be able to deliver a message to the transport
  layer with the expectation that it will be delivered without loss.
       Upon receiving a message from the application layer, the transport layer
  breaks it into pieces small enough for transmission, assigns each one a sequence
  number, and then sends them all. The discussion in the transport layer header
  concerns which packets have been sent, which have been received, how many
  more the receiver has room to accept, which should be retransmitted, and similar
  topics.
       Reliable transport connections (which by definition are connection-oriented)
  can be built on top of connection-oriented or connectionless network services. In
  the former case all the packets will arrive in the correct sequence (if they arrive at
  all), but in the latter case it is possible for one packet to take a different route and
  arrive earlier than the packet sent before it. It is up to the transport layer software
  to put everything back to maintain the illusion that a transport connection is like
  a big tube–you put messages into it, and they come out undamaged and in the
  same order in which they went in. Providing this end-to-end communication
  behavior is an important aspect of the transport layer.
       The Internet transport protocol is called TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)
  and is described in detail by Comer [2013]. The combination TCP/IP is now
  used as a de facto standard for network communication. The Internet protocol
  suite also supports a connectionless transport protocol called UDP (Universal
  Datagram Protocol), which is essentially just IP with some minor additions. User
  programs that do not need a connection-oriented protocol normally use UDP.
       Additional transport protocols are regularly proposed. For example, to sup-
  port real-time data transfer, the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) has been
  defined. RTP is a framework protocol in the sense that it specifies packet formats
  for real-time data without providing the actual mechanisms for guaranteeing
  data delivery. In addition, it specifies a protocol for monitoring and controlling
  data transfer of RTP packets [Schulzrinne et al., 2003]. Likewise, the Streaming
  Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) has been proposed as an alternative to

  TCP [Stewart, 2007]. The main difference between SCTP and TCP is that SCTP
  groups data into messages, whereas TCP merely moves bytes between processes.
  Doing so may simplify application development.

  Higher-level protocols Above the transport layer, OSI distinguishes three addi-
  tional layers. In practice, only the application layer is ever used. In fact, in the
  Internet protocol suite, everything above the transport layer is grouped together.
  In the face of middleware systems, we shall see that neither the OSI nor the
  Internet approach is really appropriate.
       The session layer is essentially an enhanced version of the transport layer. It
  provides dialog control, to keep track of which party is currently talking, and it
  provides synchronization facilities. The latter are useful to allow users to insert
  checkpoints into long transfers, so that in the event of a crash, it is necessary to
  go back only to the last checkpoint, rather than all the way back to the beginning.
  In practice, few applications are interested in the session layer, and it is rarely
  supported. It is not even present in the Internet protocol suite. However, in
  the context of developing middleware solutions, the concept of a session and
  its related protocols has turned out to be quite relevant, notably when defining
  higher-level communication protocols.
       Unlike the lower layers, which are concerned with getting the bits from the
  sender to the receiver reliably and efficiently, the presentation layer is concerned
  with the meaning of the bits. Most messages do not consist of random bit strings,
  but more structured information such as people’s names, addresses, amounts
  of money, and so on. In the presentation layer, it is possible to define records
  containing fields like these and then have the sender notify the receiver that a
  message contains a particular record in a certain format. This makes it easier for
  machines with different internal representations to communicate with each other.
       The OSI application layer was originally intended to contain a collection of
  standard network applications such as those for electronic mail, file transfer, and
  terminal emulation. By now, it has become the container for all applications and
  protocols that in one way or the other do not fit into one of the underlying layers.
  From the perspective of the OSI reference model, virtually all distributed systems
  are just applications.
       What is missing in this model is a clear distinction between applications,
  application-specific protocols, and general-purpose protocols. For example, the
  Internet File Transfer Protocol (FTP) [Postel and Reynolds, 1985; Horowitz and
  Lunt, 1997] defines a protocol for transferring files between a client and server
  machine. The protocol should not be confused with the ftp program, which
  is an end-user application for transferring files and which also (not entirely
  coincidentally) happens to implement the Internet FTP.
       Another example of a typical application-specific protocol is the HyperText
  Transfer Protocol (HTTP) [Fielding and Reschke, 2014] which is designed to
  remotely manage and handle the transfer of Web pages. The protocol is imple-
  mented by applications such as Web browsers and Web servers. However, HTTP
  is now also used by systems that are not intrinsically tied to the Web. For example,

  Java’s object-invocation mechanism can use HTTP to request the invocation of
  remote objects that are protected by a firewall.
      There are also many general-purpose protocols that are useful to many ap-
  plications, but which cannot be qualified as transport protocols. Often, such
  protocols fall into the category of middleware protocols.

Middleware protocols
Middleware is an application that logically lives (mostly) in the OSI application
layer, but which contains many general-purpose protocols that warrant their
own layers, independent of other, more specific applications. Let us briefly
look at some examples.
    The Domain Name System (DNS) [Liu and Albitz, 2006] is a distributed
service that is used to look up a network address associated with a name, such
as the address of a so-called domain name like www.distributed-systems.net.
In terms of the OSI reference model, DNS is an application and therefore
is logically placed in the application layer. However, it should be quite
obvious that DNS is offering a general-purpose, application-independent
service. Arguably, it forms part of the middleware.
    As another example, there are various ways to establish authentication,
that is, provide proof of a claimed identity. Authentication protocols are
not closely tied to any specific application, but instead, can be integrated
into a middleware system as a general service. Likewise, authorization
protocols by which authenticated users and processes are granted access only
to those resources for which they have authorization, tend to have a general,
application-independent nature. Being labeled as applications in the OSI
reference model, these are clear examples that belong in the middleware.
    Distributed commit protocols establish that in a group of processes, pos-
sibly spread out across several machines, either all processes carry out a
particular operation, or that the operation is not carried out at all. This phe-
nomenon is also referred to as atomicity and is widely applied in transactions.
As it turns out, commit protocols can present an interface independently of
specific applications, thus providing a general-purpose transaction service.
In such a form, they typically belong to the middleware and not to the OSI
application layer.
    As a last example, consider a distributed locking protocol, by which a
resource can be protected against simultaneous access by a collection of pro-
cesses that are distributed across multiple machines. It is not hard to imagine
that such protocols can be designed in an application-independent fashion,
and accessible through a relatively simple, again application-independent
interface. As such, they generally belong in the middleware.
    These protocol examples are not directly tied to communication, yet there

Figure 4.3: An adapted reference model for networked communication.

are also many middleware communication protocols. For example, with
a so-called remote procedure call, a process is offered a facility to locally
call a procedure that is effectively implemented on a remote machine. This
communication service belongs to one of the oldest types of middleware
services and is used for realizing access transparency. In a similar vein, there
are high-level communication services for setting and synchronizing streams
for transferring real-time data, such as needed for multimedia applications.
As a last example, some middleware systems offer reliable multicast services
that scale to thousands of receivers spread across a wide-area network.
    Taking this approach to layering leads to the adapted and simplified
reference model for communication, as shown in Figure 4.3. Compared to
the OSI model, the session and presentation layer have been replaced by
a single middleware layer that contains application-independent protocols.
These protocols do not belong in the lower layers we just discussed. Network
and transport services have been grouped into communication services as
normally offered by an operating system, which, in turn, manages the specific
lowest-level hardware used to establish communication.

4.1.2      Types of Communication
In the remainder of this chapter, we concentrate on high-level middleware
communication services. Before doing so, there are other general criteria
for distinguishing (middleware) communication. To understand the various
alternatives in communication that middleware can offer to applications, we
view the middleware as an additional service in client-server computing, as
shown in Figure 4.4. Consider, for example, an e-mail system. In principle, the
core of the mail delivery system can be seen as a middleware communication
service. Each host runs a user agent allowing users to compose, send, and
receive e-mail. A sending user agent passes such mail to the mail delivery

system, expecting it, in turn, to eventually deliver the mail to the intended
recipient. Likewise, the user agent at the receiver’s side connects to the mail
delivery system to see whether any mail has come in. If so, the messages are
transferred to the user agent so that they can be read by the user.

Figure 4.4: Viewing middleware as an intermediate (distributed) service in
application-level communication.
    An e-mail system is a typical example in which communication is persis-
tent. With persistent communication, a message that has been submitted
for transmission is stored by the communication middleware as long as it
takes to deliver it to the receiver. In this case, the middleware will store the
message at one or several of the storage facilities shown in Figure 4.4. As
a consequence, it is not necessary for the sending application to continue
execution after submitting the message. Likewise, the receiving application
need not be executing when the message is submitted.
    In contrast, with transient communication, a message is stored by the
communication system only as long as the sending and receiving application
are executing. More precisely, in terms of Figure 4.4, if the middleware cannot
deliver a message due to a transmission interrupt, or because the recipient is
currently not active, it will simply be discarded. Typically, all transport-level
communication services offer only transient communication. In this case, the
communication system consists of traditional store-and-forward routers. If a
router cannot deliver a message to the next one or the destination host, it will
simply drop the message.
    Besides being persistent or transient, communication can also be asyn-
chronous or synchronous. The characteristic feature of asynchronous com-
munication is that a sender continues immediately after it has submitted its
message for transmission. This means that the message is (temporarily) stored
immediately by the middleware upon submission. With synchronous com-
munication, the sender is blocked until its request is known to be accepted.
There are essentially three points where synchronization can take place. First,

the sender may be blocked until the middleware notifies that it will take over
transmission of the request. Second, the sender may synchronize until its
request has been delivered to the intended recipient. Third, synchronization
may take place by letting the sender wait until its request has been fully
processed, that is, up to the time that the recipient returns a response.
    Various combinations of persistence and synchronization occur in practice.
Popular ones are persistence in combination with synchronization at request
submission, which is a common scheme for many message-queuing systems,
which we discuss later in this chapter. Likewise, transient communication
with synchronization after the request has been fully processed is also widely
used. This scheme corresponds with remote procedure calls, which we discuss
in the following section.

4.2     Remote procedure call
Many distributed systems have been based on explicit message exchange
between processes. However, the operations send and receive do not conceal
communication at all, which is important to achieve access transparency in
distributed systems. This problem has long been known, but little was done
about it until researchers in the 1980s [Birrell and Nelson, 1984] introduced
an entirely different way of handling communication. Although the idea is
refreshingly simple (once someone has thought of it), the implications are
often subtle. In this section we will examine the concept, its implementation,
its strengths, and its weaknesses.
    In a nutshell, the proposal was to allow programs to call procedures
located on other machines. When a process on a machine A calls a procedure
on a machine B, the calling process on A is suspended, and execution of the
called procedure takes place on B. Information can be transported from the
caller to the callee in the parameters and can come back in the procedure
result. No message passing at all is visible to the programmer. This method is
known as remote procedure call, or often just RPC.
    While the basic idea sounds simple and elegant, subtle problems exist. To
start with because the calling and called procedures run on different machines,
they execute in different address spaces, which causes complications. Parame-
ters and results also have to be passed, which can be complicated, especially
if the machines are not identical. Finally, either or both machines can crash,
and each of the possible failures causes different problems. Still, most of these
can be dealt with, and RPC is a widely used technique that underlies many
distributed systems.

4.2.1      Basic RPC operation
The idea behind RPC is to make a remote procedure call look as much as
possible as a local one. In other words, we want RPC to be transparent—the

calling procedure should not be aware that the called procedure is executing
on a different machine or vice versa. Suppose that a program has access to a
database that allows it to append data to a stored list, after which it returns a
reference to the modified list. The operation is made available to a program
by a routine append:

      newlist = append(data, dbList)

In a traditional (single processor) system, append is extracted from a library
by the linker and inserted into the object program. In principle, it can be a
short procedure, which could be implemented by a few file operations for
accessing the database.
    Even though append eventually does only a few basic file operations, it
is called in the usual way, by pushing its parameters onto the stack. The
programmer does not know the implementation details of append, and this is,
of course, how it is supposed to be.

  Note 4.2 (More information: Conventional procedure calls)
  To understand how RPC works and some of its pitfalls, it may help to first under-
  stand how a conventional (i.e., single machine) procedure call works. Consider
  the operation newlist = append(data, dbList);
      We assume that the purpose of this call is to take a globally defined list object,
  referred here to as dbList, and append a simple data element to it, represented
  by the variable data. An important observation is that in various programming
  languages such as C, dbList is implemented as a reference to a list object (i.e.,
  a pointer), whereas data may be represented directly by its value (which we
  assume to be the case here). When calling append, both the representations of data
  and dbList are pushed onto the stack, making those representations accessible
  to the implementation of append. For data, this means the variable follows a
  call-by-value policy, the policy for dblist is call-by-reference. What happens
  before and during the call is shown in Figure 4.5.

                          (a)                            (b)

Figure 4.5: (a) Parameter passing in a local procedure call: the stack before
      the call to append. (b) The stack while the called procedure is active.

       Several things are worth noting. For one, a value parameter, such as data, is
  just an initialized local variable. The called procedure may modify it, but such
  changes do not affect the original value at the calling side.
       When a parameter like dbList is actually a pointer to a variable rather than
  the value of the variable, something else happens. What is pushed onto the stack
  is the address of the list object as stored in main memory. When the value of data
  is appended to the list, a call to append does modify the list object. The difference
  between call-by-value and call-by-reference is quite important for RPC.
       One other parameter passing mechanism also exists, although it is not used
  in most programming languages. It is called call-by-copy/restore. It consists of
  having the variable copied to the stack by the caller, as in call-by-value, and then
  copied back after the call, overwriting the caller’s original value. Under most
  conditions, this achieves the same effect as call-by-reference, but in some situations,
  such as the same parameter being present multiple times in the parameter list,
  the semantics are different.
       The decision of which parameter passing mechanism to use is normally made
  by the language designers and is a fixed property of the language. Every so
  often, it depends on the data type being passed. In C, for example, integers and
  other scalar types are always passed by value, whereas arrays are always passed
  by reference. Some Ada compilers use copy/restore for inout parameters, but
  others use call-by-reference. The language definition permits either choice, which
  makes the semantics a bit fuzzy. In Python, all variables are passed by reference,
  but some actually get copied to local variables, thus mimicking the behavior of
  copy-by-value.

    RPC achieves its transparency analogously. When append is actually a
remote procedure, a different version of append, called a client stub, is offered
to the calling client. Like the original one, it, too, is called using a normal
calling sequence. However, unlike the original one, it does not perform
an append operation. Instead, it packs the parameters into a message and
requests that message to be sent to the server, as illustrated in Figure 4.6.
Following the call to send, the client stub calls receive, blocking itself until
the reply comes back.

Figure 4.6: The principle of RPC between a client and server program.

    When the message arrives at the server, the server’s operating system
passes it to a server stub. A server stub is the server-side equivalent of a client
stub: it is a piece of code that transforms requests coming in over the network
into local procedure calls. Typically, the server stub will have called receive
and be blocked waiting for incoming messages. The server stub unpacks the
parameters from the message and then calls the server procedure in the usual
way. From the server’s perspective, it is as though it is being called directly by
the client—the parameters and return address are all on the stack where they
belong and nothing seems unusual. The server performs its work and then
returns the result to the caller (in this case the server stub) in the usual way.
    When the server stub gets control back after the call has completed, it packs
the result in a message and calls send to return it to the client. Thereafter, the
server stub usually does a call to receive again, to wait for the next incoming
request.
    When the result message arrives at the client’s machine, the operating
system passes it through the receive operation, which had been called pre-
viously, to the client stub, and the client process is subsequently unblocked.
The client stub inspects the message, unpacks the result, copies it to its caller,
and returns in the usual way. When the caller gets control following the call
to append, all it knows is that it appended some data to a list. It has no idea
that the work was done remotely at another machine.
    This blissful ignorance for the client is the beauty of the whole scheme. As
far as it is concerned, remote services are accessed by making ordinary (i.e.,
local) procedure calls, not by calling send and receive. All the details of the
message passing are hidden away in the two library procedures, just as the
details of actually making system calls are hidden away in traditional libraries.
To summarize, a remote procedure call occurs in the following steps:

  1. The client procedure calls the client stub in the normal way.
  2. The client stub builds a message and calls the local operating system.
  3. The client’s OS sends the message to the remote OS.
  4. The remote OS gives the message to the server stub.
  5. The server stub unpacks the parameter(s) and calls the server.
  6. The server does the work and returns the result to the stub.
  7. The server stub packs the result in a message and calls its local OS.
  8. The server’s OS sends the message to the client’s OS.
  9. The client’s OS gives the message to the client stub.
 10. The stub unpacks the result and returns it to the client.

   The first steps are shown in Figure 4.7 for an abstract two-parameter
procedure doit(a,b), where we assume that parameter a is of type type1, and
b of type type2. The net effect of all these steps is to convert the local call by
the client procedure to the client stub, to a local call to the server procedure,

       Client machine                                   Server machine

      Client process                                  Server process
                            1. Client call to
                               procedure               Implementation     6. Stub makes
                                                           of doit           local call to “doit”
                                     Server stub
            r = doit(a,b)                                 r = doit(a,b)
                             Client stub
            proc: “doit”                                  proc: “doit”
           type1: val(a)                                 type1: val(a)    5. Stub unpacks
                            2. Stub builds                                   message
           type2: val(b)       message                   type2: val(b)

                                 proc: “doit”                             4. Server OS
 Client OS                      type1: val(a)      Server OS                 hands message
                                type2: val(b)                                to server stub

                              3. Message is sent
                                 across the network

Figure 4.7: The steps involved in calling a remote procedure doit(a,b). The
return path for the result is not shown.

without either client or server being aware of the intermediate steps or the
existence of the network.

  Note 4.3 (More information: An example in Python)
  To make matters concrete, let us consider how a remote procedure call could
  be implemented for the operation append discussed previously. Take a look at
  the Python code shown in Figure 4.8 (from which we omit nonessential code
  fragments).
      The class DBList is a simple representation of a list object, mimicking what one
  would expect to see in a version that would be found in a database environment.
  The client stub, represented by the class Client, consists of an implementation
  of append. When called with parameters data and dbList, the following happens.
  The call is transformed into a tuple (APPEND, data, dbList) containing all the
  information the server would need to do its work. The client stub then sends the
  request off to the server, and subsequently waits for the response. In the channel
  package, a recvFrom operation always returns a (sender,message) pair, allowing the
  caller to identify the process who had sent the message. In our case, when the
  response comes in, the client stub finishes the call to append by simply passing
  the returned message from the server to the program that initially called the stub.
      On the server side, we see that in the server stub, the server waits for any
  incoming message, and inspects which operation it is required to call. Again, the
  channel package returns the identifier of the original sender (line 24). Assuming
  the server received a request to call append, it then simply does a local call to its
  implementation of append with the appropriate parameters as also found in the
  request tuple. The result is then sent back to the identified client.
      Note that an actual client would simply call c.append(...) where c is an
  instance of the class Client. Indeed, the call truly seems to take place locally.

    1   import channel, pickle
    2
    3   class DBList:
    4     def append(self, data):
    5       self.value.extend(data)
    6       return self
    7
    8   class Client:
    9     def append(self, data, dbList):
   10       msglst = (APPEND, data, dbList)             # message payload
   11       self.channel.sendTo(self.server, msglst)    # send message to server
   12       msgrcv = self.channel.recvFrom(self.server) # wait for an incoming message
   13
   14      # A call to recvFrom returns a [senderID, message] pair
   15      return msgrcv[1]                            # pass returned message to caller
   16
   17   class Server:
   18     def append(self, data, dbList):
   19       return dbList.append(data)
   20
   21     def run(self):
   22       while True:
   23         msgreq = self.channel.recvFromAny() # wait for any request
   24         client = msgreq[0]                  # see who is the caller
   25         msgrpc = msgreq[1]                  # fetch the actual request
   26
   27         # At this point, msgreq should have the form (operation, data, list)
   28         if APPEND == msgrpc[0]:          # check what is being requested
   29           result = self.append(msgrpc[1], msgrpc[2]) # do local call
   30           self.channel.sendTo(client,result)         # return response

Figure 4.8: A simple RPC example for operation append.

4.2.2     Parameter passing
The function of the client stub is to take its parameters, pack them into a
message, and send them to the server stub. While this sounds straightforward,
it is not quite as simple as it at first appears.
     Packing parameters into a message is called parameter marshaling. Re-
turning to our append operation, we need to ensure that its two parameters
(data and dbList) are sent over the network and correctly interpreted by the
server. The thing to realize, is that the server will just be seeing a series
of bytes coming in that constitute the original message sent by the client.
However, no additional information on what those bytes mean is normally
provided with the message. Also, we would be facing the same problem again:
how should the meta-information be recognized as such by the server?

    Besides this interpretation problem, we also need to handle the case that
the placement of bytes in memory may differ between machine architectures.
In particular, we need to account for the fact that some machines, such as
Intel processors, number their bytes from right to left, whereas many others,
such as the older ARM processors, number them the other way (ARM now
supports both). The Intel format is called little endian and the (older) ARM
format is called big endian. Byte ordering is also important for networking:
also here we can witness that machines may use a different ordering when
transmitting (and thus receiving) bits and bytes. However, big endian is what
is normally used for transferring bytes across a network.
   The solution to this problem is to transform data that is to be sent to a
machine- and network-independent format, next to making sure that both
communicating parties expect the same message data type to be transmitted.
The latter can typically be solved at the level of programming languages. The
former is accomplished by using machine-dependent routines that transform
data to and from machine- and network-independent formats.
   Marshaling and unmarshaling is all about this transformation to neutral
formats and forms an essential part of remote procedure calls.

  Note 4.4 (More information: An example in Python revisited)

      1   import channel, pickle
      2
      3   class Client:
      4     def append(self, data, dbList):
      5       msglst = (APPEND, data, dbList)             # message payload
      6       msgsnd = pickle.dumps(msglst)               # wrap call
      7       self.channel.sendTo(self.server, msgsnd)    # send request to server
      8       msgrcv = self.channel.recvFrom(self.server) # wait for response
      9       retval = pickle.loads(msgrcv[1])            # unwrap return value
   10         return retval                               # pass it to caller
   11
   12     class Server:
   13       def run(self):
   14         while True:
   15           msgreq = self.channel.recvFromAny() # wait for any request
   16           client = msgreq[0]                  # see who is the caller
   17           msgrpc = pickle.loads(msgreq[1])    # unwrap the call
   18           if APPEND == msgrpc[0]:             # check what is being requested
   19             result = self.append(msgrpc[1], msgrpc[2]) # do local call
   20             msgres = pickle.dumps(result)              # wrap the result
   21             self.channel.sendTo(client,msgres)         # send response

Figure 4.9: A simple RPC example for operation append, but now with
          proper marshaling.

      It is not difficult to see that the solution to remote procedure calling as shown
  in Figure 4.8 will not work in general. Only if the client and server are operating
  on machines that obey the same byte-ordering rules and have the same machine
  representations for data structures, will the exchange of messages as shown lead
  to correct interpretations. A robust solution is shown in Figure 4.9 (where we
  again have omitted code for brevity).
      In this example, we use the Python pickle library for marshaling and unmar-
  shaling data structures. Note that the code hardly changes in comparison to what
  we have shown in Figure 4.8. The only changes occur just before sending, and
  after receiving a message. Also note that both client and server are programmed
  to work on the same data structures, as we discussed above.
      (We do note that, behind the scene, whenever a class instance is passed as a
  parameter, Python generally takes care of pickling and later unpickling the instance.
  In this sense, our explicit use of pickle is, strictly speaking, not necessary.)

     We now come to a difficult problem: How are pointers, or in general,
references passed? The answer is: only with the greatest of difficulty, if at
all. A pointer is meaningful only within the address space of the process
in which it is being used. Getting back to our append example, we stated
that the second parameter, dbList, is implemented through a reference to a
list stored in a database. If that reference is just a pointer to a local data
structure somewhere in the caller’s main memory, we cannot simply pass it
to the server. The transferred pointer value will most likely be referring to
something entirely different.
     One solution is just to forbid pointers and reference parameters in general.
However, these are so important that this solution is highly undesirable. In
fact, it is often not necessary either. First, reference parameters are often used
with fixed-sized data types, such as static arrays, or with dynamic data types
for which it is easy to compute their size at runtime, such as strings or dynamic
arrays. In such cases, we can simply copy the entire data structure to which the
parameter is referring, effectively replacing the copy-by-reference mechanism
by copy-by-value/restore. Although this is semantically not always identical,
it frequently is good enough. An obvious optimization is that when the client
stub knows the referred data will be only read, there is no need to copy it
back when the call has finished. Copy-by-value is thus good enough.
     More intricate data types can often be supported as well, and certainly if a
programming language supports those data types. For example, a language
such as Python or Java supports user-defined classes, allowing a language
system to provide fully automated marshaling and unmarshaling of those
data types. Note, however, that as soon as we are dealing with large, nested,
or otherwise intricate dynamic data structures, automatic (un)marshaling may
not be available, or even desirable.
     The problem with pointers and references, as discussed so far, is that
they make sense only locally: they refer to memory locations that have

meaning only to the calling process. Problems can be alleviated by using
global references: references that are meaningful to the calling and the called
process. For example, if the client and the server have access to the same file
system, passing a file handle instead of a pointer may do the trick. There is
one important observation: both processes need to know exactly what to do
when a global reference is passed. In other words, if we consider a global
reference having an associated data type, the calling and called process should
have the same picture of the operations that can be performed. Moreover, both
processes should have agreement on exactly what to do when a file handle
is passed. Again, these are typically issues that can be solved by proper
programming-language support. We will return to this subject shortly.

  Note 4.5 (Advanced: Parameter passing in object-based systems)
  Object-based systems often use global references. Consider the situation that
  all objects in the system can be accessed from remote machines. In that case,
  we can consistently use object references as parameters in method invocations.
  References are passed by value, and thus copied from one machine to the other.
  When a process is given an object reference as the result of a method invocation, it
  can simply bind to the object referred to when needed later (see also Section 2.1.2).
      Unfortunately, using only distributed objects can be highly inefficient, espe-
  cially when objects are small, such as integers, or worse yet, Booleans. Each
  invocation by a client that is not co-located in the same server as the object, gener-
  ates a request between different address spaces or, even worse, between different
  machines. Therefore, references to remote objects and those to local objects are
  often treated differently.
                        Machine A                                    Machine B
                        Local object
               Local                                                Remote object
                            O1                   Remote
        reference L1                                                    O2
                                              reference R1

   Client code with
   RMI to server at C
   (proxy)                                New local
                                          reference          Copy of O1
                            Remote
                            invocation with
                            L1 and R1 as                                            Copy of R1 to O2
                            parameters                                      Server code
                                                             Machine C      (method implementation)

Figure 4.10: Passing an object by reference or by value.

      When invoking a method with an object reference as parameter, that reference
  is copied and passed as a value parameter only when it refers to a remote object.
  In this case, the object is literally passed by reference. However, when the reference
  refers to a local object, that is an object in the same address space as the client,
  the referred object is copied as a whole and passed along with the invocation. In

  other words, the object is passed by value.
      These two situations are illustrated in Figure 4.10 which shows a client pro-
  gram running on a machine A, and a server program on a machine C. The client
  has a reference to a local object O1 that it uses as a parameter when calling the
  server program on machine C. In addition, it holds a reference to a remote object
  O2 residing at machine B, which is also used as a parameter. When calling the
  server, a copy of O1 is passed to the server on machine C, along with only a copy
  of the reference to O2.
      Note that whether we are dealing with a reference to a local object or a
  reference to a remote object can be highly transparent, such as in Java. In Java, the
  distinction is visible only because local objects are essentially of a different data
  type than remote objects. Otherwise, both types of references are treated very
  much the same (see also [Wollrath et al., 1996]). On the other hand, when using
  conventional programming languages such as C, a reference to a local object can
  be as simple as a pointer, which can never be used to refer to a remote object.
      The side effect of invoking a method with an object reference as parameter is
  that we may be copying an object. Obviously, hiding this aspect is unacceptable
  so that we are consequently forced to make an explicit distinction between local
  and distributed objects. Clearly, this distinction not only violates distribution
  transparency, but also makes it harder to write distributed applications.
      We can now also easily explain how global references can be implemented
  when using portable, interpreted languages such as Python or Java: use the entire
  client stub as a reference. The key observation is that a client stub is often just
  another data structure that is compiled into (portable) bytecode. That compiled
  code can actually be transferred across the network and executed at the receiver’s
  side. In other words, there is no need for explicit binding anymore; simply
  copying the client stub to the recipient is enough to allow the latter to invoke the
  associated server-side object. Of course, it may be necessary to marshall that code
  before shipping it to the other machine, although strictly speaking, there is no
  reason why that other machine would work with different layouts.

4.2.3   RPC-based application support

From what we have explained so far, it is clear that hiding a remote procedure
call requires that the caller and the callee agree on the format of the messages
they exchange and that they follow the same steps when it comes to, for
example, passing complex data structures. In other words, both sides in an
RPC should follow the same protocol or the RPC will not work correctly.
There are at least two ways in which RPC-based application development can
be supported. The first one is to let a developer specify exactly what needs
to be called remotely, from which complete client-side and server-side stubs
can be generated. A second approach is to embed remote procedure calling
as part of a programming-language environment.

Stub generation
Consider the function someFunction of Figure 4.11(a). It has three parameters,
a character, a floating-point number, and an array of five integers. Assuming a
word is four bytes, the RPC protocol might prescribe that we should transmit a
character in the rightmost byte of a word (leaving the next three bytes empty),
a float as a whole word, and an array as a group of words whose size is
equal to the array length, preceded by a word giving the length, as shown in
Figure 4.11(b). Thus given these rules, the client stub for someFunction knows
that it must use the format of Figure 4.11(b), and the server stub knows that
incoming messages for someFunction will have the format of Figure 4.11(b).

              void someFunction(char x; float y; int z[5])

                                      (a)

                                     (b)

Figure 4.11: (a) A function. (b) The corresponding message, and the order in
which bytes and words are sent across the network.

    Defining the message format is one aspect of an RPC protocol, but it
is not sufficient. What we also need is the client and the server to agree
on the representation of simple data structures, such as integers, characters,
Booleans, etc. For example, the protocol could prescribe that integers are
represented in two’s complement, characters in 16-bit Unicode, and floats in
the IEEE standard #754 format, with everything stored in little endian. With
this additional information, messages can be unambiguously interpreted.
    With the encoding rules now pinned down to the last bit, the only thing
that remains to be done is that the caller and callee agree on the actual
exchange of messages. For example, it may be decided to use a connection-
oriented transport service, such as TCP/IP. An alternative is to use an unreli-
able datagram service and let the client and server implement an error control
scheme as part of the RPC protocol. In practice, several variants exist, and it
is up to the developer to indicate the preferred underlying communication
service.
    Once the RPC protocol has been fully defined, the client and server stubs
need to be implemented. Fortunately, stubs for the same protocol, but different

procedures, normally differ only in their interface to the applications. An
interface consists of a collection of procedures that can be called by a client,
and which are implemented by a server. An interface is usually available in
the same programming language as the one in which the client or server is
written (although this is, strictly speaking, not necessary). To simplify matters,
interfaces are often specified through an Interface Definition Language (IDL).
An interface specified in such an IDL is then subsequently compiled into a
client stub and a server stub, along with the appropriate compile-time or
run-time interfaces. This process is sketched in Figure 4.12.

Figure 4.12: The principle of generating stubs from an interface definition file.

    The figure shows the situation for compiled languages, yet it is not hard
to imagine that a very similar situation holds for interpreted languages. Also
note that it is possible that the client and server code are written in different
languages. There is no principal reason why the client side cannot consist of
components written in, for example, Python, while the server side is written
in C. Of course, in that case, the box in Figure 4.12 representing common
includes will then contain separate files for the client and server, respectively.
Important in this scheme is the runtime library: it forms the interface to the
actual runtime system, constituting the middleware.
    Practice shows that using an interface definition language considerably
simplifies client-server applications based on RPCs. Because it is easy to fully

generate client and server stubs, all RPC-based middleware systems offer an
IDL to support application development. In some cases, using the IDL is even
mandatory.

  Note 4.6 (More information: Language-based RPC in Python)
  Let us see by an example of how remote procedure calling can be integrated in a
  language. We have been using the Python language for most of our examples, and
  will continue to do so now as well. In Figure 4.13 we show a simple server for our
  DBList data structure. In this case, it has two exposed operations: exposed_append
  for appending elements, and exposed_value to display what is currently in the
  list. We use the Python RPyC package for embedding RPCs.

      1   import rpyc
      2   from rpyc.utils.server import ForkingServer
      3
      4   class DBList(rpyc.Service):
      5     value = [] # Used to build a list of strings
      6
      7     def exposed_append(self, data):
      8       self.value.extend(str(data)) # Extend the list with the data
      9       return self.value            # Return the current list
   10
   11     class Server:
   12       # Create a forking server at inititalization time and immediately start it.
   13       # For each incoming request, the server will spawn another process to handle
   14       # that request. The process that started the (main) server can simply kill
   15       # it when it’s time to do so.
   16       def __init__(self):
   17         self.server = ForkingServer(DBList, hostname=SERVER, port=PORT)
   18
   19       def start(self):
   20         self.server.start()
   21
   22     class Client:
   23       def run(self):
   24         conn = rpyc.connect(SERVER, PORT) # Connect to the server
   25         conn.root.exposed_append(2)       # Call an exposed operation,
   26         conn.root.exposed_append(4)       # and append two elements
   27         print(conn.root.exposed_value()) # Print the result

Figure 4.13: Embedding RPCs in a language

       The client is also shown in Figure 4.13. When a connection is made to the
  server, a new instance of DBList will be created and the client can immediately
  append values to the list. The exposed operations are called without further ado.
       Note that as the client breaks the connection to the server, the list will be lost.
  It is a transient object and special measures will need to be taken to make it a
  persistent object.

Language-based support
The approach described up until now is largely independent of a specific pro-
gramming language. As an alternative, we can also embed remote procedure
calling into a language itself. The main benefit is that application development
often becomes much simpler. Furthermore, reaching a high degree of access
transparency is often simpler, as many issues related to parameter passing
can be circumvented altogether.
    A well-known example in which remote procedure calling is fully em-
bedded is Java, where an RPC is referred to as a remote method invocation
(RMI). In essence, a client being executed by its own (Java) virtual machine
can invoke a method of an object managed by another virtual machine. By
simply reading an application’s source code, it may be hard or even impossible
to see whether a method invocation is to a local or to a remote object.

4.2.4   Variations on RPC
As in conventional procedure calls, when a client calls a remote procedure, the
client will block until a reply is returned. This strict request-reply behavior
is unnecessary when there is no result to return, or may hinder efficiency
when multiple RPCs need to be performed. In the following, we look at two
variations on the RPC scheme we have discussed so far.

Asynchronous RPC
To support situations in which there is simply no result to return to the client,
RPC systems may provide facilities for what are called asynchronous RPCs.
With asynchronous RPCs, the server, in principle, immediately sends a reply
back to the client the moment the RPC request is received, after which it
locally calls the requested procedure. The reply acts as an acknowledgment
to the client that the server is going to process the RPC. The client will
continue without further blocking as soon as it has received the server’s
acknowledgment. Figure 4.14(b) shows how client and server interact in the
case of asynchronous RPCs. For comparison, Figure 4.14(a) shows the normal
request-reply behavior.
    Asynchronous RPCs can also be useful when a reply will be returned, but
the client is not prepared to wait for it and do nothing in the meantime. A
typical case is when a client needs to contact several servers independently.
In that case, it can send the call requests one after the other, effectively
establishing that the servers operate more or less in parallel. After all call
requests have been sent, the client can start waiting for the various results to be
returned. In cases such as these, it makes sense to organize the communication
between the client and server through an asynchronous RPC combined with a
callback, as shown in Figure 4.15. In this scheme, also referred to as deferred
synchronous RPC, the client first calls the server, waits for the acceptance,

                    (a)                                       (b)

Figure 4.14: (a) The interaction between client and server in a traditional RPC.
(b) The interaction using asynchronous RPC.

and continues. When the results become available, the server sends a response
message that leads to a callback at the client’s side. A callback is a user-defined
function that is invoked when a special event happens, such as an incoming
message. A straightforward implementation is to spawn a separate thread and
let it block on the occurrence of the event while the main process continues.
When the event occurs, the thread is unblocked and calls the function.

Figure 4.15: A client and server interacting through a deferred synchronous
RPC.

    It should be noted that variants of asynchronous RPCs exist in which the
client continues executing immediately after sending the request to the server.
In other words, the client does not wait for an acknowledgment of the server’s
acceptance of the request. We refer to such RPCs as one-way RPCs. The
problem with this approach is that when reliability is not guaranteed, the
client cannot know for sure whether its request will be processed. We return
to these matters in Chapter 8. Likewise, in the case of deferred synchronous
RPC, the client may poll the server to see whether the results are available yet,
instead of letting the server calling back the client.

Multicast RPC
Asynchronous and deferred synchronous RPCs facilitate another alternative
to remote procedure calls, namely executing multiple RPCs at the same time.
Adopting the one-way RPCs (i.e., when a server does not tell the client it has
accepted its call request but immediately starts processing it, while the client
continues just after issuing the RPC), a multicast RPC boils down to sending
an RPC request to a group of servers. This principle is shown in Figure 4.16.
In this example, the client sends a request to two servers, who subsequently
process that request independently and in parallel. When done, the result is
returned to the client where a callback takes place.

Figure 4.16: The principle of a multicast RPC.

    There are several issues that we need to consider. First, as before, the
client application may be unaware of the fact that an RPC is actually being
forwarded to more than one server. For example, to increase fault tolerance,
we may decide to have all operations executed by a backup server who can
take over when the main server fails. That a server has been replicated can be
completely hidden from a client application by an appropriate stub. Yet even
the stub need not be aware that the server is replicated, for example because
we are using a transport-level multicast address.
    Second, we need to consider what to do with the responses. In particular,
will the client proceed after all responses have been received, or wait just for
one? It all depends. When the server has been replicated for fault tolerance,
we may decide to wait for just the first response, or perhaps until a majority
of the servers returns the same result. On the other hand, if the servers have
been replicated to do the same work but on different parts of the input, their
results may need to be merged before the client can continue. Again, such
matters can be hidden in the client-side stub, yet the application developer
will, at the very least, have to specify the purpose of the multicast RPC.

4.3     Message-oriented communication
Remote procedure calls and remote object invocations contribute to hiding
communication in distributed systems, that is, they enhance access trans-
parency. Unfortunately, neither mechanism is always appropriate. In particu-
lar, when it cannot be assumed that the receiving side is executing at the time
a request is issued, alternative communication services are needed. Likewise,
the inherent synchronous nature of RPCs, by which a client is blocked until
its request has been processed, may need to be replaced by something else.
     That something else is messaging. In this section, we concentrate on
message-oriented communication in distributed systems by first taking a closer
look at what exactly synchronous behavior is and what its implications are.
Then, we discuss messaging systems that assume that parties are executing
at the time of communication. Finally, we will examine message-queuing
systems that allow processes to exchange information, even if the other party
is not executing at the time communication is initiated.

4.3.1      Simple transient messaging with sockets
Many distributed systems and applications are built directly on top of the
simple message-oriented model offered by the transport layer. To better un-
derstand and appreciate the message-oriented systems as part of middleware
solutions, we first discuss messaging through transport-level sockets.
    Special attention has been paid to standardizing the interface of the trans-
port layer to allow programmers to make use of its entire suite of (messaging)
protocols through a simple set of operations. Furthermore, standard interfaces
make it easier to port an application to a different machine. As an example,
we briefly discuss the socket interface as introduced in the 1970s in Berkeley
Unix, and which has been adopted as a POSIX standard (with only very few
adaptations).
    Conceptually, a socket is a communication end point to which an applica-
tion can write data that are to be sent out over the underlying network, and
from which incoming data can be read. A socket forms an abstraction over the
actual port that is used by the local operating system for a specific transport
protocol. In the following text, we concentrate on the socket operations for
TCP, which are shown in Figure 4.17.
    Servers generally execute the first four operations, normally in the order
given. When calling the socket operation, the caller creates a new commu-
nication end point for a specific transport protocol. Internally, creating a
communication end point means that the local operating system reserves
resources for sending and receiving messages for the specified protocol.
    The bind operation associates a local address with the newly created socket.
For example, a server should bind the IP address of its machine together with
a (possibly well-known) port number to a socket. Binding tells the operating

     Operation     Description
     socket        Create a new communication end point
     bind          Attach a local address to a socket
     listen        Tell operating system what the maximum number of pending
                   connection requests should be
     accept        Block caller until a connection request arrives
     connect       Actively attempt to establish a connection
     send          Send some data over the connection
     receive       Receive some data over the connection
     close         Release the connection

Figure 4.17: The socket operations for TCP/IP.

system that the server wants to receive messages only on the specified address
and port. In the case of connection-oriented communication, the address is
used to receive incoming connection requests.
    The listen operation is called only in the case of connection-oriented
communication. It is a nonblocking call that allows the local operating sys-
tem to reserve enough buffers for a specified maximum number of pending
connection requests that the caller is willing to accept.
    A call to accept blocks the caller until a connection request arrives. When
a request arrives, the local operating system creates a new socket with the
same properties as the original one, and returns it to the caller. This approach
will allow the server to, for example, fork a process that will subsequently
handle the actual communication through the new connection. The server can
go back and wait for another connection request on the original socket.

Figure 4.18: Connection-oriented communication pattern using sockets.

    Let us now take a look at the client side. Here, too, a socket must first be
created using the socket operation, but explicitly binding the socket to a local
address is not necessary, since the operating system can dynamically allocate
a port when the connection is set up. The connect operation requires that the
caller specifies the transport-level address to which a connection request is to
be sent. The client is blocked until a connection has been set up successfully,
after which both sides can start exchanging information through the send and
receive operations. Finally, closing a connection is symmetric when using

sockets, and is established by having both the client and server call the close
operation. Although there are many exceptions to the rule, the general pattern
followed by a client and server for connection-oriented communication using
sockets is as shown in Figure 4.18. Details on network programming using
sockets and other interfaces in Unix can be found in [Stevens, 1998].

  Note 4.7 (Example: A simple socket-based client-server system)
  As an illustration of the recurring pattern in Figure 4.18, consider the simple
  socket-based client-server system shown in Figure 4.19 (see also Note 2.1). We see
  the server starting by creating a socket, and subsequently binding an address to
  that socket. It calls the listen operation, and waits for an incoming connection
  request. When the server accepts a connection, the socket library creates a
  separate connection, conn, which is used to receive data and send a response to
  the connected client. The server enters a loop receiving and sending messages,
  until no more data has been received. It then closes the connection.

      1   from socket import *
      2
      3   class Server:
      4     def run(self):
      5       s = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
      6       s.bind((HOST, PORT))
      7       s.listen(1)
      8       (conn, addr) = s.accept() # returns new socket and addr. client
      9       while True:                # forever
   10           data = conn.recv(1024) # receive data from client
   11           if not data: break       # stop if client stopped
   12           conn.send(data+b"*")     # return sent data plus an "*"
   13         conn.close()               # close the connection

                                                (a)

      1   class Client:
      2     def run(self):
      3       s = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
      4       s.connect((HOST, PORT)) # connect to server (block until accepted)
      5       s.send(b"Hello, world") # send same data
      6       data = s.recv(1024)     # receive the response
      7       print(data)             # print what you received
      8       s.send(b"")             # tell the server to close
      9       s.close()               # close the connection

                                                (b)

Figure 4.19: A simple socket-based client-server system.

      The client again follows the pattern from Figure 4.18. It creates a socket, and
  calls connect to request a connection with the server. Once the connection has
  been established, it sends a single message, waits for the response, and after
  printing the result, closes the connection.

  Note 4.8 (Advanced: Implementing stubs as global references revisited)
  To provide a more in-depth insight in the working of sockets, let us look
  at a more elaborate example, namely the use of stubs as global references.

       1    class DBClient:
       2      def __sendrecv(self, message):           # this is a private method
       3        sock = socket()                        # create a socket
       4        sock.connect((self.host, self.port)) # connect to server
       5        sock.send(pickle.dumps(message))       # send some data
       6        result = pickle.loads(sock.recv(1024)) # receive the response
       7        sock.close()                           # close the connection
       8        return result
       9
       10     def create(self):
       11       self.listID = self.__sendrecv([CREATE])
       12       return self.listID
       13
       14     def getValue(self):
       15       return self.__sendrecv([GETVALUE, self.listID])
       16
       17     def appendData(self, data):
       18       return self.__sendrecv([APPEND, data, self.listID])

                                                     (a)

   1    class Server:
   2        self.setOfLists = {}                     # init: no lists to manage
   3
   4        def run(self):
   5          while True:
   6            (conn, addr) = self.sock.accept() # accept incoming call
   7            data = conn.recv(1024)            # fetch data from client
   8            request = pickle.loads(data)      # unwrap the request
   9
  10           if request[0] == CREATE:                    # create a list
  11             listID = len(self.setOfLists) + 1         # allocate listID
  12             self.setOfLists[listID] = []              # initialize to empty
  13             conn.send(pickle.dumps(listID))           # return ID
  14
  15           elif request[0] == APPEND:             # append request
  16             listID = request[2]                  # fetch listID
  17             data = request[1]                    # fetch data to append
  18             self.setOfLists[listID].append(data) # append it to the list
  19             conn.send(pickle.dumps(OK))          # return an OK
  20
  21           elif request[0] == GETVALUE:                # read request
  22             listID = request[1]                       # fetch listID
  23             result = self.setOfLists[listID]          # get the elements
  24             conn.send(pickle.dumps(result))           # return the list

                                                     (b)

Figure 4.20: Implementing a list server in Python.

      We return to our example of implementing a shared list, which we now
  do using a list server, implemented in the form of the Python class shown in
  Figure 4.20(b). Figure 4.20(a) shows the stub implementation of a shared list.
  Again, we have omitted code for readability.
      The DBClient class represents a client-side stub that, once marshaled, can be
  passed between processes. It provides three operations associated with a list:
  create, getValue, and append, with obvious semantics. A DBClient is assumed to
  be associated with one specific list as managed by the server. An identifier for
  that list is returned when the list is created. Note how the (internal) sendrecv
  operation follows the client-side pattern explained in Figure 4.18.
      The server maintains lists, as shown in Figure 4.20(b). Its internal data
  structure is a setOfLists with each element being a previously created list. The
  server simply waits for incoming requests, unmarshals the request, and checks
  which operation is being requested. Results are sent back to the requesting client
  (which always issues the sendrecv operation implemented as part of DBClient).
  Again, we see that the server follows the pattern shown in Figure 4.18: it creates
  a socket, binds an address to it, informs the operating system to how many
  connections it should listen, and then waits to accept an incoming connection
  request. Once a connection has been established, the server receives data, sends a
  response, and closes the connection again.

  1   class Client:
  2     def __init__(self, port):
  3       self.host = ’localhost’                # this machine
  4       self.port = port                       # port it will listen to
  5       self.sock = socket()                   # socket for incoming calls
  6       self.sock.bind((self.host, self.port)) # bind socket to an address
  7       self.sock.listen(2)                    # max num connections
  8
  9     def sendTo(self, host, port, data):
 10       sock = socket()
 11       sock.connect((host, port))    # connect to server (blocking call)
 12       sock.send(pickle.dumps(data)) # send some data
 13       sock.close()
 14
 15     def recvAny(self):
 16       (conn, addr) = self.sock.accept()
 17       return conn.recv(1024)
Figure 4.20: (c) Implementing a list server in Python: the client.

      To use a stub as a global reference, we represent each client application by
  the class Client shown in Figure 4.20(c). The class is instantiated in the same
  process running the application (exemplified by the value of self.host), and will
  be listening on a specific port for messages from other applications, as well as
  the server. Otherwise, it merely sends and receives messages, coded through the
  operations sendTo and recvAny, respectively.
      Now consider the code shown in Figure 4.20(d), which mimics two client
  applications. The first one creates a new list and appends data to it. Then note

  how dbClient1 is simply sent to the other client. Under the hood, we now know
  that it is marshaled in the operation sendTo (line 12) of class Client shown in
  Figure 4.20(c).

  1   def client1():
  2     c1 = Client(PORTC1)               # create client
  3     dbC1 = DBClient(HOSTS,PORTS)      # create reference
  4     dbC1.create()                     # create new list
  5     dbC1.appendData(’Client 1’)       # append some data
  6     c1.sendTo(HOSTC2,PORTC2,dbC1)     # send to other client
  7
  8   def client2():
  9     c2 = Client(PORTC2)               # create a new client
 10     data = c2.recvAny()               # block until data is sent
 11     dbC2 = pickle.loads(data)         # receive reference
 12     dbC2.appendData(’Client 2’)       # append data to same list
Figure 4.20: (d) Passing stubs as references.

      The second client simply waits for an incoming message (line 12), unmarshals
  the result, knowing that it is a DBClient instance, and subsequently appends some
  more data to the same list as the one the first client appended data. Indeed, an
  instance of DBClient is seen to be passed as a global reference, seemingly along
  with all the operations that go with the associated class.

4.3.2     Advanced transient messaging
The standard socket-based approach toward transient messaging is very basic
and, as such, rather brittle: a mistake is easily made. Furthermore, sockets
essentially support only TCP or UDP, meaning that any extra facility for
messaging needs to be implemented separately by an application programmer.
In practice, we do often need more advanced approaches for message-oriented
communication to make network programming easier, to expand beyond the
functionality offered by existing networking protocols, to make better use of
local resources, and so on.

Using messaging patterns: ZeroMQ

One approach toward making network programming easier is based on the
observation that many messaging applications, or their components, can be
effectively organized according to a few simple communication patterns. By
subsequently providing enhancements to sockets for each of these patterns,
it may become easier to develop a networked, distributed application. This
approach has been followed in ZeroMQ and documented in [Hintjens, 2013;
Akgul, 2013].

    Like in the Berkeley approach, ZeroMQ also provides sockets through
which all communication takes place. Actual message transmission gener-
ally takes place over TCP connections, and like TCP, all communication is
essentially connection-oriented, meaning that a connection will first be set up
between a sender and receiver before message transmission can take place.
However, setting up, and maintaining connections is kept mostly under the
hood: an application programmer need not bother with those issues. To
further simplify matters, a socket may be bound to multiple addresses, ef-
fectively allowing a server to handle messages from very different sources
through a single interface. For example, a server can listen to multiple ports
using a single blocking receive operation. ZeroMQ sockets can thus support
many-to-one communication instead of just one-to-one communication, as is the
case with standard Berkeley sockets. To complete the story: ZeroMQ sockets
also support one-to-many communication, i.e., multicasting.
    Essential to ZeroMQ is that communication is asynchronous: a sender will
normally continue after having submitted a message to the underlying com-
munication subsystem. An interesting side effect of combining asynchronous
with connection-oriented communication, is that a process can request a con-
nection setup, and subsequently send a message even if the recipient is not yet
up-and-running and ready to accept incoming connection requests, let alone
incoming messages. What happens, of course, is that a connection request and
subsequent messages are queued at the sender’s side, while a separate thread
as part of ZeroMQ’s library will take care that eventually the connection is set
up and messages are transmitted to the recipient.
    Simplifying matters, ZeroMQ establishes a higher level of abstraction in
socket-based communication by pairing sockets: a specific type of socket used
for sending messages is paired with a corresponding socket type for receiving
messages. Each pair of socket types corresponds to a communication pattern.
The three most important communication patterns supported by ZeroMQ are
request-reply, publish-subscribe, and pipeline.
    The request-reply pattern is used in traditional client-server communi-
cation, like the ones normally used for remote procedure calls. A client
application uses a request socket (of type REQ) to send a request message to a
server and expects the latter to respond with an appropriate response. The
server is assumed to use a reply socket (of type REP). The request-reply pattern
simplifies matters for developers by avoiding the need to call the listen
operation, as well as the accept operation. Moreover, when a server receives
a message, a subsequent call to send is automatically targeted toward the
original sender. Likewise, when a client calls the recv operation (for receiving
a message) after having sent a message, ZeroMQ assumes the client is wait-
ing for a response from the original recipient. Note that this approach was
effectively encoded in the local sendrecv operation of Figure 4.20(b), which
we discussed in Note 4.8.

  Note 4.9 (Example: The request-reply pattern)
  Let us look at a simple programming example to illustrate the request-reply
  pattern. Figure 4.21 shows a server that appends an asterisk to a received message.
  As before, it creates a socket, and binds it to a combination of a protocol (in this
  case TCP), and a host and port. In our example, the server is willing to accept
  incoming connection requests on two different ports. It then waits for incoming
  messages. The request-reply pattern effectively ties the receipt of a message to the
  subsequent response. In other words, when the server calls send, it will transmit
  a message to the same client from which it previously had received a message. Of
  course, this simplicity can be achieved only if the programmer indeed abides to
  the request-reply pattern.

    1   import zmq
    2
    3   def server():
    4     context = zmq.Context()
    5     socket = context.socket(zmq.REP)       # create reply socket
    6     socket.bind("tcp://*:12345")           # bind socket to address
    7
    8    while True:
    9      message = socket.recv()               # wait for incoming message
   10      if not "STOP" in str(message):        # if not to stop...
   11        reply = str(message.decode())+’*’   # append "*" to message
   12        socket.send(reply.encode())         # send it away (encoded)
   13      else:
   14        break                               # break out of loop and end
   15
   16   def client():
   17     context = zmq.Context()
   18     socket = context.socket(zmq.REQ)       # create request socket
   19
   20    socket.connect("tcp://localhost:12345") # block until connected
   21    socket.send(b"Hello world")             # send message
   22    message = socket.recv()                 # block until response
   23    socket.send(b"STOP")                    # tell server to stop
   24    print(message.decode())                 # print result

Figure 4.21: A ZeroMQ client-server system.

      The client, also shown in Figure 4.21, creates a socket and connects to the
  associated server. When it sends a message, it can expect to receive, from that
  same server, a response. By sending the string “STOP”, it tells the server it is done,
  after which the server will actually stop.
      Interestingly, the asynchronous nature of ZeroMQ allows one to start the client
  before starting the server. An implication is that if, in this example, we would start
  the server, then a client, and after a while a second client, that the latter will be
  blocked until the server is restarted. Furthermore, note that ZeroMQ does not
  require the programmer to specify how many bytes are expected to be received.
  Unlike TCP, ZeroMQ uses messages instead of byte streams.

   In the case of a publish-subscribe pattern, clients subscribe to specific mes-
sages that are published by servers. We came across this pattern in Section 2.1.3
when discussing coordination. In effect, only the messages to which the client
has subscribed will be transmitted. If a server is publishing messages to which
no one has subscribed, these messages will be lost. In its simplest form, this
pattern establishes multicasting messages from a server to several clients. The
server is assumed to use a socket of type PUB, while each client must use SUB
type sockets. Each client socket is connected to the socket of the server. By
default, a client subscribes to no specific message. This means that as long
as no explicit subscription is provided, a client will not receive a message
published by the server.

  Note 4.10 (Example: The publish-subscribe pattern)
  Again, let us make this pattern more concrete through a simple example. Fig-
  ure 4.22 shows an admittedly naive time server that publishes its current, local
  time, through a PUB socket. The local time is published every five seconds, for any
  interested client.

      1   import multiprocessing
      2   import zmq, time
      3
      4   def server():
      5     context = zmq.Context()
      6     socket = context.socket(zmq.PUB)         # create a publisher socket
      7     socket.bind("tcp://*:12345")             # bind socket to the address
      8     while True:
      9       time.sleep(5)                          # wait every 5 seconds
   10         t = "TIME " + time.asctime()
   11         socket.send(t.encode())                # publish the current time
   12
   13     def client():
   14       context = zmq.Context()
   15       socket = context.socket(zmq.SUB)          # create a subscriber socket
   16       socket.connect("tcp://localhost:12345") # connect to the server
   17       socket.setsockopt(zmq.SUBSCRIBE, b"TIME") # subscribe to TIME messages
   18
   19      for i in range(5):     # Five iterations
   20        time = socket.recv() # receive a message related to subscription
   21        print(time.decode()) # print the result

Figure 4.22: A multicasting socket-based setup.

      A client is equally simple, as also shown in Figure 4.22. It first creates a SUB
  socket which it connects to the corresponding PUB socket of the server. To receive
  the appropriate messages, it needs to subscribe to messages that have TIME as
  their tag. In our example, a client will simply print the first five messages received
  from the server. Note that we can have as many clients as we want: the server’s
  message will be multicasted to all subscribers. Most important in this example, is

  that it illustrates that the only messages received through the SUB socket, are the
  ones the client had subscribed to.

    Finally, the pipeline pattern is characterized by the fact that a process
wants to push out its results, assuming that there are other processes that want
to pull in those results. The essence of the pipeline pattern is that a pushing
process does not really care which other process pulls in its results: the first
available one will do just fine. Likewise, any process pulling in results from
multiple other processes will do so from the first pushing process making its
results available. The intention of the pipeline pattern is thus seen to keep as
many processes working as possible, pushing results through a pipeline of
processes as quickly as possible.

  Note 4.11 (Example: The pipeline pattern)
  As our last example, consider the following template for keeping a collection
  of worker tasks busy. Figure 4.23 shows the code for a so-called farmer task: a
  process producing tasks to be picked up by others. In this example, we simulate
  the task by letting the producer pick a random number modeling the duration,
  or load, of the work to be done. This workload is then sent to the PUSH socket,
  effectively being queued until another process picks it up.

    1   def producer():
    2     context = zmq.Context()
    3     socket = context.socket(zmq.PUSH)      # create a push socket
    4     socket.bind("tcp://127.0.0.1:12345")   # bind socket to address
    5
    6    while True:
    7      workload = random.randint(1, 100)     # compute workload
    8      socket.send(pickle.dumps(workload))   # send workload to worker
    9      time.sleep(workload/NWORKERS)         # balance production by waiting
   10
   11   def worker(id):
   12     context = zmq.Context()
   13     socket = context.socket(zmq.PULL)       # create a pull socket
   14     socket.connect("tcp://localhost:12345") # connect to the producer
   15
   16    while True:
   17      work = pickle.loads(socket.recv())     # receive work from a source
   18      time.sleep(work)                       # pretend to work

Figure 4.23: A producer-worker pattern.

      Such other processes are known as worker tasks, of which a sketch is also
  given in Figure 4.23. A worker task connects to a single PULL socket. Once it picks
  up some work, it simulates that it is actually doing something by sleeping for
  some time proportional to the received workload.

      The semantics of this push-pull pattern is such that the first available worker
  will pick up work from the producer, and likewise, if there are multiple workers
  ready to pick up work, each one of them will be provided with a task. How work
  distribution is actually done fairly requires some specific attention, which we will
  not discuss further here.

The Message-Passing Interface (MPI)
With the advent of high-performance multicomputers, developers have been
looking for message-oriented operations that would allow them to easily write
highly efficient applications. This means that the operations should be at a
convenient level of abstraction (to ease application development), and that
their implementation incurs only minimal overhead. Sockets were deemed
insufficient for two reasons. First, they were at the wrong level of abstraction
by supporting only simple send and receive operations. Second, sockets
had been designed to communicate across networks using general-purpose
protocol stacks such as TCP/IP. They were not considered suitable for the
proprietary protocols developed for high-speed interconnection networks,
such as those used in high-performance server clusters. Those protocols
required an interface that could handle more advanced features, such as
different forms of buffering and synchronization.
    The result was that most interconnection networks and high-performance
multicomputers were shipped with proprietary communication libraries.
These libraries offered a wealth of high-level and generally efficient com-
munication operations. Of course, all libraries were mutually incompatible, so
that application developers now had a portability problem.
    The need to be hardware and platform independent eventually lead to
the definition of a standard for message passing, simply called the Message-
Passing Interface or MPI. MPI is designed for parallel applications and
as such is tailored to transient communication. It makes direct use of the
underlying network. Furthermore, it assumes that serious failures such as
process crashes or network partitions are fatal and do not require automatic
recovery.
    MPI assumes communication takes place within a known group of pro-
cesses. Each group is assigned an identifier. Each process within a group is
also assigned a (local) identifier. A (groupID, processID) pair therefore uniquely
identifies the source or destination of a message, and is used instead of a
transport-level address. There may be several, possibly overlapping, groups
of processes involved in a computation and that are all executing at the same
time.
    At the core of MPI are messaging operations to support transient com-
munication, of which the most intuitive ones are summarized in Figure 4.25.
To understand their semantics, it helps to keep Figure 4.4 in mind, with the

middleware formed entirely by an MPI implementation. In particular, the
middleware maintains its own buffers and synchronization is often related to
when the necessary data has been copied from the calling application to the
middleware.

    Operation       Description
    MPI_BSEND       Append outgoing message to a local send buffer
    MPI_SEND        Send a message and wait until copied to local or remote
                    buffer
    MPI_SSEND       Send a message and wait until transmission starts
    MPI_SENDRECV    Send a message and wait for reply
    MPI_ISEND       Pass reference to outgoing message, and continue
    MPI_ISSEND      Pass reference to outgoing message, and wait until receipt
                    starts
    MPI_RECV        Receive a message; block if there is none
    MPI_IRECV       Check if there is an incoming message, but do not block

Figure 4.24: Some of the more intuitive message-passing operations of MPI.

    Transient asynchronous communication is supported by the MPI_BSEND
operation. The sender submits a message for transmission, which is generally
first copied to a local buffer in the MPI runtime system. When the message
has been copied, the sender continues. The local MPI runtime system will
remove the message from its local buffer and take care of transmission as soon
as a receiver has called a receive operation.
    There is also a blocking send operation, called MPI_SEND, of which the
semantics are implementation dependent. The operation MPI_SEND may either
block the caller until the specified message has been copied to the MPI
runtime system at the sender’s side, or until the receiver has initiated a receive
operation. Synchronous communication by which the sender blocks until its
request is accepted for further processing is available through the MPI_SSEND
operation. Finally, the strongest form of synchronous communication is also
supported: when a sender calls MPI_SENDRECV, it sends a request to the receiver
and blocks until the latter returns a reply. Basically, this operation corresponds
to a normal RPC.
    Both MPI_SEND and MPI_SSEND have variants that avoid copying messages
from user buffers to buffers internal to the local MPI runtime system. These
variants essentially correspond to a form of asynchronous communication.
With MPI_ISEND, a sender passes a pointer to the message, after which the MPI
runtime system takes care of communication. The sender immediately contin-
ues. To prevent overwriting the message before communication completes,
MPI offers operations to check for completion, or even to block if required.
As with MPI_SEND, whether the message has actually been transferred to the
receiver or that it has merely been copied by the local MPI runtime system to
an internal buffer is left unspecified.

    Likewise, with MPI_ISSEND, a sender also passes only a pointer to the MPI
runtime system. When the runtime system indicates it has processed the
message, the sender is then guaranteed that the receiver has accepted the
message and is now working on it.
    The operation MPI_RECV is called to receive a message; it blocks the
caller until a message arrives. There is also an asynchronous variant, called
MPI_IRECV, by which a receiver indicates that it is prepared to accept a mes-
sage. The receiver can check whether a message has indeed arrived, or block
until one does.
    The semantics of MPI communication operations are not always straight-
forward, and different operations can sometimes be interchanged without
affecting the correctness of a program. The official reason why so many differ-
ent forms of communication are supported is that it gives implementers of
MPI systems enough possibilities for optimizing performance. Cynics might
say the committee could not make up its collective mind, so it threw in every-
thing. By now, MPI is in its fourth version with over 650 operations available.
Being designed for high-performance parallel applications, it is perhaps easier
to understand its diversity. More on MPI can be found in [Gropp et al., 2016].
The complete MPI-4 reference can be found in [Message Passing Interface
Forum, 2021].

4.3.3      Message-oriented persistent communication
We now come to an important class of message-oriented middleware services,
generally known as message-queuing systems, or just message-oriented
middleware (MOM). Message-queuing systems provide extensive support for
persistent asynchronous communication. The essence of these systems is that
they offer intermediate-term storage capacity for messages, without requiring
either the sender or receiver to be active during message transmission. An
important difference with sockets and MPI is that message-queuing systems
are typically targeted to support message transfers that are allowed to take
minutes instead of seconds or milliseconds.

Message-queuing model
The basic idea behind a message-queuing system is that applications commu-
nicate by inserting messages in specific queues. These messages are forwarded
over a series of communication servers and are eventually delivered to the
destination, even if it was down when the message was sent. In practice, most
communication servers are directly connected to each other. In other words, a
message is generally transferred directly to a destination server. In principle,
each application has its own private queue to which other applications can
send messages. A queue can be read only by its associated application, but it
is also possible for multiple applications to share a single queue.

    An important aspect of message-queuing systems is that a sender is gen-
erally given only the guarantees that its message will eventually be inserted
in the recipient’s queue. No guarantees are given about when, or even if
the message will actually be read, which is completely determined by the
behavior of the recipient.
    These semantics permit communication to be decoupled in time, as also
discussed in Section 2.1.3. There is thus no need for the receiver to be executing
when a message is being sent to its queue. Likewise, there is no need for the
sender to be executing the moment its message is picked up by the receiver.
The sender and receiver can execute completely independently of each other.
In fact, once a message has been deposited in a queue, it will remain there
until it is removed, irrespective of whether its sender or receiver is executing.
This gives us four combinations regarding the execution mode of the sender
and receiver, as shown in Figure 4.25.

Figure 4.25: Four combinations for loosely coupled communication using
queues.

    In Figure 4.25(a), both the sender and receiver are in execution during
the entire transmission of a message. In Figure 4.25(b), only the sender is in
execution, while the receiver is passive, that is, in a state in which message
delivery is not possible. Nevertheless, the sender can still send messages.
The combination of a passive sender and an active receiver is shown in
Figure 4.25(c). In this case, the receiver can read messages that were sent
to it, but it is not necessary that their respective senders are in execution
as well. Finally, in Figure 4.25(d), we see the situation that the system is
storing (and possibly transmitting) messages even while sender and receiver

are passive. One may argue that only if this last configuration is supported,
the message-queuing system truly provides persistent messaging.
    Messages can, in principle, contain any data. The only important aspect
from the perspective of middleware is that messages are properly addressed.
In practice, addressing is done by providing a systemwide unique name of the
destination queue. In some cases, message size may be limited, although it is
also possible that the underlying system takes care of fragmenting and assem-
bling large messages in a way that is completely transparent to applications.
An effect of this approach is that the basic interface offered to applications
can be simple, as shown in Figure 4.26.

       Operation   Description
       PUT         Append a message to a specified queue
       GET         Block until the specified queue is nonempty, and remove the
                   first message
       POLL        Check a specified queue for messages, and remove the first.
                   Never block
       NOTIFY      Install a handler to be called when a message is put into the
                   specified queue

Figure 4.26: Basic interface to a queue in a message-queuing system.

    The PUT operation is called by a sender to pass a message to the underlying
system that is to be appended to the specified queue. As we explained, this is a
nonblocking call. The GET operation is a blocking call by which an authorized
process can remove the longest pending message in the specified queue. The
process is blocked only if the queue is empty. Variations on this call allow
searching for a specific message in the queue, for example, using a priority, or
a matching pattern. The nonblocking variant is given by the POLL operation.
If the queue is empty, or if a specific message could not be found, the calling
process simply continues.
    Finally, most queuing systems also allow a process to install a handler
as a callback function, which is automatically invoked whenever a message
is put into the queue. Arranging this scheme is handled through a NOTIFY
operation. Callbacks can also be used to automatically start a process that
will fetch messages from the queue if no process is currently in execution.
This approach is often implemented through a daemon on the receiver’s side
that continuously monitors the queue for incoming messages and handles
accordingly.

General architecture of a message-queuing system
Let us now take a closer look at what a general message-queuing system looks
like. First, queues are managed by queue managers. A queue manager is
either a separate process, or is implemented through a library that is linked

with an application. Secondly, as a rule of thumb, an application can put
messages only into a local queue. Likewise, getting a message is possible by
extracting it from a local queue only. As a consequence, if a queue manager
QMA handling the queues for an application A runs as a separate process,
both processes QMA and A will generally be placed on the same machine, or
at worst on the same LAN. Also note that if all queue managers are linked
into their respective applications, we can no longer speak of a persistent
asynchronous messaging system.
    If applications can put messages only into local queues, then clearly each
message will have to carry information concerning its destination. It is the
queue manager’s task to make sure that a message reaches its destination.
This brings us to several issues.
    In the first place, we need to consider how the destination queue is ad-
dressed. Obviously, to enhance location transparency, it is preferable that
queues have logical, location-independent names. Assuming that a queue man-
ager is implemented as a separate process, using logical names implies that
each name should be associated with a contact address, such as a (host,port)-
pair, and that the name-to-address mapping is readily available to a queue
manager, as shown in Figure 4.27. In practice, a contact address carries more
information, notably the protocol to be used, such as TCP or UDP. We came
across such contact addresses in our examples of advanced sockets in, for
example, Note 4.9.

Figure 4.27: The relationship between queue-level naming and network-level
addressing.

    A second issue that we need to consider is how the name-to-address
mapping is actually made available to a queue manager. A common approach
is to simply implement the mapping as a lookup table and copy that table
to all managers. Obviously, this leads to a maintenance problem, for every
time that a new queue is added or named, many, if not all tables, need to be
updated. There are various ways to alleviate such problems, which we will
discuss in Chapter 6.

    This brings us to a third issue, related to the problems of efficiently
maintaining name-to-address mappings. We have implicitly assumed that if a
destination queue at manager QMB is known to queue manager QMA , then
QMA can directly contact QMB to transfer messages. In effect, this means that
(the contact address of) each queue manager should be known to all others.
Obviously, when dealing with large message-queuing systems, we will have a
scalability problem. In practice, there are often special queue managers that
operate as routers: they forward incoming messages to other queue managers.
In this way, a message-queuing system may gradually grow into a complete,
application-level, overlay network.
    If only a few routers need to know about the network topology, then a
source queue manager need only to know to which adjacent router, say R, it
should forward a message, given a destination queue. The router R, in turn,
may need to keep track only of its adjacent routers to see where to forward
the message to, and so on. Of course, we still need to have name-to-address
mappings for all queue managers, including the routers, but it is not difficult
to imagine that such tables can be much smaller and easier to maintain.

Message brokers
An important application area of message-queuing systems is integrating
existing and new applications into a single, coherent distributed information
system. If we assume that communication with an application takes place
through messages, then integration requires that applications can understand
the messages they receive. In practice, this requires the sender to have its
outgoing messages in the same format as that of the receiver, but also that
its messages adhere to the same semantics as those expected by the receiver.
Sender and receiver essentially need to speak the same language, that is,
adhere to the same messaging protocol.
    The problem with this approach is that each time an application A is
added to the system having its own messaging protocol, then for each other
application B that is to communicate with A we will need to provide the means
for converting their respective messages. In a system with N applications, we
will thus need N × N messaging-protocol converters.
    An alternative is to agree on a common messaging protocol, as is done
with traditional network protocols. Unfortunately, this approach will generally
not work for message-queuing systems. The problem is the level of abstraction
at which these systems operate. A common messaging protocol makes sense
only if the collection of processes that make use of that protocol indeed
have enough in common. If the collection of applications that make up a
distributed information system is highly diverse (which it often is), then
inventing a one-size-fits-all solution is simply not going to work.
    If we focus only on the format and meaning of messages, commonality can
be achieved by lifting the level of abstraction, as is done with XML messages.

In this case, messages carry information on their own organization, and what
has been standardized is the way that they can describe their content. As a
consequence, an application can provide information on the organization of
its messages that can be automatically processed. Of course, this information
is generally not enough: we also need to make sure that the semantics of
messages are well understood.
    Given these problems, the general approach is to learn to live with differ-
ences, and try to provide the means to make conversions as simple as possible.
In message-queuing systems, conversions are handled by special nodes in a
queuing network, known as message brokers. A message broker acts as an
application-level gateway in a message-queuing system. Its main purpose is to
convert incoming messages so that they can be understood by the destination
application. Note that to a message-queuing system, a message broker is just
another application, as shown in Figure 4.28. In other words, a message broker
is generally not considered to be an integral part of the queuing system.

Figure 4.28: The general organization of a message broker in a message-
queuing system.

   A message broker can be as simple as a reformatter for messages. For
example, assume an incoming message contains a table from a database in
which records are separated by a special end-of-record delimiter and fields
within a record have a known, fixed length. If the destination application
expects a different delimiter between records, and also expects that fields have
variable lengths, a message broker can be used to convert messages to the
format expected by the destination.
   In a more advanced setting, a message broker may act as an application-
level gateway, in which information on the messaging protocol of several
applications has been encoded. In general, for each pair of applications, we
will have a separate subprogram capable of converting messages between the
two applications. In Figure 4.28, this subprogram is drawn as a plugin to
emphasize that such parts can be dynamically plugged in, or removed from a
broker.

    Finally, note that often a message broker is used for advanced enterprise
application integration (EAI), as we discussed in Section 1.3.2. In this case,
rather than (only) converting messages, a broker is responsible for matching
applications based on the messages that are being exchanged. In such a
publish-subscribe model, applications send messages in the form of publishing.
In particular, they may publish a message on topic X, which is then sent to the
broker. Applications that have stated their interest in messages on topic X, that
is, who have subscribed to those messages, will then receive these messages
from the broker. More advanced forms of mediation are also possible.
    At the heart of a message broker lies a repository of rules for transforming
a message of one type to another. The problem is defining the rules and
developing the plugins. Most message-broker products come with sophisti-
cated development tools, but the bottom line is still that the repository needs
to be filled by experts. Here we see a perfect example where commercial
products are often misleadingly said to provide “intelligence,” where, in fact,
the intelligence is to be found only in the heads of those experts. It may be
better to consistently talk about “advanced” systems (but even then, we often
see that this stands for complex or complicated).

  Note 4.12 (More information: A note on message-queuing systems)
  Considering what we have said about message-queuing systems, it would appear
  that they have long existed in the form of implementations for e-mail services.
  E-mail systems are generally implemented through a collection of mail servers
  that store and forward messages on behalf of the users on hosts directly connected
  to the server. Routing is generally left out, as e-mail systems can make direct use
  of the underlying transport services. For example, in the mail protocol for the
  Internet, SMTP [Postel, 1982], a message is transferred by setting up a direct TCP
  connection to the destination mail server.
       What makes e-mail systems special compared to message-queuing systems
  is that they are primarily aimed at providing direct support for end users. This
  explains, for example, why several groupware applications are based directly
  on an e-mail system [Khoshafian and Buckiewicz, 1995]. In addition, e-mail
  systems may have very specific requirements such as automatic message filtering,
  support for advanced messaging databases (e.g., to easily retrieve previously
  stored messages), and so on.
       General message-queuing systems are not aimed at supporting only end users.
  An important issue is that they are set up to enable persistent communication
  between processes, regardless of whether a process is running a user application,
  handling access to a database, performing computations, and so on. This approach
  leads to a different set of requirements for message-queuing systems than pure e-
  mail systems. For example, e-mail systems generally need not provide guaranteed
  message delivery, message priorities, logging facilities, efficient multicasting, load
  balancing, fault tolerance, and so on for general usage.
       General-purpose message-queuing systems, therefore, have a wide range

  of applications, including e-mail, workflow, groupware, and batch processing.
  However, as we have stated before, the most important application area is the in-
  tegration of a (possibly widely dispersed) collection of databases and applications
  into a federated information system [Hohpe and Woolf, 2004]. For example, a
  query expanding several databases may need to be split into subqueries that are
  forwarded to individual databases. Message-queuing systems assist by providing
  the basic means to package each subquery into a message and routing it to the
  appropriate database. Other communication facilities we have discussed in this
  chapter are far less appropriate.

4.3.4    Example: Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP)
An interesting observation about message-queuing systems is that they have
been developed in part to allow legacy applications to interoperate, yet at
the same time we see that when it comes to operations between different
message-queuing systems, we often hit a wall. As a consequence, once an
organization chooses to use a message-queuing system from manufacturer X,
they may have to settle for solutions that only X provides. Message-queuing
solutions are thus in large part proprietary solutions. So much for openness.
   In 2006, a working group was formed to change this situation, which
resulted in the specification of the Advanced Message-Queuing Protocol,
or simply AMQP. There are different versions of AMQP, with version 1.0
being the most recent one. There are also various implementations of AMQP,
notably of versions before 1.0, which by the time version 1.0 was established,
had gained considerable popularity. Because a pre-1.0 version is so different
from the 1.0 version, yet has also a steady user base, we may see various
pre-1.0 AMQP servers exist next to (their undeniably incompatible) 1.0 servers.
   In this section, we will describe AMQP, but will more or less deliberately
mix the pre-1.0 and 1.0 versions, sticking to the essentials and spirit of AMQP.
Details can be found in the specifications [AMQP Working Group, 2008;
OASIS, 2012]. Implementations of AMQP include RabbitMQ [Roy, 2018] and
Apache’s ActiveMQ.

Basics

AMQP revolves around applications, queue managers, and queues. Taking
an approach that is common for many networking situations, we make a
distinction between AMQP as a messaging service, the actual messaging protocol,
and, finally, the messaging interface as offered to applications. To this end,
it is easiest to consider having only a single queue manager, running as a
single, separate server, forming the implementation of AMQP as a service. An
application communicates with this queue manager through a local interface.

Figure 4.29: An overview of a single-server AMQP instance.

Between an application and the queue manager, communication proceeds
according to the AMQP protocol.
   This situation is shown in Figure 4.29 and should look familiar. The AMQP
stub shields the application (as well as the queue manager) from the details
concerning message transfer and communication in general. At the same
time, it implements a message-queuing interface, allowing the application to
make use of AMQP as a message-queuing service. Although the distinction
between AMQP stub and queue manager is made explicit for queue managers,
the strictness of the separation is left to an implementation. Nevertheless, if
not strict, conceptually there is a distinction between handling queues and
handling related communication as we shall make clear shortly.

AMQP communication
AMQP allows an application to set up a connection to a queue manager; a
connection is a container for a number of one-way channels. Whereas the
lifetime of a channel can be highly dynamic, connections are assumed to
be relatively stable. This difference between connection and channel allows
for efficient implementations, notably by using a single transport-layer TCP
connection to multiplex many different channels between an application and
a queue manager. In practice, AMQP assumes TCP is used for establishing
AMQP connections.
    Bidirectional communication is established through sessions: a logical
grouping of two channels. A connection may have multiple sessions, but note
that a channel need not necessarily be part of a session.
    Finally, to actually transfer messages, a link is needed. Conceptually, a
link, or rather its end points, keep track of the status of messages that are
being transferred. It thus provides fine-grained flow control between an
application and a queue manager, and, indeed, different control policies can
be put simultaneously in place for different messages that are transferred

through the same session or connection. Flow control is established through
credits: a receiver can tell the sender how many messages it is allowed to send
over a specific link.
   When a message is to be transferred, the application passes it to its local
AMQP stub. As mentioned, each message transfer is associated with one
specific link. Message transfer normally proceeds in three steps.

   1. At the sender’s side, the message is assigned a unique identifier and
      is recorded locally to be in an unsettled state. The stub subsequently
      transfers the message to the server, where the AMQP stub also records it
      as being in an unsettled state. At that point, the server-side stub passes
      it to the queue manager.
   2. The receiving application (in this case the queue manager), is assumed
      to handle the message and normally reports back to its stub that it is
      finished. The stub passes this information to the original sender, at
      which point the message at the original sender’s AMQP stub enters a
      settled state.
   3. The AMQP stub of the original sender now tells the stub of the original
      receiver that message transfer has been settled (meaning that the original
      sender will forget about the message from now on). The receiver’s stub
      can now also discard anything about the message, formally recording it
      as being settled as well.

Note that because the receiving application can indicate to the underlying
AMQP communication layer that it is done with a message, AMQP enables
true end-to-end communication reliability. In particular, the application, be
it a client application or an actual queue manager, can instruct the AMQP
communication layer to keep hold of a message (i.e., a message stays in the
unsettled state).

AMQP messaging
Messaging in AMQP logically takes place at the layer above the one handling
communication. It is here that an application can indicate what needs to be
done with a message, but can also see what has happened so far. Messaging
formally takes place between two nodes, of which there are three types: a
producer, a consumer, or a queue. Typically, producer and consumer nodes
represent regular applications, whereas queues are used to store and forward
messages. Indeed, a queue manager will typically consist of multiple queue
nodes. In order for message transfer to take place, two nodes will have to
establish a link between them.
    The receiver can indicate to the sender whether its message was accepted
(meaning that it was successfully processed), or rejected. Note that this
means that a notification is returned to the original sender. AMQP also

  1   import rabbitpy
  2
  3   def producer():
  4     connection = rabbitpy.Connection() # Connect to RabbitMQ server
  5     channel = connection.channel()     # Create new channel on the connection
  6
  7    exchange = rabbitpy.Exchange(channel, ’exchange’) # Create an exchange
  8    exchange.declare()
  9
 10    queue1 = rabbitpy.Queue(channel, ’example1’) # Create 1st queue
 11    queue1.declare()
 12
 13    queue2 = rabbitpy.Queue(channel, ’example2’) # Create 2nd queue
 14    queue2.declare()
 15
 16    queue1.bind(exchange, ’example-key’) # Bind queue1 to a single key
 17    queue2.bind(exchange, ’example-key’) # Bind queue2 to the same key
 18
 19    message = rabbitpy.Message(channel, ’Test message’)
 20    message.publish(exchange, ’example-key’) # Publish the message using the key
 21    exchange.delete()

                                               (a)
  1   import rabbitpy
  2
  3   def consumer():
  4     connection = rabbitpy.Connection()
  5     channel = connection.channel()
  6
  7    queue = rabbitpy.Queue(channel, ’example1’)
  8
  9    # While there are messages in the queue, fetch them using Basic.Get
 10    while len(queue) > 0:
 11      message = queue.get()
 12      print(’Message Q1: %s’ % message.body.decode())
 13      message.ack()
 14
 15    queue = rabbitpy.Queue(channel, ’example2’)
 16
 17    while len(queue) > 0:
 18      message = queue.get()
 19      print(’Message Q2: %s’ % message.body.decode())
 20      message.ack()

                                               (b)

Figure 4.30: A simple (a) producer and (b) consumer for RabbitMQ, adapted
from [Roy, 2018].

supports fragmentation and assembly of large messages, for which additional
notifications are sent.
    Of course, an important aspect of AMQP is its support for persistent
messaging. Achieving persistence is handled through several mechanisms.
First, a message can be marked as durable, indicating that the source expects
any intermediate node, such as a queue, to be able to recover in the case
of a failure. An intermediate node that cannot guarantee such durability
will have to reject a message. Second, a source or target node can also
indicate its durability: if durable, will it maintain its state, or will it also
maintain the (unsettled) state of durable messages? Combining the latter
with durable messages effectively establishes reliable message transfer and
persistent messaging.
    AMQP is truly a messaging protocol in the sense that it does not by itself
support, for example, publish-subscribe primitives. It expects that such issues
are handled by more advanced, proprietary queue managers, akin to the
message brokers discussed in Section 4.3.3.
    Finally, there is no reason why a queue manager cannot be connected to
another queue manager. In fact, it is quite common to organize queue man-
agers into an overlay network in which messages are routed from producers to
their consumers. AMQP does not specify how the overlay network should be
constructed and managed, and, indeed, different providers of AMQP-based
systems offer different solutions. Of particular importance is specifying how
messages should be routed through the network. The bottom line is that ad-
ministrators will need to do a lot of this specification manually. Only in cases
where overlays have regular structures, such as cycles or trees, it becomes
easier to provide the necessary routing details.

AMQP in practice
One of the more popular implementations of message brokering is the Rab-
bitMQ server, extensively described by Roy [2018]. The RabbitMQ server is
based on the 0.9 version of AMQP, while also fully supporting version 1.0. An
important difference between these two versions is the use of exchanges. In-
stead of directly manipulating queues, producers contact an exchange, which,
in turn, places messages in one or several queues. In essence, an exchange
allows a producer to use a synchronous or asynchronous RPC to a queue
manager. An exchange never stores messages; it simply makes sure that a
message is placed in an appropriate queue.
    To illustrate this concept, consider Figure 4.30(a) showing a simple pro-
ducer. As mentioned previously, AMQP embeds channels as part of more
durable connections, and the first we do is create a means for communicating
with the server (we are omitting various details; in this case we establish a
default connection with the server). In the following lines, an exchange is
created within the realm of the server, along with two queues. In Lines 16

and 17, both queues are bound to the same exchange by a simple key named
example-key. After creating a message, the producer tells the exchange that it
should publish that message to any queue bound by the specified key.
    As to be expected, the exchange will place the message in both queues,
which is verified by the simple consumer shown in Figure 4.30(b). In this case,
the consumer simply fetches messages from either queue and prints their
content.
    Exchanges and queues have many options, for which we refer the inter-
ested reader to Roy [2018]. It is important to note that using systems such
as RabbitMQ, but also other messaging brokers, one can generally set up
advanced overlay networks for application-level message routing. At the same
time, maintenance of those networks can easily become a nightmare.

4.4     Multicast communication
An important topic in communication in distributed systems is the support for
sending data to multiple receivers, also known as multicast communication.
For many years, this topic has belonged to the domain of network protocols,
where numerous proposals for network-level and transport-level solutions
have been implemented and evaluated [Janic, 2005; Obraczka, 1998]. A major
issue in all solutions was setting up the communication paths for information
dissemination. In practice, this involved a huge management effort, often
requiring human intervention. In addition, as long as there is no convergence
of proposals, ISPs have shown to be reluctant to support multicasting [Diot
et al., 2000].
    With the advent of peer-to-peer technology, and notably structured overlay
management, it became easier to set up communication paths. As peer-to-peer
solutions are typically deployed at the application layer, various application-
level multicasting techniques have been introduced. In this section, we will
take a brief look at these techniques.
    Multicast communication can also be accomplished in other ways than
setting up explicit communication paths. As we also explore in this sec-
tion, gossip-based information dissemination provides simple (yet often less
efficient) ways for multicasting.

4.4.1      Application-level tree-based multicasting
The basic idea in application-level multicasting is that nodes are organized
into an overlay network, which is then used to disseminate information to its
members. An important observation is that network routers are not involved
in group membership. As a consequence, the connections between nodes in
the overlay network may cross several physical links, and as such, routing
messages within the overlay may not be optimal in comparison to what could
have been achieved by network-level routing.

    A crucial design issue is the construction of the overlay network. In
essence, there are two approaches [El-Sayed et al., 2003; Hosseini et al., 2007;
Allani et al., 2009]. First, nodes may organize themselves directly into a tree,
meaning that there is a unique (overlay) path between every pair of nodes.
An alternative approach is that nodes organize into a mesh network in which
every node will have multiple neighbors and, in general, there exist multiple
paths between every pair of nodes. The main difference between the two is
that the latter generally provides higher robustness: if a connection breaks
(e.g., because a node fails), there will still be an opportunity to disseminate
information without having to immediately reorganize the entire network.

  Note 4.13 (Advanced: Constructing a multicast tree in Chord)
  To make matters concrete, let us consider a relatively simple scheme for construct-
  ing a multicast tree in Chord, which we described in Note 2.6. This scheme was
  originally proposed for Scribe [Castro et al., 2002b] which is an application-level
  multicasting scheme built on top of Pastry [Rowstron and Druschel, 2001]. The
  latter is also a DHT-based peer-to-peer system.
       Assume a node wants to start a multicast session. To this end, it simply
  generates a multicast identifier, say, mid which is just a randomly chosen 160-bit
  key. It then looks up succ(mid), which is the node responsible for that key, and
  promotes it to become the root of the multicast tree that will be used for sending
  data to interested nodes. To join the tree, a node P simply executes the operation
  lookup(mid) having the effect that a lookup message with the request to join the
  multicast group mid will be routed from P to succ(mid). The routing algorithm
  itself will be explained in detail in Chapter 6.
       On its way toward the root, the join request will pass several nodes. Assume
  it first reaches node Q. If Q had never seen a join request for mid before, it will
  become a forwarder for that group. At that point, P will become a child of Q
  whereas the latter will continue to forward the join request to the root. If the next
  node on the root, say, R is also not yet a forwarder, it will become one and record
  Q as its child and continue to send the join request.
       On the other hand, if Q (or R) is already a forwarder for mid, it will also record
  the previous sender as its child (i.e., P or Q, respectively), but there will not be a
  need to send the join request to the root anymore, as Q (or R) will already be a
  member of the multicast tree.
       Nodes such as P that have explicitly requested to join the multicast tree are, by
  definition, also forwarders. The result of this scheme is that we construct a multi-
  cast tree across the overlay network with two types of nodes: pure forwarders that
  act as helpers, and nodes that are also forwarders, but have explicitly requested
  to join the tree. Multicasting is now simple: a node merely sends a multicast
  message toward the root of the tree by again executing the lookup(mid) operation,
  after which that message can be sent along the tree.
       We note that this high-level description of multicasting in Scribe does not do
  complete justice to its original design. The interested reader is encouraged to take
  a look at the details, which can be found in [Castro et al., 2002b].

Performance issues in overlays

From the high-level description given above, it should be clear that although
building a tree by itself is not that difficult once we have organized the nodes
into an overlay, building an efficient tree may be a different story. Note that
in our description so far, the selection of nodes that participate in the tree
does not take into account any performance metrics: it is purely based on the
(logical) routing of messages through the overlay.
    To understand the problem at hand, take a look at Figure 4.31 which
shows a small set of five nodes that are organized in a simple overlay network,
with the node A forming the root of a multicast tree. The costs for traversing
a physical link are also shown. Now, whenever A multicasts a message to
the other nodes, the logical route, i.e., at the level of the overlay, is simply
A → B → E → D → C. The actual route crosses the network-level links in the
following order: A → Ra → Rb → B → Rb → Ra → Re → E → Re → Rc →
Rd → D → Rd → Rc → C. It is thus seen that this message will traverse each
of the links ⟨B, Rb⟩, ⟨Ra, Rb⟩, ⟨E, Re⟩, ⟨Rc, Rd⟩, and ⟨D, Rd⟩ twice. The overlay
network would have been more efficient if we had not constructed overlay links
⟨B, E⟩, and ⟨D, E⟩, but instead ⟨A, E⟩ and ⟨C, E⟩. Such a configuration would
have saved the double traversal across physical links ⟨Ra, Rb⟩ and ⟨Rc, Rd⟩.

Figure 4.31: The relation between links in an overlay and network-level routes.

    The quality of an application-level multicast tree is generally measured
by three different metrics: link stress, stretch, and tree cost. Link stress is
defined per link and counts how often a packet crosses the same link [Chu
et al., 2002]. A link stress greater than 1 comes from the fact that although at a
logical level a packet may be forwarded along two different connections, part
of those connections may actually correspond to the same physical link, as we
showed in Figure 4.31.
    The stretch or relative delay penalty (RDP) measures the ratio of the
delay between two nodes in the overlay, and the delay that those two nodes
would experience in the underlying network. For example, messages from

B to C follow the route B → Rb → Ra → Re → E → Re → Rc → Rd →
D → Rd → Rc → C in the overlay network, having a total cost of 73 units.
However, messages would have been routed in the underlying network along
the path B → Rb → Rd → Rc → C, with a total cost of 47 units, leading to a
stretch of 1.55. Obviously, when constructing an overlay network, the goal is
to minimize the aggregated stretch, or similarly, the average RDP measured
over all node pairs.
    Finally, the tree cost is a global metric, generally related to minimizing
the aggregated link costs. For example, if the cost of a link is taken to be the
delay between its two end nodes, then optimizing the tree cost boils down
to finding a minimal spanning tree in which the total time for disseminating
information to all nodes is minimal.
    To simplify matters somewhat, assume that a multicast group has an
associated and well-known node that keeps track of the nodes that have joined
the tree. When a new node issues a join request, it contacts this rendezvous
node to obtain a (potentially partial) list of members. The goal is to select
the best member that can operate as the new node’s parent in the tree. Who
should it select? There are many alternatives, and different proposals often
follow very different solutions.
    Consider, for example, a multicast group with only a single source. In
this case, the selection of the best node is obvious: it should be the source
(because in that case, we can be assured that the stretch will be equal to 1).
However, in doing so, we would introduce a star topology with the source
in the middle. Although simple, it is not difficult to imagine the source may
easily become overloaded. In other words, selection of a node will generally
be constrained in such a way that only those nodes may be chosen who
have k or fewer neighbors, with k being a design parameter. This constraint
severely complicates the tree-establishment algorithm, as a suitable solution
may require that part of the existing tree is reconfigured. Tan et al. [2003]
provide an extensive overview and evaluation of various solutions to this
problem.

  Note 4.14 (Advanced: Switch-trees)
  As an illustration, let us take a closer look at one specific family, known as switch-
  trees [Helder and Jamin, 2002]. The basic idea is simple. Assume we already have
  a multicast tree with a single source as root. In this tree, a node P can switch
  parents by dropping the link to its current parent in favor of a link to another
  node. The only constraints imposed on switching links is that the new parent can
  never be a member of the subtree rooted at P (as this would partition the tree
  and create a loop), and that the new parent will not have too many immediate
  children. This last requirement is needed to limit the load of forwarding messages
  by any single node.
      There are different criteria for deciding to switch parents. A simple one is to

  optimize the route to the source, effectively minimizing the delay when a message
  is to be multicasted. To this end, each node regularly receives information on
  other nodes (we will explain one specific way of doing this below). At that point,
  the node can evaluate whether another node would be a better parent in terms of
  delay along the route to the source, and if so, initiates a switch.
       Another criterion could be whether the delay to the potential other parent
  is lower than to the current parent. If every node takes this as a criterion, then
  the aggregated delays of the resulting tree should ideally be minimal. In other
  words, this is an example of optimizing the cost of the tree, as we explained
  above. However, more information would be needed to construct such a tree, but
  as it turns out, this simple scheme is a reasonable heuristic leading to a good
  approximation of a minimal spanning tree.
       As an example, consider the case where a node P receives information on
  the neighbors of its parent. Note that the neighbors consist of P’s grandparent,
  along with the other siblings of P’s parent. Node P can then evaluate the delays
  to each of these nodes and subsequently choose the one with the lowest delay,
  say Q, as its new parent. To that end, it sends a switch request to Q. To prevent
  loops from being formed due to concurrent switching requests, a node that has an
  outstanding switch request will simply refuse to process any incoming requests.
  In effect, this leads to a situation where only completely independent switches
  can be carried out simultaneously. Furthermore, P will provide Q with enough
  information to allow the latter to conclude that both nodes have the same parent,
  or that Q is the grandparent.
       An important problem that we have not yet addressed is node failure. In the
  case of switch-trees, a simple solution is proposed: whenever a node notices that
  its parent has failed, it attaches itself to the root. At that point, the optimization
  protocol can proceed as usual and will eventually place the node at a good point
  in the multicast tree. Experiments described in [Helder and Jamin, 2002] show
  that the resulting tree is indeed close to a minimal spanning one.

4.4.2      Flooding-based multicasting
So far, we have assumed that when a message is to be multicasted, it is to
be received by every node in the overlay network. Strictly speaking, this
corresponds to broadcasting. In general, multicasting refers to sending a
message to a subset of all the nodes, that is, a specific group of nodes. A
key design issue when it comes to multicasting is to minimize the use of
intermediate nodes for which the message is not intended. To make this clear,
if the overlay is organized as a multi-level tree, yet only the leaf nodes are the
ones who should receive a multicast message, then clearly there may be quite
some nodes who need to store and subsequently forward a message that is
not meant for them.
    One simple way to avoid such inefficiency, is to construct an overlay
network per multicast group. As a consequence, multicasting a message m to a

group G is the same as broadcasting m to G. The drawback of this solution is
that a node belonging to several groups, will, in principle, need to maintain a
separate list of its neighbors for each group of which it is a member.
    If we assume that an overlay corresponds to a multicast group, and thus
that we need to broadcast a message, a naive way of doing so is to apply
flooding. In this case, each node simply forwards a message m to each of its
neighbors, except to the one from which it received m. Furthermore, if a node
keeps track of the messages it received and forwarded, it can simply ignore
duplicates.
    To understand the performance of flooding, we model an overlay network
as a connected undirected graph G = (V, E) with nodes V and links E.
Let v0 be the node that initiates flooding. In principle, every node other
node than v0 will send out the message to its neighbors once, except to the
neighbor from which it had received the message. We will thus see a total of
δ(v0 ) + ∑v∈V −v0 (δ(v) − 1) messages, with δ(v) the number of neighbors of
the node v. For any undirected graph, ∑v∈V δ(v) = 2 · | E|, with | E| denoting
the total number of edges. In other words, we will see 2| E| − |V | + 1 messages
being sent, making flooding quite inefficient. Only if G is a tree, will flooding
be optimal, for in that case, | E| = |V | − 1. In the worst case, when G is fully
connected, we have | E| = (|V2 |) leading to an order of |V |2 messages.
    Suppose now that we have no information on the structure of the overlay
network and that the best we can assume is that it can be represented as
a random graph, which (to keep it simple) is a graph having a probability
pedge that two vertices are joined by an edge, also known as an Erdös-Rényi
graph [Erdös and Rényi, 1959]. Note that we are actually considering our
overlay network to be an unstructured peer-to-peer network, and that we do
not have any information on how it is being constructed. With a probability
pedge that two nodes are joined, and a total of (|V2 |) edges, it is not difficult to
see that we can expect our overlay to have | E| = 12 · pedge · |V | · (|V | − 1) edges.
To give an impression of what we are dealing with, Figure 4.32 shows the
relationship between the number of nodes and edges for different values of
pedge . As can be seen, the number of edges can easily become large, even for
small values of pedge .
    To reduce the number of messages, we can also use probabilistic flooding
as introduced by Banaei-Kashani and Shahab [2003] and formally analyzed
by Oikonomou and Stavrakakis [2007]. The idea is simple: when a node is
flooding a message m and needs to forward m to a specific neighbor, it will
do so with a probability pflood . The effect can be dramatic: the total number
of messages sent will drop linearly in pflood . However, there is also a risk:
the lower pflood , the higher the chance that not all nodes in the network will
be reached. This risk is caused by the simple fact that all neighbors of a
specific node Q may have decided not to forward m to Q. If Q has n neighbors,
then this can happen roughly with a probability of (1 − pflood )n . Clearly, the

Figure 4.32: The size of a random overlay as function of the number of nodes.

number of neighbors plays an important role in deciding whether to forward a
message, and, indeed, we can replace the static probability of forwarding with
one that takes the degree of the neighbor into account. This has been further
developed and analyzed by Sereno and Gaeta [2011]. To give an idea of the
efficiency of probabilistic broadcasting: in a random network of 10,000 nodes
and pedge = 0.1, we need only set pflood = 0.01 to establish a more than 50-fold
reduction in the number of messages sent in comparison to full flooding.
    When dealing with a structured overlay, that is, one having a more or less
deterministic topology, designing efficient flooding schemes is simpler. As an
example, consider an n-dimensional hypercube, shown in Figure 4.33 for the
case n = 4, as also discussed in Section 2.4.1.

Figure 4.33: A simple peer-to-peer, four-dimensional hypercube.

    A simple and efficient broadcast scheme has been designed by Schlosser
et al. [2002] and relies on keeping track of neighbors per dimension. This is
best explained by considering that every node in an n-dimensional hypercube
is represented by a bit string of length n. Each edge in the overlay is labeled
with its dimension. For the case n = 4, node 0000 will have as its neighbors
the set {0001, 0010, 0100, 1000}. The edge between 0000 and 0001 is labeled

“4” corresponding to changing the 4th bit when comparing 0000 to 0001 and
vice versa. Likewise, the edge ⟨0000, 0100⟩ is labeled “2,” and so forth. A node
initially broadcasts a message m to all of its neighbors, and tags m with the
label of the edge over which it sends the message. In our example, if node
1001 broadcasts a message, it will send the following:

   • (m,1) to 0001
   • (m,2) to 1101
   • (m,3) to 1011
   • (m,4) to 1000

When a node receives a broadcast message, it will forward it only along edges
that have a higher dimension. In other words, in our example, node 1101 will
forward m only to nodes 1111 (joined to 1101 by an edge labeled “3”) and
1100 (joined by an edge with label “4”). Using this scheme, it can be shown
that every broadcast requires precisely N − 1 messages, where N = 2n , that is
the number of nodes in a n-dimensional hypercube. This broadcasting scheme
is therefore optimal in terms of the number of messages sent.

  Note 4.15 (Advanced: Ring-based flooding)

Figure 4.34: A Chord ring in which node 9 broadcasts a message.

      A hypercube is a straightforward example of how we can effectively use
  knowledge of the structure of an overlay network to establish efficient flooding. In
  the case of Chord, we can follow an approach proposed by Ghodsi [2010]. Recall
  that in Chord each node is identified by a number p, and each resource (typically

  a file), is assigned a key k from the same space as used for node identifiers. The
  successor succ(k) of a key k is the node with the smallest identifier p ≥ k. Consider
  the small Chord ring shown in Figure 4.34 and assume that node 9 wants to flood
  a message to all other nodes.
       In our example, node 9 divides the identifier space into four segments (one
  for each of its neighbors). Node 28 is requested to make sure that the message
  reaches all nodes with identifiers 28 ≤ k < 9 (recall that we are applying modulo
  arithmetic); node 18 takes care of nodes with identifiers 18 ≤ k < 28; node 14 for
  14 ≤ k < 18; and 11 for identifiers 11 ≤ k < 14.
       Node 28 will subsequently divide the part of the identifier space it is requested
  to handle into two subsegments: one for its neighboring node 1 and another for 4.
  Likewise, node 18, responsible for segment [18, 28) will “split” that segment into
  only one part: it has only one neighbor to delegate the flood to, and forwards the
  message to node 20, telling it that it should handle segment [20, 28).
       In the last step, only node 20 has work to do. It forwards the message to node
  21, telling it to forward it to nodes known to it in the segment [21, 28). As there
  are no such nodes anymore, the broadcast completes.
       As in the case of our hypercube example, we see that flooding is done with
  N − 1 messages, with N being the number of nodes in the system.

4.4.3      Gossip-based data dissemination
An important technique for disseminating information is to rely on epidemic
behavior, also referred to as gossiping. Observing how diseases spread
among people, researchers have since long investigated whether simple tech-
niques could be developed for spreading information in very large-scale
distributed systems. The main goal of these epidemic protocols is to rapidly
propagate information among a large collection of nodes using only local infor-
mation. In other words, there is no central component by which information
dissemination is coordinated.
    To explain the general principles of these algorithms, we assume that all
updates for a specific data item are initiated at a single node. In this way, we
simply avoid write-write conflicts. The following presentation is based on the
classical paper by Demers et al. [1987] on epidemic algorithms. An overview
of epidemic information dissemination can be found in [Eugster et al., 2004].

Information dissemination models
As the name suggests, epidemic algorithms are based on the theory of epi-
demics, which studies the spreading of infectious diseases. In the case of
large-scale distributed systems, instead of spreading diseases, they spread
information. Research on epidemics for distributed systems also aims at an
entirely different goal: whereas health organizations will do their best to
prevent infectious diseases from spreading across large groups of people,

designers of epidemic algorithms for distributed systems will try to “infect”
all nodes with new information as fast as possible.
    Using the terminology from epidemics, a node that is part of a distributed
system is called infected if it holds data that it is willing to spread to other
nodes. A node that has not yet seen this data is called susceptible. Finally, an
updated node that is not willing or able to spread its data is said to have been
removed. Note that we assume we can distinguish old from new data, for
example because it has been timestamped or versioned. In this light, nodes
are also said to spread updates.
    A popular propagation model is that of anti-entropy. In this model, a
node P picks another node Q at random, and subsequently exchanges updates
with Q. There are three approaches to exchanging updates:

   1. P only pulls in new updates from Q
   2. P only pushes its own updates to Q
   3. P and Q send updates to each other (i.e., a push-pull approach)

    When it comes to rapidly spreading updates, only pushing updates turns
out to be a bad choice. Intuitively, this can be understood as follows. First,
note that in a pure push-based approach, updates can be propagated only by
infected nodes. However, if many nodes are infected, the probability of each
one selecting a susceptible node is relatively small. Consequently, chances are
that a particular node remains susceptible for a long period simply because
an infected node does not select it.
    In contrast, the pull-based approach works much better when many nodes
are infected. In that case, spreading updates is essentially triggered by suscep-
tible nodes. Chances are big that such a node will contact an infected one to
subsequently pull in the updates and become infected as well.
    If only a single node is infected, updates will rapidly spread across all
nodes using either form of anti-entropy, although push-pull remains the best
strategy [Jelasity et al., 2007]. Define a round as spanning a period in which
every node will have taken the initiative once to exchange updates with a
randomly chosen other node. It can then be shown that the number of rounds
to propagate a single update to all nodes is of the order O(log( N )), where N
is the number of nodes in the system. This indicates indeed that propagating
updates is fast, but above all scalable.

  Note 4.16 (Advanced: An analysis of anti-entropy)
  A simple and straightforward analysis will give some idea on how well anti-
  entropy works. Consider a system with N nodes. One of these nodes initiates the
  spreading of a message m to all other nodes. Let pi denote the probability that a
  node P has not yet received m after the ith round. We distinguish the following
  three cases:

      • With a pure pull-based approach, pi+1 = ( pi )2 : not only had P not yet been
        updated in the previous round, also P contacts a node that had not yet
        received m.
      • With a pure push-based approach, pi+1 = pi · (1 − N1−1 ) N (1− pi ) : again, P
        should not have been updated in the previous round, but also none of the
        updated nodes should contact P. The probability that not a single node
        contacts P is 1 − N1−1 ; we can expect that there are N (1 − pi ) updated nodes
        in round i.
      • In a push-pull approach, we can simply combine the two: P should not
        contact an updated node, and should not be contacted by one.

Figure 4.35: (a) The number of nodes that have not been updated as a
      function of the number of dissemination rounds.

Figure 4.35: (b) Zooming in the differences between the three anti-entropy
      approaches when almost all nodes have been updated.

      Figure 4.35(a) shows how quickly the probability of not yet being updated
  drops as a function of the number of rounds in a network of 10,000 nodes. After
  a slow start, the information is rapidly disseminated. In Figure 4.35(b) we have
  zoomed into what happens in the last number of rounds while also using a log
  scale for the y-axis. Indeed, assuming that nodes are up-and-running all the time,

  it turns out that an anti-entropy push-pull strategy can be an extremely effective
  dissemination protocol.

     One specific variant of epidemic protocols is called rumor spreading. It
works as follows. If node P has just been updated for a data item x, it contacts
an arbitrary other node Q and tries to push the update to Q. However, it is
possible that Q was already updated by another node. In that case, P may
lose interest in spreading the update any further, say with probability pstop . In
other words, it then becomes removed.
     Rumor spreading is gossiping as we mostly experience it in real life. When
Bob has some hot news to spread around, he may phone his friend Alice,
telling her all about it. Alice, like Bob, will be really excited to spread the
rumor to her friends as well. However, she will become disappointed when
phoning a friend, say Chuck, only to hear that the news has already reached
him. Chances are that she will stop phoning other friends, for what good is it
if they already know?
     Rumor spreading turns out to be an excellent way of rapidly spreading
news. However, it cannot guarantee that all nodes will actually be updated [De-
mers et al., 1987]. In fact, when there are many nodes that participate in the
epidemics, the fraction s of nodes that will remain ignorant of an update, that
is, remain susceptible, satisfies the equation:

                                s = e−(1/pstop +1)(1−s)
    To get an idea of what this means, take a look at Figure 4.36, which
shows s as a function of pstop . Even for high values of pstop we see that the
fraction of nodes that remains ignorant is relatively low, and always less than
approximately 0.2. For pstop = 0.20 it can be shown that s = 0.0025. However,
in those cases when pstop is relatively high, additional measures will need to
be taken to ensure that all nodes are updated.

  Note 4.17 (Advanced: Analysis of rumor spreading)
  To formally analyze the situation for rumor spreading, we let s denote the fraction
  of nodes that have not yet been updated, i.e., the fraction of susceptible nodes.
  Likewise, let i denote the fraction of infected nodes: the ones that have been
  updated and are still contacting other nodes to spread information. Finally, r
  is the fraction of nodes that have been updated, but have given up, i.e., they
  are passive and no longer play a role in disseminating information. Obviously,
  s + i + r = 1. Using theory from epidemics, it is not difficult to see the following:
                 (1)   ds/dt    =    −s · i
                 (2)   di/dt    =    s · i − pstop · (1 − s) · i
                                                        pstop
                 ⇒     di/ds    =    −(1 + pstop ) + s
                 ⇒     i (s)    =    −(1 + pstop ) · s + pstop · ln(s) + C

Figure 4.36: The relation between the fraction s of update-ignorant nodes and
the probability pstop that a node will stop gossiping once it contacts a node
that has already been updated.

  where we use the notation i (s) to express i as a function of s. When s = 1, no
  nodes have yet been infected, meaning that i (1) = 0. This allows us to derive that
  C = 1 + pstop , and thus

                       i (s) = (1 + pstop ) · (1 − s) + pstop · ln(s)

  We are looking for the situation that there is no more rumor spreading, i.e., when
  i (s) = 0. Having a closed expression for i (s) then leads to
                                       −(1/pstop +1)(1−s)
                                 s=e

    One of the main advantages of epidemic algorithms is their scalability
since the number of synchronizations between processes is relatively small
compared to other propagation methods. For wide-area systems, Lin and
Marzullo [1999] have shown that it makes sense to take the actual network
topology into account to achieve better results. In that case, nodes that are
connected to only a few other nodes are contacted with a relatively high
probability. The underlying assumption is that such nodes form a bridge to
other remote parts of the network; therefore, they should be contacted as soon
as possible. This approach is referred to as directional gossiping and comes
in different variants.
    This problem touches upon an important assumption that most epidemic
solutions make, namely that a node can randomly select any other node to
gossip with. This implies that, in principle, the complete set of nodes should
be known to each member. In a large system, this assumption can never hold,
and special measures will need to be taken to mimic such properties. We
return to this issue in Section 5.5.2 when we discuss a peer-sampling service.

Removing data
Epidemic algorithms are fantastic for spreading updates. However, they have
a rather strange side effect: spreading the deletion of a data item is hard. The
essence of the problem lies in the fact that deletion of a data item destroys all
information on that item. Consequently, when a data item is simply removed
from a node, that node will eventually receive old copies of the data item and
interpret those as updates on something it did not have before.
    The trick is to record the deletion of a data item as just another update, and
keep a record of that deletion. In this way, old copies will not be interpreted
as something new, but merely treated as versions that have been updated by
a delete operation. The recording of a deletion is done by spreading death
certificates.
    Of course, the problem with death certificates is that they should eventually
be cleaned up, or otherwise each node will gradually build a huge local
database of historical information on deleted data items that is otherwise not
used. Demers et al. [1987] propose to use what are called dormant death
certificates. Each death certificate is timestamped when it is created. If it can
be assumed that updates propagate to all nodes within a known finite time,
then death certificates can be removed after this maximum propagation time
has elapsed.
    However, to provide hard guarantees that deletions are indeed spread to
all nodes, only a very few nodes maintain dormant death certificates that are
never thrown away. Assume node P has such a certificate for a data item x.
If by any chance an obsolete update for x reaches P, P will react by simply
spreading the death certificate for x again.

4.5   Summary
Having powerful and flexible facilities for communication between processes
is essential for any distributed system. In traditional network applications,
communication is often based on the low-level message-passing primitives
offered by the transport layer. An important issue in middleware systems
is to offer a higher level of abstraction that will make it easier to express
communication between processes than the support offered by the interface
to the transport layer.
    One of the most widely used abstractions is the Remote Procedure Call
(RPC). The essence of an RPC is that a service is implemented through a
procedure, of which the body is executed at a server. The client is offered
only the signature of the procedure, that is, the procedure’s name along
with its parameters. When the client calls the procedure, the client-side
implementation, called a stub, takes care of wrapping the parameter values
into a message and sending that to the server. The latter calls the actual
procedure and returns the results, again in a message. The client’s stub

extracts the result values from the return message and passes it back to the
calling client application.
    RPCs offer synchronous communication facilities, by which a client is
blocked until the server has sent a reply. Although variations of either
mechanism exist by which this strict synchronous model is relaxed, it turns
out that general-purpose, high-level message-oriented models are often more
convenient.
    In message-oriented models, the issues are whether communication is
persistent, and whether communication is synchronous. The essence of
persistent communication is that a message that is submitted for transmission,
is stored by the communication system as long as it takes to deliver it. In
other words, neither the sender nor the receiver needs to be up and running
for message transmission to take place. In transient communication, no
storage facilities are offered so that the receiver must be prepared to accept
the message when it is sent.
    In asynchronous communication, the sender is allowed to continue imme-
diately after the message has been submitted for transmission, possibly before
it has even been sent. In synchronous communication, the sender is blocked
at least until a message has been received. Alternatively, the sender may be
blocked until message delivery has taken place or even until the receiver has
responded, as with RPCs.
    Message-oriented middleware models generally offer persistent asyn-
chronous communication, and are used where RPCs are not appropriate.
They are often used to assist the integration of (widely dispersed) collections
of databases into large-scale information systems.
    Finally, an important class of communication protocols in distributed
systems is multicasting. The basic idea is to disseminate information from
one sender to multiple receivers. We have discussed two different approaches.
First, multicasting can be achieved by setting up a tree from the sender to
the receivers. Considering that it is now well understood how nodes can self-
organize into peer-to-peer system, solutions have also appeared to dynamically
set up trees in a decentralized fashion. Second, flooding messages across
the network is extremely robust, yet requires special attention if we want to
avoid severe waste of resources as nodes may see messages multiple times.
Probabilistic flooding, by which a node forwards a message with a certain
probability, often proves to combine simplicity and efficiency, while being
highly effective.
    Another important class of dissemination solutions deploys epidemic
protocols. These protocols have proven to be simple and extremely robust.

