     05

COORDINATION

    In the previous chapters, we have looked at processes and communication
between processes. While communication is important, it is not the entire
story. Closely related is how processes cooperate and synchronize with one
another. Cooperation is partly supported by naming, which allows processes
to at least share resources, or entities in general.
    In this chapter, we mainly concentrate on how processes can synchronize
and coordinate their actions. For example, it is important that multiple
processes do not simultaneously access a shared resource, such as a file, but
instead cooperate in granting each other temporary exclusive access. Another
example is that multiple processes may sometimes need to agree on the
ordering of events, such as whether message m1 from process P was sent
before or after message m2 from process Q.
    Synchronization and coordination are two closely related phenomena. In
process synchronization we make sure that one process waits for another to
complete its operation. When dealing with data synchronization, the problem
is to ensure that two sets of data are the same. When it comes to coordination,
the goal is to manage the interactions and dependencies between activities
in a distributed system [Malone and Crowston, 1994]. From this perspective,
one could state that coordination encapsulates synchronization.
    As it turns out, coordination in distributed systems is often much more
difficult compared to that in uniprocessor or multiprocessor systems. The
problems and solutions that are discussed in this chapter are, by their nature,
rather general, and occur in many situations in distributed systems.
    We start with a discussion of the issue of synchronization based on actual
time, followed by synchronization in which only relative ordering matters
rather than ordering in absolute time.
    Often, it is important that a group of processes can appoint one process
as a coordinator, which can be done through election algorithms. We discuss
various election algorithms in a separate section. Before that, we look into
several algorithms for coordinating mutual exclusion to a shared resource. As
a special class of coordination problems, we also dive into location systems,
by which we place a process in a multidimensional plane. Such placements
are useful when dealing with very large distributed systems.
    We also consider three different gossip-based coordination problems: ag-
gregation, peer sampling, and overlay construction.
    Finally, we already came across publish-subscribe systems, but have not
yet discussed in any detail how we actually match subscriptions to publica-
tions. There are many ways to do this, and we look at centralized as well as
decentralized implementations.
    Distributed algorithms come in all sorts and flavors and have been devel-
oped for different types of distributed systems. Many examples (and further
references) can be found in Andrews [2000], Cachin et al. [2011], and Fokkink
[2018]. More formal approaches to a wealth of algorithms can be found in

textbooks from Attiya and Welch [2004], Lynch [1996], Santoro [2007], and Tel
[2000].

5.1   Clock synchronization
In a centralized system, time is unambiguous. When a process wants to know
the time, it simply makes a call to the operating system. If process A asks for
the time, and then a little later process B asks for the time, the value that B
gets will be higher than (or possibly equal to) the value A got. It will certainly
not be lower. In a distributed system, achieving agreement on time is not
trivial.
    Just think, for a moment, about the implications of the lack of global time
on the Unix make program, as a simple example. Normally, in Unix, large
programs are split up into multiple source files, so that a change to one source
file requires only one file to be recompiled, not all the files. If a program
consists of 100 files, not having to recompile everything because one file has
been changed greatly increases the speed at which programmers can work.
    The way make normally works is simple. When the programmer has
finished changing all the source files, she runs make, which examines the times
at which all the source and object files were last modified. If the source file
input.c has time 2151 and the corresponding object file input.o has time
2150, make knows that input.c has been changed since input.o was created,
and thus input.c must be recompiled. On the other hand, if output.c has
time 2144 and output.o has time 2145, no compilation is needed. Thus make
goes through all the source files to find out which ones need to be recompiled
and calls the compiler to recompile them.
    Now imagine what could happen in a distributed system in which there
was no global agreement on time. Suppose that output.o has time 2144 as
above, and shortly thereafter output.c is modified but is assigned time 2143
because the clock on its machine is slightly behind, as shown in Figure 5.1.
Make will not call the compiler. The resulting executable binary program will
then contain a mixture of object files from the old sources and the new sources.
It may crash, and the programmer will go crazy trying to understand what is
wrong with the code.
    There are many more examples where an accurate account of time is
needed. The example above can easily be reformulated to file timestamps in
general. In addition, think of application domains such as financial brokerage,
security auditing, and collaborative sensing, and it will become clear that
accurate timing is important. From a different perspective, Najafi et al. [2021]
argue that accurate timing is essential for most systems research, if only to
ensure that performance measurements can be properly compared. Since
time is so basic to the way people think and the effect of not having all the
clocks synchronized can be so dramatic, it is fitting that we begin our study of

Figure 5.1: When each machine has its own clock, an event that occurred after
another event may nevertheless be assigned an earlier time.

synchronization with the simple question: Would it be possible to synchronize
all the clocks in a distributed system? The answer is surprisingly complicated.

5.1.1      Physical clocks
Nearly all computers often have several circuits for keeping track of time.
Despite the widespread use of the word “clock” to refer to these devices,
they are not actually clocks in the usual sense. Timer is perhaps a better
word. A computer timer is usually a precisely machined quartz crystal. When
kept under tension, quartz crystals oscillate at a well-defined frequency that
depends on the kind of crystal, how it is cut, and the amount of tension.
Associated with each crystal are two registers, a counter and a holding
register. Each oscillation of the crystal decrements the counter by one. When
the counter gets to zero, an interrupt is generated and the counter is reloaded
from the holding register. In this way, it is possible to program a timer to
generate an interrupt 60 times a second, or at any other desired frequency.
Each interrupt is called one clock tick.
    When the system is booted and initialized for the very first time, the user is
asked for the current time zone, or even time, to convert time to the number of
ticks after some known starting date and stored in memory. Most computers
have a special battery-backed up CMOS RAM so that the date and time need
not be entered on subsequent boots. At every clock tick, the interrupt service
procedure adds one to the time stored in memory. In this way, the (software)
clock is kept up to date.
    With a single computer and a single clock, it does not matter much if this
clock is off by a small amount. Since all processes on the machine use the
same clock, they will still be internally consistent. For example, if the file
input.c has time 2151 and file input.o has time 2150, make will recompile the
source file, even if the clock is off by 2 and the true times are 2153 and 2152,
respectively. All that really matters are the relative times.
    As soon as multiple CPUs are introduced, each with its own clock, the sit-
uation changes radically. Although the frequency at which a crystal oscillator
runs is usually fairly stable, it is impossible to guarantee that the crystals in

different computers all run at the same frequency. In practice, when a system
has n computers, all n crystals will run at slightly different rates, causing
the (software) clocks gradually to get out of sync and give different values
when read out. This difference in time values is called clock skew. As a
consequence of this clock skew, programs that expect the time associated
with a file, object, process, or message to be correct and independent of the
machine on which it was generated (i.e., which clock it used) can fail, as we
saw in the make example above.
    In some systems (e.g., real-time systems), the actual clock time is important.
Under these circumstances, external physical clocks are needed. For reasons of
efficiency and redundancy, multiple physical clocks are generally considered
desirable, which yields two problems: (1) how do we synchronize them with
real-world clocks, and (2) how do we synchronize the clocks with each other?

  Note 5.1 (More information: Determining real time)
  Before answering these questions, let us digress slightly to see how time is
  actually measured. It is not nearly as easy as one might think, especially when
  high accuracy is required. Since the invention of mechanical clocks in the 17th
  century, time has been measured astronomically. Every day, the sun appears to
  rise on the eastern horizon, then climbs to a maximum height in the sky, and
  finally sinks in the west. The event of the sun’s reaching its highest apparent
  point in the sky is called the transit of the sun. This event occurs at about noon
  each day. The interval between two consecutive transits of the sun is called the
  solar day. Since there are 24 hours in a day, each containing 3600 seconds, the
  solar second is defined as exactly 1/86400th of a solar day. The geometry of the
  mean solar day calculation is shown in Figure 5.2.

Figure 5.2: Computation of the mean solar day.

      In the 1940s, it was established that the period of the earth’s rotation is not
  constant. The earth is slowing down due to tidal friction and atmospheric drag.
  Based on studies of growth patterns in ancient coral, geologists now believe that
  300 million years ago there were about 400 days per year. The length of the year
  (the time for one trip around the sun) is not thought to have changed; the day has
  simply become longer. In addition to this long-term trend, short-term variations in
  the length of the day also occur, probably caused by turbulence deep in the earth’s
  core of molten iron. These revelations lead astronomers to compute the length
  of the day by measuring a large number of days and taking the average before
  dividing by 86,400. The resulting quantity was called the mean solar second.
      With the invention of the atomic clock in 1948, it became possible to measure
  time much more accurately, and independent of the wiggling and wobbling of the
  earth, by counting transitions of the cesium 133 atom. The physicists took over
  the job of timekeeping from the astronomers and defined the second to be the
  time it takes the cesium 133 atom to make exactly 9,192,631,770 transitions. The
  choice of 9,192,631,770 was made to make the atomic second equal to the mean
  solar second in the year of its introduction. Currently, several laboratories around
  the world have cesium 133 clocks. Periodically, each laboratory tells the Bureau
  International de l’Heure (BIH) in Paris how many times its clock has ticked. The
  BIH averages these to produce International Atomic Time, which is abbreviated
  to TAI. Thus TAI is just the mean number of ticks of the cesium 133 clocks since
  midnight on Jan. 1, 1958 (the beginning of time) divided by 9,192,631,770.
      Although TAI is highly stable and available to anyone who wants to go to the
  trouble of buying a cesium clock, there is a serious problem with it; 86,400 TAI
  seconds is now about 3 msec less than a mean solar day (because the mean solar
  day is getting longer all the time). Using TAI for keeping time would mean that
  over the course of the years, noon would get earlier and earlier, until it would
  eventually occur in the wee hours of the morning. People might notice this and
  we could have the same kind of situation as occurred in 1582 when Pope Gregory
  XIII decreed that 10 days be omitted from the calendar. This event caused riots in
  the streets because landlords demanded a full month’s rent and bankers a full
  month’s interest, while employers refused to pay workers for the 10 days they did
  not work, to mention only a few of the conflicts. The Protestant countries, as a
  matter of principle, refused to have anything to do with papal decrees and did
  not accept the Gregorian calendar for 170 years.
      BIH solves the problem by introducing leap seconds whenever the discrepancy
  between TAI and solar time grows to 800 msec. The use of leap seconds is
  illustrated in Figure 5.3. This correction gives rise to a time system based on
  constant TAI seconds but which stays in phase with the apparent motion of the
  sun. This time system is known as Coordinated Universal Time abbreviated to
  UTC.
      Most electric power companies synchronize the timing of their 60-Hz or 50-Hz
  clocks to UTC, so when BIH announces a leap second, the power companies raise
  their frequency to 61 Hz or 51 Hz for 60 or 50 sec, to advance all the clocks in their
  distribution area. Since 1 sec is a noticeable interval for a computer, an operating
  system that needs to keep accurate time over a period of years must have special

  software to account for leap seconds as they are announced (unless they use the
  power line for time, which is usually too crude). The total number of leap seconds
  introduced into UTC so far is about 30.

Figure 5.3: TAI seconds are of constant length, unlike solar seconds. Leap
        seconds are introduced when necessary to keep in phase with the sun.

    The basis for keeping global time is a called Coordinated Universal Time,
but is abbreviated as UTC. UTC is the basis of all modern civil timekeeping
and is a worldwide standard. To provide UTC to people who need precise
time, some 40 shortwave radio stations around the world broadcast a short
pulse at the start of each UTC second. The accuracy of these stations is about
± 1 msec, but due to random atmospheric fluctuations that can affect the
length of the signal path, in practice the accuracy is no better than ± 10
milliseconds.
    Several earth satellites also offer a UTC service. The Geostationary Oper-
ational Environment Satellite can provide UTC accurately to 0.5 msec, and
some other satellites do even better. By combining receptions from several
satellites, ground timeservers can be built, offering an accuracy of 50 nanosec-
onds. UTC receivers are commercially available, and many computers are
equipped with one.

5.1.2    Clock synchronization algorithms
If one machine has a UTC receiver, the goal becomes keeping all the other
machines synchronized to it. If no machines have UTC receivers, each machine
keeps track of its own time, and the goal is to keep all the machines together
as well as possible. Many algorithms have been proposed for doing this
synchronization. Surveys are provided by Ramanathan et al. [1990], Horauer
[2004], Shin et al. [2011], and Levesque and Tipper [2016].
    All clocks are based on some harmonic oscillator: an object that resonates
at a certain frequency and from which we can subsequently derive time.
Atomic clocks are based on the transitions of the cesium 133 atom, which is
not only very high, but also very constant. Hardware clocks in most computers
use a crystal oscillator based on quartz, which is also capable of producing

a very high, stable frequency, although not as stable as that of atomic clocks.
A software clock in a computer is derived from that computer’s hardware
clock. In particular, the hardware clock is assumed to cause an interrupt f
times per second. When this timer goes off, the interrupt handler adds 1 to a
counter that keeps track of the number of ticks (interrupts) since some agreed-
upon time in the past. This counter acts as a software clock C, resonating at
frequency F.
    When the UTC time is t, denote by C p (t) the value of the software clock
on machine p. The goal of clock synchronization algorithms is to keep the
deviation between the respective clocks of any two machines in a distributed
system, within a specified bound, known as the precision π:

                            ∀t, ∀p, q : |C p (t) − Cq (t)| ≤ π
Note that precision refers to the deviation of clocks only between machines
that are part of a distributed system. When considering an external reference
point, like UTC, we speak of accuracy, aiming to keep it bound to a value α:

                                 ∀t, ∀p : |C p (t) − t| ≤ α
The whole idea of clock synchronization is that we keep clocks precise, referred
to as internal synchronization or accurate, known as external synchronization.
A set of clocks that are accurate within bound α, will be precise within bound
π = 2α. However, being precise does not allow us to conclude anything about
the accuracy of clocks.
    In a perfect world, we would have C p (t) = t for all p and all t, and
thus α = π = 0. Unfortunately, hardware clocks, and thus also software
clocks, are subject to clock drift: because their frequency is not perfect and
affected by external sources such as temperature, clocks on different machines
will gradually start showing different values for time. This is known as
the clock drift rate: the difference per unit of time from a perfect reference
clock. A typical quartz-based hardware clock has a clock drift rate of some
10−6 seconds per second, or approximately 31.5 seconds per year. Computer
hardware clocks exist that have much lower drift rates.
    The specifications of a hardware clock include its maximum clock drift
rate ρ. If F (t) denotes the actual oscillator frequency of the hardware clock at
time t and F its ideal (constant) frequency, then a hardware clock is living up
to its specifications if
                                               F (t)
                            ∀ t : (1 − ρ ) ≤         ≤ (1 + ρ )
                                                 F
By using hardware interrupts we are directly coupling a software clock to the
hardware clock, and thus also its clock drift rate. In particular, we have that

                            1
                                Z t
                                                           dC p (t)   F (t)
                C p (t) =             F (t)dt, and thus:            =
                            F    0                           dt         F

which brings us to our goal, namely keeping the software clock drift rate also
bounded to ρ:
                                         dC p (t)
                          ∀t : 1 − ρ ≤            ≤ 1+ρ
                                           dt
Slow, perfect, and fast clocks are shown in Figure 5.4.

Figure 5.4: The relation between clock time and UTC when clocks tick at
different rates.

    If two clocks are drifting from UTC in the opposite direction, at a time
∆t after they were synchronized, they may be as much as 2ρ · ∆t apart. If
the system designers want to guarantee a precision π, that is, that no two
clocks ever differ by more than π seconds, clocks must be resynchronized
(in software) at least every π/(2ρ) seconds. The various algorithms differ in
precisely how this resynchronization is done.

Network Time Protocol

A common approach in many protocols, and originally proposed by Cristian
[1989], is to let clients contact a timeserver. The latter can accurately provide
the current time, for example because it is equipped with a UTC receiver
or an accurate clock. The problem, of course, is that when contacting the
server, message delays will have outdated the reported time. The trick is to
find a good estimation for these delays. Consider the situation sketched in
Figure 5.5.
    In this case, A will send a request to B, timestamped with value T1 . B,
in turn, will record the time of receipt T2 (taken from its own local clock),
and returns a response timestamped with value T3 , and piggybacking the
previously recorded value T2 . Finally, A records the time of the response’s
arrival, T4 . Let us assume that the propagation delays from A to B is roughly
the same as B to A, meaning that δTreq = T2 − T1 ≈ T4 − T3 = δTres . In that

Figure 5.5: Getting the current time from a time server.

case, A can estimate its offset relative to B as

                      ( T2 − T1 ) + ( T4 − T3 )       ( T − T1 ) + ( T3 − T4 )
           θ = T3 +                             − T4 = 2
                                  2                              2
Of course, time is not allowed to run backward. If A’s clock is fast, θ < 0,
meaning that A should, in principle, set its clock backward. This is not allowed
as it could cause serious problems, such as an object file compiled just after
the clock change having a time earlier than the source which was modified
just before the clock change.
    Such a change must be introduced gradually. One way is as follows.
Suppose that the timer is set to generate 100 interrupts per second. Normally,
each interrupt would add 10 msec to the time. When slowing down, the
interrupt routine adds only 9 msec each time until the correction has been
made. Similarly, the clock can be advanced gradually by adding 11 msec at
each interrupt instead of jumping it forward all at once.
    In the case of the Network Time Protocol (NTP), this protocol is set up
pairwise between servers. In other words, B will also probe A for its current
time. The offset θ is computed as given above, along with the estimation δ for
the delay:
                               ( T − T1 ) − ( T3 − T2 )
                           δ= 4
                                          2
Eight pairs of (θ, δ) values are buffered, finally taking the minimal value
found for δ as the best estimation for the delay between the two servers, and
subsequently the associated value θ as the most reliable estimation of the
offset.
    Applying NTP symmetrically should, in principle, also let B adjust its
clock to that of A. However, if B’s clock is known to be more accurate, then
such an adjustment would be foolish. To solve this problem, NTP divides
servers into strata. A server with a reference clock such as a UTC receiver or
an atomic clock, is known to be a stratum-1 server (the clock itself is said to
operate at stratum 0). When A contacts B, it will adjust only its time if its own
stratum level is higher than that of B. Moreover, after the synchronization, A’s

stratum level will become one higher than that of B. In other words, if B is a
stratum-k server, then A will become a stratum-(k + 1) server if its original
stratum level was already larger than k. Due to the symmetry of NTP, if A’s
stratum level was lower than that of B, B will adjust itself to A.
    There are many important features about NTP, of which many relate to
identifying and masking errors, but also security attacks (see, e.g., Malhotra
et al. [2016]). Many security issues, such as also described by Levesque and
Tipper [2016], can be dealt with by establishing a secure channel between a
time server and its client. NTP was originally described in [Mills, 1992] and is
known to achieve (worldwide) accuracy in the range of 1–50 msec. A detailed
description of NTP can be found in [Mills, 2011].

Clock synchronization in wireless networks
An important advantage of more traditional distributed systems is that we can
easily and efficiently deploy timeservers. Moreover, most machines can contact
each other, allowing for a relatively simple dissemination of information.
These assumptions are no longer valid in many wireless networks, notably
sensor networks. Nodes are resource constrained, and multihop routing
is expensive. In addition, it is often important to optimize algorithms for
energy consumption. These and other observations have led to the design
of very different clock synchronization algorithms for wireless networks. In
the following, we consider one specific solution. Sivrikaya and Yener [2004]
provide a brief overview of other solutions. An extensive survey can be found
in [Sundararaman et al., 2005].
    Reference broadcast synchronization (RBS) is a clock synchronization
protocol that is quite different from other proposals [Elson et al., 2002]. First,
the protocol does not assume that there is a single node with an accurate
account of the actual time available. Instead of aiming to provide all nodes
UTC time, it aims at merely internally synchronizing the clocks. Second,
the solutions we have discussed so far are designed to bring the sender and
receiver into sync, essentially following a two-way protocol. RBS deviates
from this pattern by letting only the receivers synchronize, keeping the sender
out of the loop.
    In RBS, a sender broadcasts a reference message that allows its receivers
to adjust their clocks. A key observation is that in a sensor network the
time to propagate a signal to other nodes is roughly constant, provided no
multi-hop routing is assumed. Propagation time in this case is measured from
the moment that a message leaves the network interface of the sender. As a
consequence, two important sources of variation in message transfer no longer
play a role in estimating delays: the time spent to construct a message, and
the time spent to access the network. This principle is shown in Figure 5.6.
    Note that in protocols such as NTP, a timestamp is added to the message
before it is passed on to the network interface. Furthermore, as wireless

Figure 5.6: The usual critical path and the one used in RBS in determining
network delays.

networks are based on a contention protocol, there is generally no saying how
long it will take before a message can actually be transmitted. These factors
of nondeterminism are eliminated in RBS. What remains is the delivery time
at the receiver, but this time varies considerably less than the network-access
time.
    The idea underlying RBS is simple: when a node broadcasts a reference
message m, each node p simply records the time Tp,m that it received m. Note
that Tp,m is read from p’s local clock. Ignoring clock skew, two nodes p and
q can exchange each other’s delivery times to estimate their mutual, relative
offset:
                                        ∑ M ( Tp,k − Tq,k )
                         Offset[ p, q] = k=1
                                               M
where M is the total number of reference messages sent. This information is
important: node p will know the value of q’s clock relative to its own value.
Moreover, if it simply stores these offsets, there is no need to adjust its own
clock, which saves energy.
    Unfortunately, clocks can drift apart. The effect is that simply computing
the average offset as done above will not work: the last values sent are
simply less accurate than the first ones. Moreover, as time goes by, the
offset will presumably increase. Elson et al. [2002] use a simple algorithm to
compensate for this: instead of computing an average, they apply standard
linear regression to compute the offset as a function:

                            Offset[ p, q](t) = αt + β

The constants α and β are computed from the pairs ( Tp,k , Tq,k ). This new form
allows a much more accurate computation of q’s current clock value by node
p, and vice versa.

  Note 5.2 (More information: How important is an accurate account of time?)
  So why is time such a big deal for distributed systems? As we shall discuss in
  the remainder of this chapter, reaching consensus on a global ordering of events
  is what we really want, and this can be achieved without any notion of global
  absolute time. However, as will become clear, alternative methods for distributed
  coordination do not come easy.
      Life would be much simpler if processes in a distributed system could time-
  stamp their events with infinite precision. Although infinite precision is asking
  too much, we can come practically close. Researchers at Google were confronted
  with the fact that their customers would really like to make use of a globally
  distributed database that supported transactions. Such a database would need
  to serve massive numbers of clients, rendering the use of, for example, a central
  transaction processing monitor as we discussed in Section 1.3.2, infeasible. Instead,
  for their Spanner system, Google decided to implement a true-time service, called
  TrueTime [Corbett et al., 2013]. This service provides three operations:

           Operation         Result
           TT.now()          A time interval [ Tlwb , Tupb ] with Tlwb < Tupb
           TT.after(t)       True if timestamp t has definitely passed
           TT.before(t)      True if timestamp t has definitely not arrived

       The most important aspect is that Tlwb and Tupb are guaranteed bounds. Of
  course, if ϵ = Tupb − Tlwb is large, say 1 hour, then implementing the service
  is relatively easy. Impressively enough, ϵ = 6ms. To achieve this accuracy, the
  TrueTime service makes use of time-master machines of which there are several
  per data center. Time-slave daemons run on every machine in a data center
  and query multiple time masters, including ones from other data centers, very
  similar to what we described for NTP. Many time masters are equipped with
  accurate GPS receivers, while many others are independently equipped with
  atomic clocks. The result is a collection of time sources with a high degree of
  mutual independence (which is important for reasons of fault tolerance). Using
  a version of an algorithm developed by Marzullo and Owicki [1983], outliers
  are kept out of the computations. Meanwhile, the performance of TrueTime is
  continuously monitored and “bad” time machines are (manually) removed to give
  at least very high guarantees for the accuracy of the TrueTime service.
       With a guaranteed accuracy of 6 milliseconds, building a transactional system
  becomes much easier: transactions can actually be timestamped, even by different
  servers, with the restriction that timestamping may need to be delayed for ϵ
  time units. More precisely, to know for sure that a transaction has committed,
  reading the resulting data may impose a wait for ϵ units. This is achieved by
  pessimistically assigning a timestamp to a transaction that writes data to the
  global database and making sure that clients never see any changes before the
  assigned timestamp (which is relatively easy to implement).
       There are many details to this approach, which can be found in [Corbett
  et al., 2013]. As we are still dealing with a time interval, taking more traditional

  ordering mechanisms into account it is possible to improve results, as explained
  by Demirbas and Kulkarni [2013].

5.2     Logical clocks
Clock synchronization is naturally related to time, although it may not be
necessary to have an accurate account of the real time: it may be sufficient that
every node in a distributed system agrees on a current time. We can go one
step further. For running make it is adequate that two nodes agree that input.o
is outdated by a new version of input.c, for example. In this case, keeping
track of each other’s events (such as a producing a new version of input.c) is
what matters. For these algorithms, it is conventional to speak of the clocks as
logical clocks.
     In a seminal paper, Lamport [1978] showed that although clock synchro-
nization is possible, it need not be absolute. If two processes do not interact,
it is not necessary that their clocks be synchronized because the lack of syn-
chronization would not be observable and thus could not cause problems.
Furthermore, he pointed out that what usually matters is not that all processes
agree on exactly what time it is, but rather that they agree on the order in which
events occur. In the make example, what counts is whether input.c is older or
newer than input.o, not their respective absolute creation times.

5.2.1      Lamport’s logical clocks
To synchronize logical clocks, Lamport defined a relation called happens-
before. The expression a → b is read “event a happens before event b” and
means that all processes agree that first event a occurs, then afterward, event b
occurs. The happens-before relation can be observed directly in two situations:

   1. If a and b are events in the same process, and a occurs before b, then
      a → b is true.
   2. If a is the event of a message being sent by one process, and b is the
      event of the message being received by another process, then a → b is
      also true. A message cannot be received before it is sent, or even at the
      same time it is sent, since it takes a finite, nonzero amount of time to
      arrive.

Happens-before is a transitive relation, so if a → b and b → c, then a → c.
If two events, x and y, happen in different processes that do not exchange
messages (not even indirectly via third parties), then x → y is not true, but
neither is y → x. These events are said to be concurrent, which simply means

that nothing can be said (or need be said) about when the events happened or
which event happened first.
    What we need is a way of measuring a notion of time such that for every
event, a, we can assign it a time value C ( a) on which all processes agree.
These time values must have the property that if a → b, then C ( a) < C (b).
To rephrase the conditions we stated earlier, if a and b are two events within
the same process and a occurs before b, then C ( a) < C (b). Similarly, if a
is the sending of a message by one process and b is the reception of that
message by another process, then C ( a) and C (b) must be assigned in such a
way that everyone agrees on the values of C ( a) and C (b) with C ( a) < C (b).
In addition, the clock time, C, must always go forward (increasing), never
backward (decreasing). Corrections to time can be made by adding a positive
value, never by subtracting one.
    Now let us look at the algorithm Lamport proposed for assigning times
to events. Consider the three processes depicted in Figure 5.7. The processes
run on different machines, each with its own clock. For the sake of argument,
we assume that a clock is implemented as a software counter: the counter
is incremented by a specific value every T time units. However, the value
by which a clock is incremented differs per process. The clock in process
P1 is incremented by 6 units, 8 units in process P2 , and 10 units in process
P3 , respectively. (Below, we explain that Lamport clocks are, in fact, event
counters, which explains why their value may differ between processes.)

                  (a)                                        (b)

Figure 5.7: (a) Three processes, each with its own (logical) clock. The clocks
run at different rates. (b) Lamport’s algorithm corrects their values.
    At time 6, process P1 sends message m1 to process P2 . How long this
message takes to arrive depends on whose clock you believe. In any event,
the clock in process P2 reads 16 when it arrives. If the message carries the
starting time, 6, in it, process P2 will conclude that it took 10 ticks to make the
journey. This value is certainly possible. According to this reasoning, message
m2 from P2 to P3 takes 16 ticks, again a plausible value.

    Now consider message m3 . It leaves process P3 at 60 and arrives at P2 at
56. Similarly, message m4 from P2 to P1 leaves at 64 and arrives at 54. These
values are clearly impossible. It is this situation that must be prevented.
    Lamport’s solution follows directly from the happens-before relation. Since
m3 left at 60, it must arrive at 61 or later. Therefore, each message carries
the sending time according to the sender’s clock. When a message arrives
and the receiver’s clock shows a value before the time the message was sent,
the receiver fast forwards its clock to be one more than the sending time. In
Figure 5.7, we see that m3 now arrives at 61. Similarly, m4 arrives at 70.
    Let us formulate this procedure more precisely. At this point, it is impor-
tant to distinguish three different layers of software, as we already encountered
in Section 2.2: the network, a middleware layer, and an application layer, as
shown in Figure 5.8. What follows is typically part of the middleware layer.

Figure 5.8: The positioning of Lamport’s logical clocks in distributed systems.

   To implement Lamport’s logical clocks, each process Pi maintains a local
counter Ci . These counters are updated according to the following steps [Ray-
nal and Singhal, 1996]:

   1. Before executing an event (i.e., sending a message over the network,
      delivering a message to an application, or some other internal event), Pi
      increments Ci : Ci ← Ci + 1.
   2. When process Pi sends a message m to process Pj , it sets m’s timestamp
      ts(m) equal to Ci after having executed the previous step.
   3. Upon the receipt of a message m, process Pj adjusts its own local counter
      as Cj ← max{Cj , ts(m)} after which it then executes the first step and
      delivers the message to the application.

In some situations, an additional requirement is desirable: no two events ever
occur at the same time. To achieve this goal, we also use the unique process
identifier to break ties and use tuples instead of only the counter’s values. For
example, an event at time 40 at process Pi will be timestamped as ⟨40, i⟩. If
we also have an event ⟨40, j⟩ and i < j, then ⟨40, i⟩ < ⟨40, j⟩.

   Note that by assigning the event time C ( a) ← Ci ( a) if a happened at
process Pi at time Ci ( a), we have a distributed implementation of the global
time value we were initially seeking for; we have thus constructed a logical
clock.

Example: Totally ordered multicasting
As an application of Lamport’s logical clocks, consider the situation in which
a database has been replicated across several sites. For example, to improve
query performance, a bank may place copies of an account database in two
different cities, say New York and San Francisco. A query is always forwarded
to the nearest copy. The price for a fast response to a query is partly paid in
higher update costs because each update operation must be carried out at
each replica.
    In fact, there is a more stringent requirement regarding updates. Assume
a customer in San Francisco wants to add $100 to her account, which cur-
rently contains $1,000. At the same time, a bank employee in New York
initiates an update by which the customer’s account is to be increased with
1 percent interest. Both updates should be carried out at both copies of the
database. However, due to communication delays in the underlying network,
the updates may arrive in the order as shown in Figure 5.9.

Figure 5.9: Updating a replicated database and leaving it in an inconsistent
state.

    The customer’s update operation is performed in San Francisco before the
interest update. In contrast, the copy of the account in the New York replica is
first updated with the 1 percent interest, and after that with the $100 deposit.
Consequently, the San Francisco database will record a total amount of $1,111,
whereas the New York database records $1,110.
    The problem that we are faced with is that the two update operations
should have been performed in the same order at each copy. Although it
makes a difference whether the deposit is processed before the interest update
or the other way around, which order is followed is not essential from a
consistency perspective. The important issue is that both copies should be the

same after the updates have taken place. In general, situations such as these
require a totally ordered multicast, that is, a multicast operation by which all
messages are delivered in the same order to each receiver. Lamport’s logical
clocks can be used to implement totally ordered multicasts in a completely
distributed fashion.
    Consider a group of processes multicasting messages to each other. Each
message is always timestamped with the current (logical) time of its sender.
When a message is multicasted, it is conceptually also sent to the sender. In
addition, we assume that messages from the same sender are received in the
order they were sent, and that no messages are lost.
    When a process receives a message, it is put into a local queue, ordered
according to its timestamp. The receiver multicasts an acknowledgment to the
other processes. Note that if we follow Lamport’s algorithm for adjusting local
clocks, the timestamp of the received message is lower than the timestamp
of the acknowledgment. The interesting aspect of this approach is that all
processes will eventually have the same copy of the local queue (provided no
messages are removed).
    A process can deliver a queued message to the application it is running
only when that message is at the head of the queue and has been acknowl-
edged by each other process. At that point, the message is removed from the
queue and handed over to the application; the associated acknowledgments
can simply be removed. Because each process has the same copy of the queue,
all messages are delivered in the same order everywhere. In other words, we
have established totally ordered multicasting. We leave it as an exercise to
the reader to figure out that it is not strictly necessary that each multicast
message has been explicitly acknowledged. It is sufficient that a process reacts
to an incoming message, either by returning an acknowledgment or sending
its own multicast message.
    Totally ordered multicasting is an important vehicle for replicated services,
where the replicas are kept consistent by letting them execute the same
operations in the same order everywhere. As the replicas essentially follow
the same transitions in the same finite state machine, it is also known as state
machine replication [Schneider, 1990].

  Note 5.3 (Advanced: Using Lamport clocks to achieve mutual exclusion)
  To further illustrate the usage of Lamport’s clocks, let us see how we can use the
  previous algorithm for totally ordered multicasting to establish access to what
  is commonly known as a critical region: a section of code that can be executed
  by at most one process at a time. This algorithm is very similar to the one for
  multicasting, as essentially all processes need to agree on the order by which
  processes are allowed to enter their critical region.
      Figure 5.10(a) shows the code that each process executes when requesting,
  releasing, or allowing access to the critical region (again, omitting details). Each

  process maintains a request queue as well as a logical clock. To enter the critical
  region, a call to requestToEnter is made, which results in inserting an ENTER
  message with timestamp (clock,procID) into the local queue and sending that
  message to the other processes. The operation cleanupQ essentially sorts the
  queue. We return to it shortly.

  1   class Process:
  2     def __init__(self, chanID, procID, procIDSet):
  3       self.chan.join(procID)
  4       self.procID     = int(procID)
  5       self.otherProcs.remove(self.procID)
  6       self.queue      = []                      # The request queue
  7       self.clock      = 0                       # The current logical clock
  8
  9     def requestToEnter(self):
 10       self.clock = self.clock + 1                         # Increment clock value
 11       self.queue.append((self.clock, self.procID, ENTER)) # Append request to q
 12       self.cleanupQ()                                     # Sort the queue
 13       self.chan.sendTo(self.otherProcs, (self.clock, self.procID, ENTER)) # Send request
 14
 15     def ackToEnter(self, requester):
 16       self.clock = self.clock + 1                         # Increment clock value
 17       self.chan.sendTo(requester, (self.clock, self.procID, ACK)) # Permit other
 18
 19     def release(self):
 20       tmp = [r for r in self.queue[1:] if r[2] == ENTER] # Remove all ACKs
 21       self.queue = tmp                                    # and copy to new queue
 22       self.clock = self.clock + 1                         # Increment clock value
 23       self.chan.sendTo(self.otherProcs, (self.clock, self.procID, RELEASE)) # Release
 24
 25     def allowedToEnter(self):
 26       commProcs = set([req[1] for req in self.queue[1:]]) # See who has sent a message
 27       return (self.queue[0][1] == self.procID and len(self.otherProcs) == len(commProcs))

Figure 5.10: (a) Using Lamport’s logical clocks for mutual exclusion.

       When a process P receives an ENTER message from process Q, it can simply
  acknowledge that Q can enter its critical region, even if P wants to do so as well.
  In the latter case, P’s ENTER request will have a lower logical timestamp than the
  ACK message sent by P to Q, meaning that P’s request will have been inserted into
  Q’s queue before P’s ACK message.
       Finally, when a process leaves its critical region, it calls release. It cleans up
  its local queue by removing all received ACK messages, leaving only the ENTER
  requests from other processes. It then multicasts a RELEASE message.
       To actually enter a critical region, a process will have to repeatedly call
  allowedToEnter and when returned False, will have to block on a next incoming
  message. The operation allowedToEnter does what is to be expected: it checks
  if the calling process’s ENTER message is at the head of the queue, and sees if all
  other processes have sent a message as well. The latter is encoded through the set

  commProcs, which contains the procIDs of all processes having sent a message by
  inspecting all messages in the local queue from the second position and onwards.

  1     def receive(self):
  2       msg = self.chan.recvFrom(self.otherProcs)[1]        # Pick up any message
  3       self.clock = max(self.clock, msg[0])                # Adjust clock value...
  4       self.clock = self.clock + 1                         # ...and increment
  5       if msg[2] == ENTER:
  6         self.queue.append(msg)                            # Append an ENTER request
  7         self.ackToEnter(msg[1])                           # and unconditionally allow
  8       elif msg[2] == ACK:
  9         self.queue.append(msg)                            # Append a received ACK
 10       elif msg[2] == RELEASE:
 11         del(self.queue[0])                                # Just remove first message
 12       self.cleanupQ()                                     # And sort and cleanup

Figure 5.10: (b) Using Lamport’s logical clocks for mutual exclusion:
        handling incoming requests.

       What to do when a message is received is shown in Figure 5.10(b). First,
  the local clock is adjusted according to the rules for Lamport’s logical clocks
  explained above. When receiving an ENTER or ALLOW message, that message is
  simply inserted into the queue. An entry request is always acknowledged, as we
  just explained. When a RELEASE message is received, the original ENTER request is
  removed. Note that this request is at the head of the queue. Thereafter, the queue
  is cleaned up again.
       At this point, note that if we would clean up the queue by only sorting it,
  we may get into trouble. Suppose that processes P and Q want to enter their
  respective critical regions at roughly the same time, but that P is allowed to go
  first based on logical-clock values. P may find Q’s request in its queue, along
  with ENTER or ALLOW messages from other processes. If its own request is at the
  head of its queue, P will proceed and enter its critical region. However, Q will
  also send an ALLOW message to P as well, in addition to its original ENTER message.
  That ALLOW message may arrive after P had already entered its critical region, but
  before ENTER messages from other processes. When Q eventually enters, and leaves
  its critical region, Q’s RELEASE message would result in removing Q’s original
  ENTER message, but not the ALLOW message it had previously sent to P. By now,
  that message is at the head of P’s queue, effectively blocking the entrance to the
  critical region of other processes in P’s queue. Cleaning up the queue thus also
  involves removing old ALLOW messages.

5.2.2      Vector clocks
Lamport’s logical clocks lead to a situation where all events in a distributed
system are totally ordered with the property that if event a happened before
event b, then a will also be positioned in that ordering before b, that is,
C ( a ) < C ( b ).

    However, with Lamport clocks, nothing can be said about the relationship
between two events a and b by merely comparing their time values C ( a)
and C (b), respectively. In other words, if C ( a) < C (b), then this does not
necessarily imply that a indeed happened before b. Something more is needed
for that.
    To explain, consider the messages as sent by the three processes shown
in Figure 5.11. Denote by Tsnd (mi ) the logical time at which message mi was
sent, and likewise, by Trcv (mi ) the time of its receipt. By construction, we
know that for each message Tsnd (mi ) < Trcv (mi ). But what can we conclude
in general from Trcv (mi ) < Tsnd (mj ) for different messages mi and mj ?

Figure 5.11: Concurrent message transmission using logical clocks.

   In the case for which mi = m1 and mj = m3 , we know that these values
correspond to events that took place at process P2 , meaning that m3 was
indeed sent after the receipt of message m1 . This may indicate that the
sending of message m3 depended on what was received through message m1 .
At the same time, we also know that Trcv (m1 ) < Tsnd (m2 ). However, as far as
we can tell from Figure 5.11, the sending of m2 has nothing to do with the
receipt of m1 .
   The problem is that Lamport clocks do not capture causality. In practice,
causality is captured by means of vector clocks. To better understand where
these come from, we follow the explanation as given by Baquero and Preguica
[2016]. In fact, tracking causality is simple if we assign each event a unique
name such as the combination of a process ID and a locally incrementing
counter: pk is the kth event that happened at process P. The problem then
boils down to keeping track of causal histories. For example, if two local
events happened at process P, then the causal history H (p2 ) of event p2 is
{p1 , p2 }.
   Now assume that process P sends a message to process Q (which is an
event at P and thus recorded as pk for some k), and that at the time of arrival
(an event for Q), the most recent causal history of Q was {q1 }. To track

causality, P also sends its most recent causal history (assume it was {p1 , p2 },
extended with p3 expressing the sending of the message). Upon arrival, Q
records the event (q2 ), and merges the two causal histories into a new one:
{p1 , p2 , p3 , q1 , q2 }.
    Checking whether an event p causally precedes an event q can be done
by checking whether H (p) ⊂ H (q) (i.e., it should be a proper subset). In fact,
with our notation, it even suffices to check whether p ∈ H (q), assuming that
q is always the last local event in H (q).
    The problem with causal histories, is that their representation is not very
efficient. However, there is no need to keep track of all successive events from
the same process: the last one will do. If we subsequently assign an index to
each process, we can represent a causal history as a vector, in which the jth
entry represents the number of events that happened at process Pj . Causality
can then be captured by means of vector clocks, which are constructed by
letting each process Pi maintain a vector VCi with the following two properties:

   1. VCi [i ] is the number of events that have occurred so far at Pi . In other
      words, VCi [i ] is the local logical clock at process Pi .
   2. If VCi [ j] = k then Pi knows that k events have occurred at Pj . It is thus
      Pi ’s knowledge of the local time at Pj .

The first property is maintained by incrementing VCi [i ] at the occurrence of
each new event that happens at process Pi . The second property is maintained
by piggybacking vectors along with messages that are sent. In particular, the
following steps are performed:

   1. Before executing an event (i.e., sending a message over the network,
      delivering a message to an application, or some other internal event), Pi
      executes VCi [i ] ← VCi [i ] + 1. This is equivalent to recording a new event
      that happened at Pi .
   2. When process Pi sends a message m to Pj , it sets m’s (vector) timestamp
      ts(m) equal to VCi after having executed the previous step (i.e., it also
      records the sending of the message as an event that takes place at Pi ).
   3. Upon the receipt of a message m, process Pj adjusts its own vector by
      setting VCj [k] ← max{VCj [k], ts(m)[k ]} for each k (which is equivalent
      to merging causal histories), after which it executes the first step (record-
      ing the receipt of the message) and then delivers the message to the
      application.

   Note that if an event a has timestamp ts( a), then ts( a)[i ] − 1 denotes the
number of events processed at Pi that causally precede a. As a consequence,
when Pj receives a message m from Pi with timestamp ts(m), it knows about
the number of events that have occurred at Pi that causally preceded the

sending of m. More important, however, is that Pj is also told how many
events at other processes have taken place, known to Pi , before Pi sent message
m. In other words, timestamp ts(m) tells the receiver how many events in
other processes have preceded the sending of m, and on which m may causally
depend.
    To see what this means, consider Figure 5.12 which shows three processes.
In Figure 5.12(a), P2 sends a message m1 at logical time VC2 = (0, 1, 0) to
process P1 . Message m1 thus receives timestamp ts(m1 ) = (0, 1, 0). Upon
its receipt, P1 adjusts its logical time to VC1 ← (1, 1, 0) and delivers it. Mes-
sage m2 is sent by P1 to P3 with timestamp ts(m2 ) = (2, 1, 0). Before P1
sends another message, m3 , an event happens at P1 , eventually leading to
timestamping m3 with value (4, 1, 0). After receiving m3 , process P2 sends
message m4 to P3 , with timestamp ts(m4 ) = (4, 3, 0).

                                      (a)

                                      (b)

Figure 5.12: Capturing potential causality when exchanging messages.

   Now consider the situation shown in Figure 5.12(b). Here, we have delayed
sending message m2 until after message m3 has been sent, and after the
event had taken place. It is not difficult to see that ts(m2 ) = (4, 1, 0), while
ts(m4 ) = (2, 3, 0). Compared to Figure 5.12(a), we have the following situation:

      Situation       ts(m2 )       ts(m4 )   ts(m2 )   ts(m2 )          Conclusion
                                                 <         >
                                              ts(m4 )   ts(m4 )
   Figure 5.12(a)    (2, 1, 0)   (4, 3, 0)      Yes       No      m2 may causally precede m4
   Figure 5.12(b)    (4, 1, 0)   (2, 3, 0)      No        No      m2 and m4 may conflict

We use the notation ts( a) < ts(b) if and only if for all k, ts( a)[k] ≤ ts(b)[k]
and there is at least one index k′ for which ts( a)[k′ ] < ts(b)[k′ ]. Thus, by using
vector clocks, process P3 can detect whether m4 may be causally dependent
on m2 , or whether there may be a potential conflict. Note, by the way, that
without knowing the actual information contained in messages, it is not
possible to state with certainty that there is indeed a causal relationship, or
perhaps a conflict.

  Note 5.4 (Advanced: Enforcing causal communication)
  Using vector clocks, it is now possible to ensure that a message is delivered only
  if all messages that may have causally preceded it have been received as well. To
  enable such a scheme, we will assume that messages are multicast within a group
  of processes. Note that this causally ordered multicasting is weaker than totally
  ordered multicasting. Specifically, if two messages are not in any way related to
  each other, we do not care in which order they are delivered to applications. They
  may even be delivered in different order at different locations.
       For enforcing causal message delivery, we assume that clocks are adjusted
  only when sending and delivering messages (note, again, that messages are not
  adjusted when they are received by a process, but only when they are delivered
  to an application). In particular, only upon sending a message, will process Pi
  increment VCi [i ] by 1. Only when it delivers a message m with timestamp ts(m),
  will it adjust VCi [k] to max{VCi [k], ts(m)[k]} for each k.
       Now suppose that Pj receives a message m from Pi with (vector) timestamp
  ts(m). The delivery of the message to the application layer will then be delayed
  until the following two conditions are met:
      1. ts(m)[i ] = VCj [i ] + 1
      2. ts(m)[k] ≤ VCj [k ] for all k ̸= i
  The first condition states that m is the next message that Pj was expecting from
  process Pi . The second condition states that Pj has delivered all the messages that
  have been delivered by Pi when it sent message m. Note that there is no need for
  process Pj to delay the delivery of its own messages.
      As an example, consider three processes P1 , P2 , and P3 as shown in Figure 5.13.
  At local time (1, 0, 0), P1 multicasts message m to the other two processes. Note
  that ts(m) = (1, 0, 0). Its receipt and subsequent delivery by P2 , will bring the
  logical clock at P2 to (1, 0, 0), effectively indicating that it has received one message
  from P1 , has itself sent no message so far, and has not yet delivered a message
  from P3 . P2 then decides to multicast m∗ , at updated time (1, 1, 0), which arrives
  at P3 sooner than m.

Figure 5.13: Enforcing causal communication.

      When comparing the timestamp of m with its current time, which is (0, 0, 0),
  P3 concludes that it is still missing a message from P1 which P2 apparently had
  delivered before sending m∗ . P3 therefore, decides to postpone the delivery of m∗
  (and will also not adjust its local, logical clock). Later, after m has been received
  and delivered by P3 , which brings its local clock to (1, 0, 0), P3 can deliver message
  m∗ and also update its clock.

  A note on ordered message delivery Some middleware systems, notably ISIS
  and its successor Horus [Birman and van Renesse, 1994], provide support for
  totally ordered and causally ordered (reliable) multicasting. There has been some
  controversy whether such support should be provided as part of the message-
  communication layer, or whether applications should handle ordering (see, e.g.,
  Cheriton and Skeen [1993]; Birman [1994]). Matters have not been settled, but
  more important is that the arguments still hold today.
      There are two main problems with letting the middleware deal with message
  ordering. First, because the middleware cannot tell what a message actually
  contains, only potential causality is captured. For example, two messages from the
  same sender that are completely independent will always be marked as causally
  related by the middleware layer. This approach is overly restrictive and may lead
  to efficiency problems.
      A second problem is that not all causality may be captured. Consider some
  digital chat room. Suppose Alice posts a message. If she then phones Bob telling
  about what she just wrote, Bob may post another message as a reaction without
  having seen Alice’s posting. In other words, there is a causality between Bob’s
  posting and that of Alice due to external communication. This causality is not
  captured by the chat room system.
      In essence, ordering issues, like many other application-specific communi-
  cation issues, can be adequately solved by looking at the application for which
  communication is taking place. This is also known as the end-to-end principle in
  systems design [Saltzer et al., 1984]. A drawback of having only application-level
  solutions is that a developer is forced to concentrate on issues that do not immedi-
  ately relate to the core functionality of the application. For example, ordering may

  not be the most important problem when developing a messaging system such
  as the one for a chat room. In that case, having an underlying communication
  layer handle ordering may turn out to be convenient. We will come across the
  end-to-end argument several times.

5.3     Mutual exclusion

Fundamental to distributed systems is the concurrency and collaboration
among multiple processes. In many cases, this also means that processes
will need to simultaneously access the same resources. To prevent that such
concurrent accesses corrupt the resource, or make it inconsistent, solutions are
needed to grant mutual exclusive access by processes. In this section, we take
a look at some important and representative distributed algorithms that have
been proposed. Surveys of distributed algorithms for mutual exclusion are
provided by Saxena and Rai [2003] and Velazquez [1993]. Various algorithms
are also presented in [Kshemkalyani and Singhal, 2008].

5.3.1      Overview
Distributed mutual exclusion algorithms can be classified into two different
categories. In token-based solutions mutual exclusion is achieved by passing
a special message between the processes, known as a token. There is only one
token available, and who ever has that token is allowed to access the shared
resource. When finished, the token is passed on to a next process. If a process
having the token is not interested in accessing the resource, it passes it on.
     Token-based solutions have a few important properties. First, depending
on how the processes are organized, they can fairly easily ensure that every
process will get a chance at accessing the resource. In other words, they pro-
vide guarantees for safety by avoiding what is known as starvation. Second,
deadlocks by which several processes are indefinitely waiting for each other
to proceed, can easily be avoided, contributing to their simplicity. The main
drawback of token-based solutions is a rather serious one: when the token
is lost (e.g. because the process holding it crashed), an intricate distributed
procedure needs to be started to ensure that a new token is created, but above
all, that it is also the only token.
     As an alternative, many distributed mutual exclusion algorithms follow
a permission-based approach. In this case, a process wanting to access the
resource first requires the permission from other processes. There are many
ways toward granting such permission and in the sections that follow we will
consider a few of them.

5.3.2   A centralized algorithm
A straightforward way to achieve mutual exclusion in a distributed system is
to simulate how it is done in a one-processor system. One process is elected
as the coordinator. Whenever a process wants to access a shared resource, it
sends a request message to the coordinator stating which resource it wants to
access and asking for permission. If no other process is currently accessing
that resource, the coordinator sends back a reply granting permission, as
shown in Figure 5.14(a). When the reply arrives, the requester can go ahead.

                (a)                       (b)                     (c)

Figure 5.14: (a) Process P1 asks for permission to access a shared resource. Per-
mission is granted. (b) Process P2 asks permission to access the same resource,
but receives no reply. (c) When P1 releases the resource, the coordinator
replies to P2 .

    Now suppose that another process, P2 in Figure 5.14(b) asks for permission
to access the resource. The coordinator knows that a different process is
already at the resource, so it cannot grant permission. The exact method used
to deny permission is system dependent. In Figure 5.14(b) the coordinator just
refrains from replying, thus blocking process P2 , which is waiting for a reply.
Alternatively, it could send a reply saying “permission denied.” Either way, it
queues the request from P2 for the time being and waits for more messages.
    When process P1 is finished with the resource, it sends a message to the
coordinator releasing its exclusive access, as shown in Figure 5.14(c). The
coordinator takes the first item off the queue of deferred requests and sends
that process a grant message. If the process was still blocked (i.e., this is
the first message to it), it unblocks and accesses the resource. If an explicit
message has already been sent denying permission, the process will have to
poll for incoming traffic or block later. Either way, when it sees the grant, it
can go ahead as well.
    It is easy to see that the algorithm guarantees mutual exclusion: the
coordinator lets only one process at a time access the resource. It is also fair,
since requests are granted in the order in which they are received. No process
ever waits forever (no starvation). The scheme is easy to implement, too, and
requires only three messages per use of resource (request, grant, release). Its
simplicity makes it an attractive solution for many practical situations.

    The centralized approach also has shortcomings. The coordinator is a
single point of failure, so if it crashes, the entire system may go down. If
processes normally block after making a request, they cannot distinguish a
dead coordinator from “permission denied” since in both cases no message
comes back. In addition, in a large system, a single coordinator can become a
performance bottleneck. Nevertheless, the benefits coming from its simplicity
often outweigh the potential drawbacks. Moreover, distributed solutions are
not necessarily better, as we illustrate next.

5.3.3      A distributed algorithm
Using Lamport’s logical clocks, and inspired by Lamport’s original solution
for distributed mutual exclusion (which we discussed in Note 5.3), Ricart and
Agrawala [1981] provided the following algorithm. Their solution requires a
total ordering of all events in the system. That is, for any pair of events, such
as messages, it must be unambiguous which one actually happened first.
    The algorithm works as follows. When a process wants to access a shared
resource, it builds a message containing the name of the resource, its process
number, and the current (logical) time. It then sends the message to all other
processes, conceptually including itself. The sending of messages is assumed
to be reliable; that is, no message is lost.
    When a process receives a request message from another process, the
action it takes depends on its own state regarding the resource named in the
message. Three different cases have to be clearly distinguished:

   • If the receiver is not accessing the resource and does not want to access
     it, it sends back an OK message to the sender.
   • If the receiver already has access to the resource, it simply does not reply.
     Instead, it queues the request.
   • If the receiver wants to access the resource as well but has not yet done
     so, it compares the timestamp of the incoming message with the one
     contained in the message that it has sent everyone. The lowest one wins.
     If the incoming message has a lower timestamp, the receiver sends back
     an OK message. If its own message has a lower timestamp, the receiver
     queues the incoming request and sends nothing.

After sending out requests asking permission, a process sits back and waits
until everyone else has given permission. As soon as all the permissions are
in, it may go ahead. When it is finished, it sends OK messages to all processes
in its queue and deletes them all from the queue. If there is no conflict, it
clearly works. However, suppose that two processes try to access the resource
simultaneously, as shown in Figure 5.15(a).
    Process P0 sends everyone a request with timestamp 8, while at the same
time, process P2 sends everyone a request with timestamp 12. P1 is not

        (a)                          (b)                            (c)

Figure 5.15: (a) Two processes want to access a shared resource at the same
moment. (b) P0 has the lowest timestamp, so it wins. (c) When process P0 is
done, it sends an OK also, so P2 can now go ahead.

interested in the resource, so it sends OK to both senders. Processes P0 and
P2 both see the conflict and compare timestamps. P2 sees that it has lost,
so it grants permission to P0 by sending OK. Process P0 now queues the
request from P2 for later processing and accesses the resource, as shown
in Figure 5.15(b). When it is finished, it removes the request from P2 from
its queue and sends an OK message to P2 , allowing the latter to go ahead,
as shown in Figure 5.15(c). The algorithm works because in the case of a
conflict, the lowest timestamp wins and everyone agrees on the ordering of
the timestamps.
    With this algorithm, mutual exclusion is guaranteed without deadlock or
starvation. If the total number of processes is N, then the number of messages
that a process needs to send and receive before it can enter its critical region
is 2 · ( N − 1): N − 1 request messages to all other processes, and subsequently
N − 1 OK messages, one from each other process. A critical region is a series
of instructions to be executed by a process, which requires mutually exclusive
access.
    Unfortunately, this algorithm has N points of failure. If any process
crashes, it will fail to respond to requests. This silence will be interpreted
(incorrectly) as denial of permission, thus blocking all subsequent attempts by
all processes to enter any of their respective critical regions. The algorithm can
be patched up as follows. When a request comes in, the receiver always sends
a reply, either granting or denying permission. Whenever either a request or a
reply is lost, the sender times out and keeps trying until either a reply comes
back or the sender concludes that the destination is dead. After a request is
denied, the sender should block, waiting for a subsequent OK message.
    Another problem with this algorithm is that either a multicast commu-
nication primitive must be used, or each process must maintain the group
membership list itself, including processes entering the group, leaving the
group, and crashing. The method works best with small groups of processes

that never change their group memberships. Finally, note that all processes are
involved in all decisions concerning accessing the shared resource, which may
impose a burden on processes running on resource-constrained machines.
    Various minor improvements are possible to this algorithm. For example,
getting permission from everyone is overkill. All that is needed is a method to
prevent two processes from accessing the resource at the same time. The algo-
rithm can be modified to grant permission when it has collected permission
from a simple majority of the other processes, rather than from all of them.

5.3.4      A token-ring algorithm
An entirely different approach to deterministically achieving mutual exclusion
in a distributed system is illustrated in Figure 5.16. In software, we construct
an overlay network in the form of a logical ring in which each process is
assigned a position in the ring. All that matters is that each process knows
who is next in line after itself.

Figure 5.16: An overlay network constructed as a logical ring with a token
circulating between its members.

    When the ring is initialized, process P0 is given a token. The token
circulates around the ring. Assuming there are N processes, the token is
passed from process Pk to process P(k+1) mod N in point-to-point messages.
When a process acquires the token from its neighbor, it checks to see if it
needs to access the shared resource. If so, the process goes ahead, does all the
work it needs to, and releases the resources. After it has finished, it passes
the token along the ring. It is not permitted to enter the resource immediately
again using the same token.
    If a process is handed the token by its neighbor and is not interested in the
resource, it just passes the token along. As a consequence, when no processes
need the resource, the token just circulates around the ring.
    The correctness of this algorithm is easy to see. Only one process has the
token at any instant, so only one process can actually get to the resource. Since
the token circulates among the processes in a well-defined order, starvation
cannot occur. Once a process decides it wants to have access to the resource,
at worst it will have to wait for every other process to use the resource.
    This algorithm has its own problems. If the token is ever lost, for example
because its holder crashes or due to a lost message containing the token, it
must be regenerated. In fact, detecting that it is lost may be difficult, since the

amount of time between successive appearances of the token on the network
is unbounded. The fact that the token has not been spotted for an hour does
not mean that it has been lost; somebody may still be using it.
    The algorithm also runs into trouble if a process crashes, but recovery is
relatively easy. If we require a process receiving the token to acknowledge
receipt, a dead process will be detected when its neighbor tries to give it
the token and fails. At that point, the dead process can be removed from
the group, and the token holder can throw the token over the head of the
dead process to the next member down the line, or the one after that, if
necessary. Of course, doing so requires that everyone maintains the current
ring configuration.

5.3.5   A decentralized algorithm
Let us take a look at a fully decentralized solution. Lin et al. [2004] propose to
use a voting algorithm. Each resource is assumed to be replicated N times.
Every replica has its own coordinator for controlling the access by concurrent
processes.
    However, whenever a process wants to access the resource, it will simply
need to get a majority vote from m > N/2 coordinators. We assume that
when a coordinator does not give permission to access a resource (which it
will do when it had granted permission to another process), it will tell the
requester.
    The assumption is that when a coordinator crashes, it recovers quickly
but will have forgotten any vote it gave before it crashed. Another way of
viewing this is that a coordinator resets itself at arbitrary moments. The risk
that we are taking is that a reset will make the coordinator forget that it had
previously granted permission to some process to access the resource. As a
consequence, it may incorrectly grant this permission again to another process
after its recovery.
    Let p = ∆t/T be the probability that a coordinator resets during a time
interval ∆t, while having a lifetime of T. The probability P[k] that k out of m
coordinators reset during the same interval is then
                                      m k
                                        
                            P[ k ] =     p (1 − p ) m − k
                                      k
If f coordinators reset, then the correctness of the voting mechanism will be
violated when we have more than m other coordinators think it is okay to
allocate the resource, that is, when N − (m − f ) ≥ m, or, in other words, when
f ≥ 2m − N. The probability that such a violation occurs is ∑m   k =2m− N P[ k ]. To
give an impression of what this could mean, Figure 5.17 shows the probability
of violating correctness for different values of N, m, and p. Note that we
compute p by considering the number of seconds per hour that a coordinator
resets, and also taking this value to be the average time needed to access

a resource. Our values for p are considered to be (very) conservative. The
conclusion is that, in general, the probability of violating correctness can be
so low that it can be neglected in comparison to other types of failure.

           N    m        p        Violation   N     m        p        Violation
            8    5   3 sec/hour    < 10−5      8    5   30 sec/hour    < 10−3
            8    6   3 sec/hour   < 10−11      8    6   30 sec/hour    < 10−7
           16    9   3 sec/hour   < 10−4      16    9   30 sec/hour    < 10−2
           16   12   3 sec/hour   < 10−21     16   12   30 sec/hour    < 10−13
           32   17   3 sec/hour   < 10−4      32   17   30 sec/hour    < 10−2
           32   24   3 sec/hour   < 10−43     32   24   30 sec/hour    < 10−27

Figure 5.17: Violation probabilities for various parameter values of decentral-
ized mutual exclusion.

    To implement this scheme, we can use a system in which a resource is
replicated N times. Assume that the resource is known under its unique
name rname. We can then assume that the ith replica is named rnamei which
is then used to compute a unique key using a known hash function. As a
consequence, every process can generate the N keys given a resource’s name,
and subsequently look up each node responsible for a replica (and controlling
access to that replica) using some commonly used naming system.
    If permission to access the resource is denied (i.e., a process gets less
than m votes), it is assumed that it will back off for some randomly chosen
time, and make a next attempt later. The problem with this scheme is that if
many nodes want to access the same resource, it turns out that the utilization
rapidly drops. In that case, there are so many nodes competing to get access
that eventually no one can get enough votes, leaving the resource unused. A
solution to solve this problem can be found in [Lin et al., 2004].

  Note 5.5 (More information: A comparison of the mutual-exclusion algorithms)
  A brief comparison of the mutual exclusion algorithms we have looked at is
  instructive. In Figure 5.18 we have listed the algorithms and two performance
  properties: the number of messages required for a process to access and release a
  shared resource, and the delay before access can occur (assuming messages are
  passed sequentially over a network).
      In the following, we assume only point-to-point messages (or, equivalently,
  count a multicast to N processes as N messages).
      • The centralized algorithm is simplest and also most efficient. It requires
        only three messages to enter and leave a critical region: a request, a grant
        to enter, and a release to exit.

     • The distributed algorithm requires N − 1 request messages, one to each of
       the other processes, and an additional N − 1 grant messages, for a total of
       2( N − 1).
     • With the token ring algorithm, the number is variable. If every process
       constantly wants to enter a critical region, then each token pass will result
       in one entry and exit, for an average of one message per critical region
       entered. At the other extreme, the token may sometimes circulate for hours
       without anyone being interested in it. In this case, the number of messages
       per entry into a critical region is unbounded.
     • The decentralized case requires sending N messages to coordinators, and
       another N responses. If it does not get a majority, it will have to release
       (at most) N/2 votes. If it did get enough votes, it will have to send an
       additional N release messages later on. A process may need to go through
       k ≥ 1 attempts.

                      Messages per                             Delay before entry
    Algorithm         entry/exit                               (in message times)
    Centralized       3                                        2
    Distributed       2( N − 1)                                2( N − 1)
    Token ring        1, . . . , ∞                             0, . . . , N − 1
    Decentralized     2kN + (k − 1) N/2 + N, k = 1, 2, . . .   2kN + (k − 1) N/2

Figure 5.18: A comparison of four mutual exclusion algorithms.

      The delay from the moment a process needs to enter a critical region until its
  actual entry also varies. For a worst-case analysis, we assume that messages are
  sent one after the other (i.e., there are never two or more messages in transit at
  the same time), and that message transfer time is roughly the same everywhere.
  Delay can then be expressed in message transfer time units, or simply MTTU.
  Under these assumptions, when the time using a resource is short, the dominant
  factor in the delay is determined by the total number of messages sent through
  the system before access can be granted. When resources are used for a long
  period of time, the dominant factor is waiting for everyone else to take their turn.
  In Figure 5.18 we show the former case.

     • It takes only two MTTUs to enter a critical region in the centralized case,
       caused by a request message and the subsequent grant message sent by the
       coordinator.
     • The distributed algorithm requires sending N − 1 request messages, and
       receiving another N − 1 grant messages, adding up to 2( N − 1) MTTUs.
     • For the token ring, the delay varies from 0 MTTU (in case the token had
       just arrived) to N − 1 (for when the token had just departed).
     • In the case of decentralized, the delay is dependent on the number of times
       a process needed to return the (minority of) votes. With having to go
       through k ≥ 1 attempts, a process may see 2kN + (k − 1) N/2 MTTUs.

      Virtually all algorithms suffer badly in the event of crashes. Special measures
  and additional complexity must be introduced to avoid having a crash bring down
  the entire system. It is somewhat ironic that distributed algorithms are generally
  more sensitive to crashes than centralized ones. In this sense, it should not come
  as a surprise that, indeed, centralized mutual exclusion is widely applied: it
  is simple to understand the behavior, and relatively easy to increase the fault
  tolerance of the centralized server.

5.3.6      Example: Simple locking with ZooKeeper
For many practical reasons, mutual exclusion in distributed systems is often
done with a centralized coordinator, not in the least because the behavior of
these solutions is much easier to understand than many other noncentralized
versions. Let us briefly look at a system that is designed for coordination tasks
in distributed systems, and which is by now also widely deployed. ZooKeeper
was developed to provide facilities for supporting various coordination tasks,
including locking, leader election, monitoring, to name but just a few. It
has been designed for scalability and fault tolerance. For our purposes now,
we concentrate only on a relatively simple setup, namely to support locking
through a single server. ZooKeeper’s fault tolerance aspects are discussed in
Chapter 8. The system was first described in [Hunt et al., 2010], to be later
followed up with a practical description by Junqueira and Reed [2014].

ZooKeeper basics

As mentioned, ZooKeeper is designed to facilitate different coordination
functions. An important design principle is its lack of blocking primitives:
clients send messages to the ZooKeeper service and, in principle, are always
immediately returned a response. In the case of locking, this means that a
client will, for example, be informed whether it was able to grab a lock. If the
lock could not be acquired, a new attempt will be necessary, as we discuss
shortly.
    To facilitate a range of coordination functions, ZooKeeper maintains a
namespace, organized as a tree. Operations on the tree are simple: creating
and deleting nodes, as well as reading and updating the data contained in a
node (if any). A partial update of a node is not possible: all the node’s data
will be overwritten in the case of an update. In addition, a client can check
with the server whether a node exists. At this point, it should be become clear
how one could implement a locking service in ZooKeeper: to acquire a lock,
simply let a process create a special node, say lock, but have that operation
fail if the node already exists. Releasing a lock is done by merely deleting the
node lock. We return to some important details below.

    There are two types of nodes in ZooKeeper. Persistent nodes need to
be created and deleted explicitly. In contrast, ephemeral nodes are created
explicitly, but are automatically removed if the connection with the creating
client closes (perhaps because of a failure), or expires. Of course, an ephemeral
node can also be explicitly deleted.
    An important consequence of not supporting blocking operations, is that a
client will have to regularly check the status of the namespace: have nodes
been added or removed, have nodes in the namespace been changed? However,
polling is generally not considered to be very efficient. To this end, ZooKeeper
supports a notification mechanism by which a client can subscribe to a change
in a node or a branch in the tree. When a change happens, the client receives
a message.
    There are a few things that need to be considered to make this all work.
First, suppose a client subscribes to changes at a specific node after having
read the state of that node. If the node is updated twice in a row, we want
to prevent that the client sees the second update before being notified, as the
notification dealt with changes to the previous state, i.e., the state after the first
update took place.
    Second, it should be clear that there can be a lot of concurrency among
competing clients. As we shall discuss in detail in Chapter 7, problematic are,
in particular, the situations in which one client C1 reads data to subsequently
decide to update that data. If, between the read and intended update another
client C2 performs an update, client C1 may now request an update based on
out-of-date information. Such intended updates can be prevented by using
version numbers, as shown in Figure 5.19.

Figure 5.19: Preventing updates based on out-of-date information through
versions (based on [Junqueira and Reed, 2014].

    We use the notation W(n, k)a to denote the request to write the value a to
node n, under the assumption that its current version is k. R(n, k) denotes that
the current version of node n is k. The operation R(n) tells that a client wants
to read the current value of node n, and R(n, k)a means that the value a from

node n is returned with its current version k. In Figure 5.19 we see that client
C1 writes value a to node n, assuming its version is 1. If no write has ever
taken place, this assumption is correct. The ZooKeeper service (ZK) returns
the new version number, namely 2.
     Meanwhile, client C2 issues a read request for node n and is returned the
previously written value a having version number 2. C2 decides to update
n, assuming its current version is still 2, by means of the write operation
W(n, 2)b. ZooKeeper accepts the write, and returns the new version number
3. This concurrent update places C1 in the position that its intended write
operation W(n, 2)c will fail: ZooKeeper states that its assumption about the
version number is incorrect. The best what C1 could do is read n again to see
if it still wants to update the node.
     Clearly, each client may need to try several times before an update actually
takes place. This may not always seem so efficient, yet this approach ensures
that data maintained by ZooKeeper is at least consistent with what clients
expect it to be. As mentioned, we will return to consistency in much more
detail in Chapter 7.

A ZooKeeper locking protocol
Implementing a lock using ZooKeeper is now fairly straightforward. ZooKeeper
uses the same path notation for nodes as in Unix file systems. That means
that we can create a node /lock at the root of the tree. The existence of that
node means that a client has successfully acquired the lock. Releasing the lock
is simply done by deleting node /lock.
    Any client wanting to create the same node will receive the message that
the node already exists and thus that the operation failed. Capturing such
exceptions is at the core of blocking a client until /lock is removed. When the
node already exists, the client will request ZooKeeper to send a notification
when the node is deleted. Until that moment, the client simply waits (i.e.,
locally blocks) until notified, after which it tries to create the node again.
    There are many subtleties to deal with. For example, a decent locking
mechanism should allow a client to bail out after several attempts. Likewise,
if a client who has created /lock crashes before deleting it again, we need to
make sure that ZooKeeper will delete the node. Furthermore, we will find
ourselves in an unfortunate race when the following happens:

   1. A client C1 creates a node /lock.
   2. A client C2 wants to acquire the lock but is notified that the associated
      node already exists.
   3. Before C2 subscribes to a notification, C1 releases the lock, i.e., deletes
      /lock.
   4. Client C2 subscribes to changes to /lock and blocks locally.

    This is analogous to the situation we described before: C2 should be
able to subscribe to changes based on the existence of /lock. In other words,
when performing the fourth step, C2 should be immediately notified that the
situation has already changed since it last visited the tree. These subtleties are
handled by ZooKeeper.

5.4     Election algorithms
Many distributed algorithms require one process to act as coordinator, initiator,
or otherwise perform some special role. In general, it does not matter which
process takes on this special responsibility, but one of them has to do it. In
this section, we will look at algorithms for electing a coordinator. We will
often also speak of a leader election.
    If all processes are the same, with no distinguishing characteristics, there is
no way to select one of them to be special. Consequently, we will assume that
each process P has a unique identifier id(P). In general, election algorithms
attempt to locate the process with the highest identifier and designate it as
coordinator. The algorithms differ in the way they locate the coordinator.
    Furthermore, we also assume that every process knows the identifier of
every other process. In other words, each process has complete knowledge of
the process group in which a coordinator must be elected. What the processes
do not know is which ones are currently up and which ones are currently
down. The goal of an election algorithm is to ensure that when an election
starts, it concludes with all processes agreeing on whom the new coordinator
is to be. There are many algorithms and variations, of which several important
ones are discussed in the textbooks by Tel [2000] and Lynch [1996].

5.4.1    The bully algorithm
A well-known solution for electing a coordinator is the bully algorithm de-
vised by Garcia-Molina [1982]. In the following, we consider N processes
{P0 , . . . , PN−1 } and let id(Pk ) = k. When any process notices that the coordi-
nator is no longer responding to requests, it initiates an election. A process,
Pk , holds an election as follows:

   1. Pk sends an ELECTION message to all processes with higher identifiers:
      Pk+1 , Pk+2 , . . . , PN−1 .
   2. If no one responds, Pk wins the election and becomes coordinator.
   3. If one of the higher-ups answers, it takes over and Pk ’s job is done.

   At any moment, a process can get an ELECTION message from one of its
lower-numbered colleagues. When such a message arrives, the receiver sends
an OK message back to the sender to indicate that it is alive and will take

                         (a)                        (b)

                                      (c)

                   (d)                                    (e)

Figure 5.20: The bully election algorithm. (a) Process 4 holds an election. (b)
Processes 5 and 6 respond, telling 4 to stop. (c) Now 5 and 6 each hold an
election. (d) Process 6 tells 5 to stop. (e) Process 6 wins and tells everyone.

over. The receiver then holds an election, unless it is already holding one.
Eventually, all processes give up but one, and that one is the new coordinator.
It announces its victory by sending all processes a message telling them that
starting immediately it is the new coordinator.
     If a process that was previously down comes back up, it holds an election.
If it happens to be the highest-numbered process currently running, it will
win the election and take over the coordinator’s job. Thus the biggest guy in
town always wins, hence the name “bully algorithm.”
     In Figure 5.20 we see an example of how the bully algorithm works. The
group consists of eight processes, with identifiers numbered from 0 to 7.

Previously, process P7 was the coordinator, but it has just crashed. Process
P4 is the first one to notice this, so it sends ELECTION messages to all the
processes higher than it, namely P5 , P6 , and P7 , as shown in Figure 5.20(a).
Processes P5 and P6 both respond with OK, as shown in Figure 5.20(b). Upon
getting the first of these responses, P4 knows that its job is over, knowing that
either one of P5 or P6 will take over and become coordinator. Process P4 just
sits back and waits to see who the winner will be (although at this point it
can make a pretty good guess).
    In Figure 5.20(c) both P5 and P6 hold elections, each one sending messages
only to those processes with identifiers higher than itself. In Figure 5.20(d),
P6 tells P5 that it will take over. At this point, P6 knows that P7 is dead and
that it (P6 ) is the winner. If there is state information to be collected from disk
or elsewhere to pick up where the old coordinator left off, P6 must now do
what is needed. When it is ready to take over, it announces the takeover by
sending a COORDINATOR message to all running processes. When P4 gets
this message, it can now continue with the operation it was trying to do when
it discovered that P7 was dead, but using P6 as the coordinator this time. In
this way, the failure of P7 is handled, and the work can continue.
    If process P7 is ever restarted, it will send all the others a COORDINATOR
message and bully them into submission.

5.4.2   A ring algorithm
Consider the following election algorithm that is based on the use of a (logical)
ring. Unlike some ring algorithms, this one does not use a token. We assume
that each process knows who its successor is. When any process notices that
the coordinator is not functioning, it builds an ELECTION message containing
its own process identifier and sends the message to its successor. If the
successor is down, the sender skips over the successor and goes to the next
member along the ring, or the one after that, until a running process is located.
At each step along the way, the sender adds its own identifier to the list in the
message, effectively making itself a candidate to be elected as coordinator.
    Eventually, the message gets back to the process that started it all. That pro-
cess recognizes this event when it receives an incoming message containing its
own identifier. At that point, the message type is changed to COORDINATOR
and circulated once again, this time to inform everyone else who the coordi-
nator is (the list member with the highest identifier) and who the members of
the new ring are. When this message has circulated once, it is removed and
everyone goes back to work.
    In Figure 5.21 we see what happens if two processes, P3 and P6 , discover
simultaneously that the previous coordinator, process P7 , has crashed. Each
of these builds an ELECTION message and each of them starts circulating its
message, independent of the other one. Eventually, both messages will go all
the way around, and both P3 and P6 will convert them into COORDINATOR

Figure 5.21: Election algorithm using a ring. The solid line shows the election
messages initiated by P6 ; the dashed one those by P3 .

messages, with exactly the same members and in the same order. When both
have gone around again, both will be removed. It does no harm to have extra
messages circulating; at worst it consumes a little bandwidth, but this is not
considered wasteful.

5.4.3      Example: Leader election in ZooKeeper
Let us look at a practical example of how leader election takes place in a
distributed system. As mentioned, ZooKeeper is logically centralized coordi-
nation service. In Section 5.3.6 we considered a simple setup with just a single
ZooKeeper server. In practice, we see that ZooKeeper maintains a (relatively
small) set of servers, forming what is called an ensemble. For a client, an
ensemble appears as just a single server. For ZooKeeper, this ensemble is
also coordinated by a single server, called the leader. The other servers are
called followers and essentially act as up-to-date standbys for whenever the
leader malfunctions. In that case, one of the followers will be elected as the
new leader. From the client’s perspective, a malfunctioning leader is mostly
invisible: as soon as one of the standbys has taken over the role of leader,
everything proceeds as if nothing happened. We return to many details of
such fault-tolerant behavior in Chapter 8, but for now, let us dive a bit deeper
into how the server in a ZooKeeper ensemble choose their leader.
    It is important to note that a leader-election algorithm within a ZooKeeper
ensemble is fundamentally different from devising a leader-election algorithm
by means of ZooKeeper. The first deals with the implementation of ZooKeeper
as a coordination service; the second with using ZooKeeper as a coordination
service, perhaps as part of the implementation of a larger distributed system.
    Which leader-election algorithm is used within a ZooKeeper ensemble is
not that important, as long as, in the end, a single leader is chosen and enough
followers are running as up-to-date standbys. Enough in this case means that
a majority of the servers that form an ensemble are operating properly. For
now, we will simply assume this to be the case.

    The default election algorithm in an implementation of ZooKeeper is
a simple version of bullying and works as follows [Junqueira and Reed,
2014]. Each server s in the ensemble has an identifier id(s), as well as a
monotonically increasing counter tx(s) of the latest transaction it handled.
Think of a transaction as a series of operations the server has executed, such
as the combination of adding a node and registering that it should send a client
a notification when anything changes. Typically, the leader of the ensemble
will have performed the transaction on its own, locally stored, namespace and
instructed its followers to do so as well on their respective local copy of that
namespace.
    When a follower s believes something is wrong with the leader (e.g., it
suspects that the leader crashed), it sends out an ELECTION message to all
other servers, along with the pair (voteID,voteTX). For this first message,
it sets voteID to id(s) and voteTX to tx(s). During an election, each server s
maintains two variables. The first, leader(s), records the identifier of the server
that s believes may turn out to be the final leader, and is initialized to id(s).
The second, lastTX(s) is what s has learned to be the most recent transaction,
initially being its own value, namely tx(s).
    When a server s∗ receives (voteID,voteTX), it proceeds as follows:

   • If lastTX(s∗ ) < voteTX, then s∗ just received more up-to-date informa-
     tion on the most recent transaction. In that case, it sets

         – leader(s∗ ) ← voteID
         – lastTX(s∗ ) ← voteTX

   • If lastTX(s∗ ) = voteTX and leader(s∗ ) < voteID, then s∗ knows as much
     about the most recent transaction as what it was just sent, but its per-
     spective on which server will be the next leader needs to be updated:

         – leader(s∗ ) ← voteID

Each time a server s∗ receives a (voteID,voteTX) message, it may update its
own information on whom it suspects to be the next leader. If s∗ believes it
should be the next leader, and has not sent out a message stating this, it will
broadcast the pair (id(s∗ ),tx(s∗ )). Under the assumption that communication is
reliable, this broadcast alone should do the job. Typically, s∗ will send out a
message stating that it is the leader, when either initiating an election, or when
receiving a message with a lower voteTX than its own tx(s∗ ), or receiving a
message with an up-to-date value for voteTX, but with a smaller voteID than
id(s∗ ). Once a leader has been elected, all servers will make sure that they
synchronize on the latest transaction.

  Note 5.6 (Advanced: ZooKeeper leader election in Python)

      1   class Process:
      2     def __init__(self, chanID, procID, procIDSet, initTX):
      3       self.txID       = initTX       # Your own most recent transaction
      4       self.leader     = self.procID # Who you believe may become leader
      5       self.lastTX     = self.txID    # What is the most recent transaction
      6       self.noleader = False          # Are you still in the race for leader?
      7
      8     def receive(self):
      9       while True:
   10           msg             = self.chan.recvFrom(self.otherProcs)
   11           sender, payload = msg[0], msg[1]
   12           if payload[0] == ELECTION: # A process started an election
   13             voteID, voteTX = payload[1], payload[2]
   14
   15             if self.lastTX < voteTX: # You’re not up to date on most recent transaction
   16               self.leader = voteID # Record the suspected leader
   17               self.lastTX = voteTX # As well as the likely most recent transaction
   18
   19            elif (self.lastTX == voteTX) and (self.leader < voteID): # Wrong leader
   20              self.leader = voteID # Update your suspected leader
   21
   22            elif (self.procID > voteID) and (self.txID >= voteTX) and (not self.noleader):
   23              # At this point, you may very well be the new leader (having a sufficiently
   24              # high process identifier as well as perhaps the most recent transaction).
   25              # No one has told you so far that you could not be leader. Tell the others.
   26              self.chan.sendTo(self.otherProcs, (LEADER, self.procID, self.txID))
   27
   28           if payload[0] == LEADER:
   29             # Check if the sender should indeed be leader
   30             if ((self.lastTX < payload[2]) or
   31                 ((self.lastTX == payload[2]) and (self.leader <= payload[1]))):
   32               # The sender is more up-to-date than you, or is equally up-to-date but
   33               # has a higher process identifier. Declare yourself follower.
   34               self.chan.sendTo(sender, (FOLLOWER, self.procID))
   35             else:
   36               # Sender is wrong: you have information that the sender based its decision
   37               # on outdated information
   38               self.chan.sendTo(sender, (NOLEADER))

Figure 5.22: A simplified version of ZooKeeper’s leader election for an
          ensemble of servers.

      Coming to the conclusion that one of the servers in a ZooKeeper ensemble is
  now indeed the new leader, can be a bit tricky. One way is to let a server come to
  the conclusion that it may never become a leader in the current round, in which
  case it tells the alleged leader that it will become a follower. This means that as
  soon as a server has collected enough followers, it can promote itself to leader.
  In ZooKeeper, this happens when a server has a majority of the other servers in
  the ensemble as followers. If we take an oversimplified approach by assuming

  that messages are never lost, nor do servers crash during an election, a leader is
  elected when all other servers are its followers. The code is shown in Figure 5.22
  (again, omitting many details).

5.4.4   Example: Leader election in Raft
As another example of a leader-election algorithm that is in practical use, let
us take a look at Raft [Ongaro and Ousterhout, 2014]. We will return to Raft
in Chapter 8 when discussing consensus algorithms and focus here only on
how it selects a leader.
    Raft operates in a setting in which a handful of known replicated servers
(typically five) collaborate by ensuring that each server executes the same set
of operations, and all in the same order. To this end, one of the servers is
elected as leader to tell the others what the exact order is of those operations.
The protocol assumes that messages may be lost and that servers may crash.
    Each server can be in one of three states: follower, candidate, or leader.
Furthermore, the protocol operates in terms, where during each term there
is exactly one leader, although it could have perhaps crashed. Each term is
numbered, starting with 0. The leader is assumed to regularly send out a
message, either containing information on an operation that should be carried
out, or otherwise a heartbeat message to tell the other servers that their leader
is still up and running.
    Each server initially starts in the follower state (that is, there is initially no
leader). Adopting the terminology from Howard et al. [2015], after a follower
timeout, a following server concludes that the leader may have crashed (which,
by the way, may be a false conclusion). As a result, it enters the candidate state
and starts an election, volunteering to be the new leader. An election starts
with a broadcast to all other servers, along with increasing the term number
by 1. At that point, three situations may happen.

   1. A candidate may receive a message from an alleged leader. If that server
      indicates it is operating in the same term as the candidate server, the
      latter will become follower again for the current term.
   2. When a following server receives an election message for the first time
      (in a new term), it simply votes for the candidate and ignores any other
      election messages (for that new term). Therefore, a candidate server can
      also receive a vote. If it has a majority of votes (i.e., more than half of the
      servers, including itself), it promotes itself as leader for the new term.
   3. As long as there is no alleged leader, or not enough votes have been
      received, the candidate server waits until a candidate timeout happens.
      At that point, the candidate server will simply start a new election (and
      again, for a next term).

    Of course, if all servers enter the candidate state, we bear the risk of
indefinitely not being able to cast enough votes for a single server. A simple
solution is to slightly vary the follower timeout and candidate timeout on a
per-server basis. The result is that, generally, there is only a single candidate
for the new term, allowing each other server to vote for that candidate and
become a follower. As soon as a server becomes leader, it will send out a
heartbeat message to the rest.

5.4.5      Elections in large-scale systems
Many leader-election algorithms apply to only relatively small distributed
systems. In such cases, the various nodes exchange information among each
other, often through several rounds, to eventually collectively decide on the
new leader. In Chapter 8, we shall see that this collective decision-making can
take place even when a fraction of the participating nodes exhibits noncon-
forming behavior, as in the case of security attacks or faults. The problem
of electing a leader becomes rather nasty when there are potentially many
processes to choose from. This is the case, for example, in permissionless
blockchains.

Proof of work

A relatively simple, yet by now heavily criticized solution, is to have the
candidates run a computational race, referred to as proof of work. Running
such a race, which is done by solving a computational puzzle, should be
known to be possible, yet difficult. The first process solving the puzzle, wins,
and may proceed as leader to append a block of validated transactions to the
existing blockchain.
    The type of problem used for blockchains is based on what is known as
hashing. As introduced in Section 1.2.5, a hash function takes as input a
(possibly large) data set and produces a fixed-length string of bits, typically
of length 1024 or 2048, called a hash. A cryptographically well-defined hash
function has several important properties [Ferguson and Schneier, 2003]:

   1. Computing the hash of a given data set is relatively easy, i.e., it does not
      require significant computational efforts.
   2. However, given a specific hash, it is computationally very difficult to
      find a corresponding data set with the same associated hash.
   3. With very high probability, any two different input data sets will lead
      to two seemingly unrelated, different hashes. Even if the two data sets
      are minimally different, their associated hashes will most likely be very
      different.

    The third property is used to securely protect blocks of validated transac-
tions against adversarial modifications: even the change of a single bit will
not go unnoticed. Combined with the second property, it becomes virtually
impossible to modify a block meaningfully, such that the modified block’s
hash is the same as the original block’s hash.
    To set up a race between validators, each validator computes the hash of
its block of validated transactions. Note again that a hash is technically just
a fixed-length string of bits. We denote the computed hash over a block a
digest. The validator is then required to find an additional bit string, called
a nonce, such that the hash computed over the digest and the nonce when
taken together produces a bit string with a predetermined number of leading
zeroes. Given property 2 of hash functions, we know that it is computationally
very difficult to find a data set that matches a given hash. In our case, we have
as input the hash of the block of validated transactions (i.e., the digest), and
are now required to find a bit string (i.e., nonce) that, taken together with the
digest, has an associated hash that starts with a given number of zeroes. This
is computationally very difficult. In essence, each validator simply needs to
go through a most likely lengthy trial-and-error process of generating a nonce
and checking whether that nonce, combined with the digest, will lead to the
required result.
    By controlling how many leading zeroes that the outcome should have,
we essentially control the difficulty of the computations. For example, with
just 1 leading zero, there is a 50% chance that a generated nonce will lead to
the desired result. Demanding 2 leading zeroes reduces this probability to
25%, 3 leading zeroes to 12.5%, and so forth. With 64 leading zeroes, which
is common practice, the chance that an arbitrarily chosen nonce will do the
trick is a mere 0.0000 0000 0000 0000 05% (that is, 17 zeroes after the decimal
dot). Put differently, a validator will on average need to check about 18 billion
billion nonces to find one that leads to the desired result. Using dedicated
supercomputers, this takes about 10 minutes. It would take an average laptop
about 100 years.
    With increasing hardware capacity, the time it takes to find a nonce will
drop. For this reason, the difficulty of finding a nonce is deliberately con-
trolled in such a way that a race will have an expected duration. For Bitcoin
systems, a popular application of blockchains, the duration is approximately
10 minutes. If races tend to become shorter, then the difficulty for finding a
nonce is increased. If races turn out to be too lengthy, the difficulty is lowered.
Adjusting the difficulty is done by regularly computing the average time it
took to run the race over the last 2000 blocks of transactions, or so. The
adjustment of the difficulty is done by all validators using the same globally
known method, and is therefore done in a completely decentralized manner.
   There is a reason for properly setting the expected duration of a race.
Suppose we have very lengthy races. This means that validators would have

to do a lot of work to find a proper nonce. The good part of the story is that
the chance that two validators find a nonce at more or less the same time is
relatively small (although this depends, of course, on how many validators
participate in the race). As a consequence, the chance that there will be only
one winner who will have enough time to successfully broadcast its victory to
all others is relatively high.
    The downside of the story, however, is that with lengthy races, the transac-
tion processing capacity may be too low. Suppose that we have a race duration
of 10 minutes and an average number of 2500 transactions per block (which
are common values for Bitcoin). This means that, effectively, the system can
handle about 4 transactions per second. Increasing the number of transactions
per block is an obvious path to follow, yet even such improvements still lead
to low rates in comparison to many centralized solutions with a fixed, trusted
third party validating transactions.
    On the other hand, assume we would have very short-lasting races. In that
case, two validators may more easily concurrently find a proper nonce, both
will declare victory, append their block to the blockchain (which was already
massively replicated), and before other validators had the chance to stop their
work, we would find ourselves with different copies of the same blockchain.
There are different ways to correct for these concurrent versions of what is
supposed to be a single blockchain, but obviously, it comes at the price of
invalidating potentially many transactions, and rolling back to a valid state.
Of course, the advantage of a smaller race duration is that, in principle, we
can handle more transactions per time unit.

Proof of stake

As a reaction to the waste of computational resources found in proof-of-work
systems, much effort has been spent on alternative leader-election algorithms
for permissionless blockchains. An important class is formed by so-called
proof-of-stake systems. Leaving out many details, as well as the many variants
of such systems, the basic principle is as follows. An easy-to-read overview of
the principles of proof-of-stake leader election is provided by Nguyen et al.
[2019].
    First, we need to make the assumption that each transaction as recorded
in a blockchain has one or more associated tokens. Moreover, at each moment,
each token has exactly one owner. This is typically the case with mone-
tary transactions, where a token is associated with a digital coin. Because
blockchains are fully readable by any participant, we may also assume that
tokens may be passed between owners, and that, indeed, copying a token and
associating it with multiple owners cannot go undetected. How this can be
realized is discussed in Section 9.4.3. Each token will, therefore, have only a
single owner. Second, we make also make the (realistic) assumption that for

a given blockchain, there are a total of N tokens, which may vary over time
depending on the application for which a blockchain is being used.
    A simple leader-election process for blockchains then consists of a function
that generates a random number k between 1 and N. That number is used
as an index of the kth token, of which the owner becomes the next leader.
The function used to generate a random number is public, meaning that any
participant can execute it to determine k. Obviously, the more tokens a process
P owns, the higher the probability that P will be elected as leader.
    The simplicity of this algorithm and the fact that there are still so many
race-based blockchains, indicates that there are many issues to deal with
before proof-of-stake solutions can actually work. To understand, we need to
realize that with proof of work, there is a price to pay to become leader, namely
using considerable computational resources. If that price is compensated by
a reward (namely a transaction fee), we have some sort of balance. In many
proof-of-stake systems, there may also be a reward, but there is no price
to be paid in advance for becoming a leader. As a result, these systems
are generally more vulnerable to security attacks, for example, by letting
participants generate invalid transactions that will disrupt the work of honest
leaders.
    Leader election in blockchains is part of reaching consensus on the status
of a blockchain. We return to these matters in Section 8.2.6.

  Note 5.7 (Advanced: Selecting superpeers)
  Many leader-election algorithms often concentrate on the selection of only a single
  node. There are situations when several nodes should actually be selected, such
  as in the case of super peers in peer-to-peer networks, which we discussed in
  Section 2.4.3.
      The following requirements need to be met for super-peer selection (see
  also [Lo et al., 2005]):
     1. Normal nodes should have low-latency access to super peers.
     2. Super peers should be evenly distributed across the overlay network.
     3. There should be a predefined portion of super peers relative to the total
        number of nodes in the overlay network.
     4. Each super peer should not need to serve more than a fixed number of
        normal nodes.
      Fortunately, these requirements are relatively easy to meet in most peer-to-
  peer systems, given the fact that the overlay network is either structured (as in
  DHT-based systems), or randomly unstructured (as, for example, can be realized
  with gossip-based solutions). Let us take a look at solutions proposed by Lo et al.
  [2005].
      In the case of DHT-based systems, the basic idea is to reserve a fraction of
  the identifier space for super peers. In a DHT-based system, each node receives
  a random and uniformly assigned m-bit identifier. Now suppose we reserve the

  first (i.e., leftmost) k bits to identify super peers. For example, if we need N
  superpeers, then the first ⌈log2 ( N )⌉ bits of any key can be used to identify these
  nodes.
       To explain, assume we have a (small) Chord system with m = 8 and k = 3.
  When looking up the node responsible for a specific key K, we can first decide
  to route the lookup request to the node responsible for the pattern K ∧ 11100000
  which is then treated as the superpeer. (We use the binary operator “∧” to denote
  a bitwise and.) Note that each node with identifier ID can check whether it is a
  super peer by looking up ID ∧ 11100000 to see if this request is routed to itself.
  Provided node identifiers are uniformly assigned to nodes, it can be seen that
  with a total of N nodes the number of super peers is, on average, equal to 2k−m N.

Figure 5.23: Moving tokens in a two-dimensional space using repulsion
        forces.

      A different approach is based on positioning nodes in an m-dimensional
  geometric space. In this case, assume we need to place N super peers evenly
  throughout the overlay. The basic idea is simple: a total of N tokens are spread
  across N randomly chosen nodes. No node can hold more than one token. Each
  token represents a repelling force by which another token is inclined to move
  away. The net effect is that if all tokens exert the same repulsion force, they will
  move away from each other and spread themselves evenly in the geometric space.
      This approach requires that nodes holding a token learn about other tokens. To
  this end, we can use a gossiping protocol, by which a token’s force is disseminated
  throughout the network. If a node discovers that the total forces that are acting
  on it exceed a threshold, it will move the token in the direction of the combined
  forces, as shown in Figure 5.23. When a token is held by a node for a given
  amount of time, that node will promote itself to superpeer.

5.4.6      Elections in wireless environments
Traditional election algorithms are generally based on assumptions that are
not realistic in wireless environments. For example, they assume that message
passing is reliable and that the topology of the network does not change.
These assumptions are false in most wireless environments, especially when
dealing with mobile devices.
   Only few protocols for elections have been developed that work in mobile
environments. Vasudevan et al. [2004] propose a solution that can handle

failing nodes and partitioning networks. An important property of their
solution is that the best leader can be elected rather than just a random one as
was more or less the case in the previously discussed solutions. Their protocol
works as follows. To simplify our discussion, we concentrate only on ad hoc
networks and ignore that nodes can actually move. This may be the case, for
example, in sensor networks.
    Consider such a wireless ad hoc network. To elect a leader, any node in the
network, called the source, can initiate an election by sending an ELECTION
message to its immediate neighbors (i.e., the nodes in its range). When a
node receives an ELECTION for the first time, it designates the sender as its
parent, and subsequently sends out an ELECTION message to all its immediate
neighbors, except for the parent. When a node receives an ELECTION message
from a node besides its parent, it merely acknowledges the receipt.
    When node R has designated node Q as its parent, it forwards the
ELECTION message to its immediate neighbors (excluding Q) and waits for
acknowledgments to come in before acknowledging the ELECTION message
from Q. This waiting has an important consequence. First, note that neighbors
who have already selected a parent will immediately respond to R. More
specifically, if all neighbors already have a parent, R is a leaf node and will be
able to report back to Q quickly. In doing so, it will also report information
such as its battery lifetime and other resource capacities.
    This information will later allow Q to compare R’s capacities to that of
other downstream nodes, and select the best eligible node for leadership. Of
course, Q had sent an ELECTION message only because its own parent P had
done so as well. In turn, when Q eventually acknowledges the ELECTION
message previously sent by P, it will pass the most eligible node to P as well.
In this way, the source will eventually get to know which node is best to be
selected as leader, after which it will broadcast this information to the rest.
    This process is illustrated in Figure 5.24. Nodes have been labeled a to
j, along with their capacity. Node a initiates an election by broadcasting
an ELECTION message to nodes b and j, as shown in Figure 5.24(b) After
that step, ELECTION messages are propagated to all nodes, ending with the
situation shown in Figure 5.24(e), where we have omitted the last broadcast
by nodes f and i. From there on, each node reports to its parent the node
with the best capacity, as shown in Figure 5.24(f). For example, when node g
receives the acknowledgments from its children e and h, it will notice that h
is the best node, propagating [h, 8] to its own parent, node b. In the end, the
source will note that h is the best leader and will broadcast this information
to all other nodes.
    When multiple elections are initiated, each node will decide to join only
one election. To this end, each source tags its ELECTION message with a
unique identifier. Nodes will participate only in the election with the highest
identifier, stopping any running participation in other elections.

                  (a)                                     (b)

                  (c)                                     (d)

                  (e)                                      (f)

Figure 5.24: Election algorithm in a wireless network, with node a as the
source. (a) Initial network. (b)–(e) The build-tree phase (last broadcast step by
nodes f and i not shown). (f) Reporting of best node to source.

    With some minor adjustments, the protocol can be shown to operate also
when the network partitions, and when nodes join and leave. The details can
be found in Vasudevan et al. [2004].

5.5     Gossip-based coordination
As a next topic in coordination, we take a look at a few important examples
in which gossiping is deployed. In the following, we look at aggregation,
large-scale peer sampling, and overlay construction, respectively.

5.5.1   Aggregation
Let us take a look at some interesting applications of epidemic protocols. We
already mentioned spreading updates, which is perhaps the most widely de-
ployed application. In the same light, gossiping can be used to discover nodes
that have a few outgoing wide-area links, to subsequently apply directional
gossiping.
    Another interesting application area is simply collecting, or actually aggre-
gating information [Jelasity et al., 2005]. Consider the following information
exchange. Every node Pi initially chooses an arbitrary number, say vi . When
node Pi contacts node Pj , they each update their value as:

                              vi , v j ← (vi + v j )/2

Obviously, after this exchange, both Pi and Pj will have the same value. In
fact, it is not difficult to see that eventually all nodes will have the same
value, namely the average of all initial values. Propagation speed is again
exponential.
    What use does computing the average have? Consider the situation that
all nodes Pi have set vi to zero, except for P1 who has set v1 to 1:
                                    (
                                      1 if i = 1
                               vi ←
                                      0 otherwise

If there are N nodes, then eventually each node will compute the average,
which is 1/N. As a consequence, every node Pi can estimate the size of the
system as being 1/vi .
    Computing the average may be difficult when nodes regularly join and
leave the system. One practical solution to this problem is to introduce epochs.
Assuming that node P1 is stable, it simply starts a new epoch now and then.
When node Pi sees a new epoch for the first time, it resets its own variable vi
to zero and starts computing the average again.
    Of course, other results can also be computed. For example, instead of
having a fixed node such as P1 start the computation of the average, we

can easily pick a random node as follows. Every node Pi initially sets vi
to a random number from the same interval, say (0, 1], and also stores it
permanently as mi . Upon an exchange between nodes Pi and Pj , each change
their value to:
                               vi , v j ← max{vi , v j }

Each node Pi for which mi < vi will lose the competition for being the initiator
in starting the computation of the average. In the end, there will be a single
winner. Of course, although it is easy to conclude that a node has lost, it is
much more difficult to decide that it has won, as it remains uncertain whether
all results have come in. The solution to this problem is to be optimistic: a
node always assumes it is the winner until proven otherwise. At that point, it
simply resets the variable it is using for computing the average to zero. Note
that by now, several computations (in our example, computing a maximum
and computing an average) may be executing simultaneously.

5.5.2      A peer-sampling service
An important aspect in epidemic protocols is the ability of a node P to choose
another node Q at random from all available nodes in the network. When
giving the matter some thought, we may actually have a serious problem:
if the network consists of thousands of nodes, how can P ever pick one of
these nodes at random without having a complete overview of the network?
For smaller networks, one could often resort to a central service that had
registered every participating node. Obviously, this approach can never scale
to large networks.
     A solution is to construct a fully decentralized peer-sampling service, or
PSS for short. As it turns out, and somewhat counter-intuitive, a PSS can be
built using an epidemic protocol. As explored by Jelasity et al. [2007], each
node maintains a list of c neighbors, where, ideally, each of these neighbors
represents a randomly chosen live node from the current set of nodes. This
list of neighbors is also referred to as a partial view. There are many ways to
construct such a partial view. In the solution of Jelasity et al., it is assumed that
nodes regularly exchange entries from their partial view. Each entry identifies
another node in the network, and has an associated age that indicates how old
the reference to that node is. Two threads are used, as shown in Figure 5.25.
     The different selection operations are specified as follows:

   • selectPeer: Randomly select a neighbor from the local partial view
   • selectToSend: Select some other entries from the partial view, and add
     to the list intended for the selected neighbor.
   • selectToKeep: Add received entries to the partial view, remove repeated
     items, and shrink the view to c items.

    1   selectPeer(&Q);                    1
    2   selectToSend(&bufs);               2
    3   sendTo(Q, bufs);              −→   3   receiveFromAny(&P, &bufr);
    4                                      4   selectToSend(&bufs);
    5   receiveFrom(Q, &bufr);        ←−   5   sendTo(P, bufs);
    6   selectToKeep(p_view, bufr);        6   selectToKeep(p_view, bufr);

                    (a)                                         (b)

Figure 5.25: Communication between the (a) active and (b) passive thread in
a peer-sampling service.

     The active thread takes the initiative to communicate with another node. It
selects that node from its current partial view. It continues by constructing a
list containing c/2 + 1 entries, including an entry identifying itself. The other
entries are taken from the current partial view. After sending the list to the
selected neighbor, it waits for a response.
     That neighbor, meanwhile, will also have constructed a list through the
passive thread shown in Figure 5.25(b) whose activities strongly resemble that
of the active thread.
     The crucial point is the construction of a new partial view. This view, for
contacting as well as for the contacted peer, will contain exactly c entries, part
of which will come from the received list. In essence, there are two ways to
construct the new view. First, the two nodes may decide to discard the entries
that they had sent to each other. Effectively, this means that they will swap
part of their original views. The second approach is to discard as many old
entries as possible (meaning, in practice, that after every gossiping round, the
age of each entry in every partial view is incremented by one).
     As it turns out, as long as peers regularly run the exchange algorithm just
described, selecting a random peer from a thus dynamically changing partial
view, is statistically indistinguishable from randomly selecting a peer from
the entire network. Of course, selecting a peer from a partial view should
occur at approximately the same frequency as the refreshing of partial views.
We have thus constructed a fully decentralized gossip-based peer-sampling
service. A simple and often-used implementation of a peer-sampling service
is Cyclon [Voulgaris et al., 2005].

5.5.3    Gossip-based overlay construction
Although it would seem that structured and unstructured peer-to-peer sys-
tems form strict independent classes, this need actually not be the case (see
also Castro et al. [2005]). One key observation is that by carefully exchanging
and selecting entries from partial views, it is possible to construct and main-
tain specific topologies of overlay networks. This topology management is
achieved by adopting a two-layered approach, as shown in Figure 5.26.

Figure 5.26: A two-layered approach for constructing and maintaining specific
overlay topologies using techniques from unstructured peer-to-peer systems.

    The lowest layer constitutes an unstructured peer-to-peer system in which
nodes periodically exchange entries of their partial views with the aim to
provide a peer-sampling service. Accuracy in this case refers to the fact that
the partial view should be filled with entries referring to randomly selected
live nodes.
    The lowest layer passes its partial view to the higher layer, where an
additional selection of entries takes place. This then leads to a second list
of neighbors corresponding to the desired topology. Jelasity and Kermarrec
[2006] propose to use a ranking function by which nodes are ordered according
to some criterion relative to a given node. A simple ranking function is to
order a set of nodes by increasing distance from a given node P. In that case,
node P will gradually build up a list of its nearest neighbors, provided the
lowest layer continues to pass randomly selected nodes.
    As an illustration, consider a logical grid of size N × N with a node placed
on each point of the grid. Every node is required to maintain a list of c
nearest neighbors, where the distance between a node at ( a1 , a2 ) and (b1 , b2 )
is defined as d1 + d2 , with di = min( N − | ai − bi |, | ai − bi |). If the lowest layer
periodically executes the protocol as outlined in Figure 5.25, the topology that
will evolve is a two-dimensional torus, shown in Figure 5.27. In this example,
N = 50 and we show the results after first initializing each list with random
entries. Figure 5.27(b) shows the results after five rounds of exchanges, while
the final result, shown in Figure 5.27(c) is achieved after 20 rounds.

  Note 5.8 (Advanced: Gossip-based overlay construction in Python)
  To better appreciate and understand the construction of overlay networks through
  gossiping, let us see what a concrete implementation in Python would look like.
  As we have mentioned, the principle is simple: we have two separate layers
  and each node is responsible for exchanging links with selected neighbors. A
  straightforward implementation would seem to be to use a separate thread per
  layer, as suggested in Figure 5.26. However, such a choice will instantly lead to
  potential deadlock problems. Suppose node A decides to exchange links with

              (a)                         (b)                         (c)

Figure 5.27: Generating a torus overlay network using a two-layered unstruc-
tured peer-to-peer system.

  node B, but B has chosen another node, say C for exchanging links. If C chooses A
  for exchanging links, we may have a deadlock if these three nodes first collectively
  choose their respective neighbor for exchanging links, and then collectively wait
  for that neighbor to respond.
       The general solution to this problem is to essentially avoid synchronous
  request-response behavior, but instead to use asynchronous, persistent com-
  munication. In other words, we let the middleware store a message before it
  is delivered, after which the sender can continue doing other things. This type
  of communication is precisely supported by the channel package used for many
  of our Python examples. The outline of the code is shown in Figure 5.28. (The
  complete code is readily available as accompanying online material for the book.)
       Note that for each layer, the approach is essentially always the same: select a
  peer, decide on the links to exchange, and send that information asynchronously
  to the selected peer. Thereafter, a node that initiated an exchange will have to
  wait for a response. When that comes in, it merely needs to update its own view.
  (There are many subtleties that need to be considered, which we will discuss
  shortly.) In principle, there will be a regular call to maintainViews(), if only to
  ensure that a node will also react to incoming exchange requests. Note that in our
  solution, we simply let a node ignore an incoming exchange request when it has
  an outstanding initiated exchange itself. Ignoring a request is done by telling the
  initiating node to give up its own attempt. Although this approach will prevent
  deadlocks, it bears the risk that no exchange will take place at all.
       As mentioned, the actual code for handling gossip-based overlay construction
  involves more than what we have shown in Figure 5.28. Crucial are the criteria
  for selecting a neighboring peer, as well as the selection of links to exchange. As
  explained by Voulgaris and van Steen [2013], there are several things that can be
  done to speed up convergence of the overlay in comparison to random choices.
  At the same time, including random choices is essential to achieve convergence to
  the requested overlay.
       In the first place, at the top layer for constructing the overlay, links should
  be exchanged that make most sense for the receiving peer. In our example, this

  means that when a node A sends links to a node B, it should select the ones to
  neighbors that are closest to B. Furthermore, B should not return links that A had
  just sent: it is much better that A learns about new nodes first.

      1   def maintainViews():
      2     for viewType in [viewOverlay, viewPSS]: # For each view, do the same
      3       peer[viewType] = None
      4       if time to maintain viewType: # This viewType needs to be updated
      5         peer[viewType] = selectPeer(viewType)            # Select a peer
      6         links = selectLinks(viewType, peer[viewType])    # Select links
      7         sendTo(peer[viewType], Request[viewType], links) # Send links asynchronously
      8
      9    while True:
   10        block = (peer[viewOverlay] != None) or (peer[viewPSS] != None)
   11        sender, msgType, msgData = recvFromAny(block) # Block if expecting something
   12
   13         if msg == None: # All work has been done, simply return from the call
   14           return
   15
   16        for viewType in [viewOverlay, viewPSS]: # For each view, do the same
   17          if msgType == Response[viewType]: # Response to previously sent links
   18            updateOwnView(viewType, msgData) # Just update the own view
   19
   20          elif msgType == Request[viewType]: # Request for exchanging links
   21            if peer[viewType] == None:       # No outstanding exchange request
   22              links = selectLinks(viewType, sender)     # Select links
   23              sendTo(sender, Response[viewType], links) # Send them asynchronously
   24              updateOwnView(viewType,msgData)           # Update own view
   25            else: # This node already has a pending exchange request, ignore this one
   26              sendTo(sender, IgnoreRequest[viewType])
   27
   28          elif msgType == IgnoreRequest[viewType]: # Request has been denied, give up
   29            peer[viewType] = None

Figure 5.28: Pseudocode in Python for implementing a gossip-based
          approach toward overlay construction.

      Moreover, when A selects a peer, we should try to prevent selecting one with
  which a recent exchange has taken place. In other words, A should try to maximize
  diversity in selecting a peer. This diversity can be obtained by selecting peers
  in a round-robin fashion. This approach also has the benefit that in a dynamic
  network, nodes that have left are guaranteed to be discovered quickly and can
  thus be removed from a view.
      If we were to use only the top layer, the greediness of exchanging only
  best links may lead to a situation that a collection of nodes will jointly form
  a closed set within the network: jointly, they are referring to each other and
  as such, may be missing out on better nodes. This is the reason introducing
  randomness is essential, and why we need to incorporate information from the
  lower random overlay in the selection process of the higher structured overlay.

  This aspect is completely analogous to getting stuck in a local optimum when
  optimizing through hill-climbing procedures. What is needed is to introduce
  some randomness to ensure that indeed a global optimum will eventually be
  reached.

5.5.4   Secure gossiping
Gossiping is an attractive means for coordination. However, the speed by
which a large collection of nodes manages to synchronize, is also an inherent
vulnerability. The time it takes to exchange and disseminate proper informa-
tion is also the time it takes to spread false information. This is perhaps best
illustrated by means of an example. Consider a peer-sampling service for
some large network. Assume that each node maintains a partial view of size c,
and that, on average, c/2 references to neighboring nodes are exchanged. Let
us also assume that there are c colluding attackers. Their behavior is simple:
each attacker also maintains a partial view, but when returning c/2 references,
only references to other colluding attackers are returned. The effect is that,
gradually, the partial view of each benign node in the network is polluted by
references to the attackers, to the extent that each partial view contains only
references to attackers.

Figure 5.29: The speed by which a hub attack can take effect.

    The effect can be dramatic. Figure 5.29 shows the speed by which partial
views are fully polluted, that is, each contains references only to attackers.
In this example, we consider a network of 100,000 nodes, a partial view size
of 30, and only 30 attackers. After less than 300 rounds, all benign nodes
have fully polluted partial views. Also note that, completely consistent with
the push-pull behavior of epidemic protocols, it may take a while before any
serious effect is seen. However, as soon as a few hundred nodes are completely

polluted, they increasingly contribute to contaminating the rest of the nodes,
and so on.
    It can be argued that there is no standard security measure that can combat
these kinds of attacks. For example, even with using secure channels by which
both parties have genuinely authenticated each other, there is no reason to
assume that both of them will also behave as they should. In other words,
authentication provides no guarantees for trust. In the case of gossiping
systems, security often comes in the form of trying to detect and prevent
malicious behavior. For our example, the question is how can a benign node
can detect that it is under attack, and which countermeasures can it take to
mitigate the effects of an attack?
    A solution in the case of peer sampling, and developed by Jesi et al. [2010],
works as follows. The essence is to discover if there are nodes that behave
badly. The attack we just described is characterized by the fact that, eventually,
many nodes will be referencing a very small of set of nodes. In terms of
graphs, this means that the indegree of some nodes is extraordinarily high,
while for most nodes, their indegree will be low, and actually 0. An indegree
of 0 means that a node is unknown to any other node in the network.
    When using Cyclon [Voulgaris et al., 2005] as the peer-sampling service,
we know that the indegrees follow a normal distribution, as shown in Fig-
ure 5.30(a). In this example, the y-axis shows the fraction of nodes with a
specific indegree value. Even with a mere 30 colluding attackers, we already
see that after 10 rounds, the indegree distribution has started to becoming
wider and shifting to the left, as shown in Figure 5.30(b). This continues,
and after 40 rounds (Figure 5.30(e)), we already have that about 15% of all
nodes have an indegree of 0. (Note that for Figure 5.29, we were counting
the number of nodes that were referencing only attacking nodes, which is
different from measuring indegrees. An attacked node can still be referenced
by others.) Finally, after less than 300 rounds, virtually all nodes have an
indegree of 0; the attackers have now full control over the entire network.
    Figure 5.30 also gives us a hint toward a solution. As explained by Jesi et al.
[2010], each node can gather statistics on which nodes are being referenced.
If certain nodes are gradually being referenced unusually more often than
others, then something fishy may be going on. There are a few issues we
need to deal with. First, spreading of “bad” links can be so efficient, that
we need to consider that once a benign node has come to the conclusion
that it has identified an attacker, it may already be too late. Second, we also
want to prevent that every benign node has to build up complete knowledge
of the entire network, partly also because attackers have to be identified
quickly. Third, attackers do not want to be caught, i.e., be recognized as acting
maliciously, as they collectively do need some time to be successful.
    Notably the last aspect, not wanting to be caught, provides a solution to
mitigating an attack. In essence, a benign node can force an attacker to behave

                    (a)                                 (b)

                    (c)                                 (d)

                    (e)                                 (f)

Figure 5.30: The development of the indegree distribution at several stages of
a peer-sampling service under attack. Each x-axis shows the indegree, and
the y-axis the fraction of nodes with that degree.

according to the rules. What happens is that when a benign node initiates
an exchange of links with a selected node, it will process the returned links
either for updating its own partial view, or for gathering statistics (it may do
both, but this may not be on par with efficient resource usage). Moreover, to
accelerate the process of discovering attackers, a node will initiate several link
exchanges simultaneously (and, in the end, process only one of the replies). A
malicious node is now faced with a dilemma: always returning references to
its colluders will quickly reveal the attackers. The only thing that it can do, is
occasionally play by the rules and return links to other, benign nodes. As it
turns out, this dilemma is enough to force the attackers to behave decently
enough, effectively rendering an attack useless. Note that this procedure will
also be applied when an attacker initiates an exchange: the recipient can decide
to use the links passed to it for updating its statistics on indegrees, as well as
use it for running the exchange protocol. The attacker will, however, never
know whether the recipient is going to collect statistics. To fly under the radar,
it will have to behave according to the rules of the game enough in order not
to be caught. The details can be found in [Jesi et al., 2010].
    There are many other types of attacks possible. For example, attackers
may decide to initiate information exchange at a much higher frequency than
specified by the protocol. With a push-based approach, this may result in
attackers rapidly polluting values of benign nodes, which are then further
disseminated. Mousazadeh and Ladani [2015] come to the conclusion that for
such attacks, in principle, only pulling should be allowed (as the benign nodes
will then collectively dictate the pace at which information is disseminated).
    Likewise, in the case of aggregation, attackers may deliberately return
incorrect values. To illustrate, suppose that when collectively computing the
average value as we described in Section 5.5.1, an attacker A always returns its
own value v A . Every node vi communicating with A will therefore compute

                               vi ← (vi + v A )/2

which gradually converges to the value v A . In all these cases, attacks can
be mitigated only by trying to detect if a node is not behaving according to
the protocol. That detection mechanism, of course, should be known to the
attacker, while at the same time will be effective if it forces an attacker to try
to go ahead unnoticed. In turn, if well designed, the mechanism will force
the attacker to actually behave well, or at least to the extent that any possible
damage remains limited. More on how these data-injection attacks work and
can be mitigated, are described by Gentz et al. [2016].

5.6    Distributed event matching
Let us now draw our attention to distributed event matching. Event matching,
or more precisely, notification filtering, is at the heart of publish-subscribe
systems. The problem boils down to the following:

   • A process specifies through a subscription S in which events it is inter-
     ested.

   • When a process publishes a notification N on the occurrence of an event,
     the system needs to see if S matches N.

   • In the case of a match, the system should send the notification N, possibly
     including the data associated with the event that took place, to the
     subscriber.

As a consequence, we need to facilitate at least two things: (1) matching
subscriptions against events, and (2) notifying a subscriber in the case of a
match. The two can be separated, but this need not always be the case. In the
following, we assume the existence of a function match(S, N) which returns
true when subscription S matches the notification N, and false otherwise. As
we argue below, publish-subscribe systems turn out to face difficult scalability
problems when the matching function cannot be easily distributed across
multiple servers. This is often the case when subscriptions can be expressive,
as in content-based publish-subscribe systems. We discuss scalability of
distributed event matching separately below.
    Another, rather nasty problem, is combining security and privacy while
keeping publishers and subscribers mutually unaware of each other, but also
ensuring that servers have only enough information available to perform
their matching function. In this sense, it may seem that the goals of publish-
subscribe systems, and those of secure distributed systems conflict. We return
to this issue below as well.

5.6.1   Centralized implementations
A simple, naive implementation of event matching is to have a fully centralized
server that handles all subscriptions and notifications. In such a scheme, a
subscriber simply submits a subscription, which is subsequently stored. When
a publisher submits a notification, that notification is checked against each
and every subscription, and when a match is found, the notification is copied
and forwarded to the associated subscriber.
     Obviously, this is not a very scalable solution. Nevertheless, provided
the matching can be done efficiently and the server itself has enough pro-
cessing power, the solution is feasible for many cases. For example, using
a centralized server is the canonical solution for implementing Linda tuple
spaces. Likewise, many publish-subscribe systems that run within a single
department or organization can be implemented through a central server.
Important, in these cases, is that the matching function can be implemented
efficiently. In practice, this is often the case when dealing with topic-based
filtering: matching then resorts to checking for equality of attribute values.

    Note that a simple way to scale up a centralized implementation, is to de-
terministically divide the work across multiple servers. A standard approach
is to make use of two functions, as explained by Baldoni et al. [2009]:

   • a function sub2node(S), which takes a subscription S and maps it to a
     nonempty subset of servers
   • a function not2node(N), which takes a notification N and maps it to a
     nonempty subset of servers.

The servers to which sub2node(S) is mapped are called the rendezvous nodes
for S. Likewise, not2node(N) are the rendezvous nodes for N. The only
constraint that needs to be satisfied, is that for any subscription S and matching
notification N, sub2node(S) ∩ not2node(N) ̸= ∅. In other words, there must be
at least one server that can handle the subscription when there is a matching
notification. In practice, this constraint is satisfied by topic-based publish-
subscribe systems by using a hashing function on the names of the topics.
    The idea of having a central server can be extended by distributing the
matching across multiple servers and dividing the work. The servers, generally
referred to as brokers, are organized into an overlay network. The issue then
becomes how to route notifications to the appropriate set of subscribers. A
straightforward way to make sure that notifications reach their subscribers, is
to deploy flooding. There are essentially two approaches. First, we store each
subscription at every broker, while publishing notifications only at a single
broker. The latter will handle identifying the matching subscriptions and
subsequently copy and forward the notification. The alternative is to store a
subscription only at one broker, while broadcasting notifications to all brokers.
In that case, matching is distributed across the brokers, which may lead to a
more balanced workload among the brokers.

  Note 5.9 (Example: TIB/Rendezvous)
  Flooding notifications is used in TIB/Rendezvous, of which the basic archi-
  tecture is shown in Figure 5.31 [TIBCO]. In this approach, a notification is
  a message tagged with a compound keyword describing its content, such as
  news.comp.os.books. A subscriber provides (parts of) a keyword, or indicating the
  messages it wants to receive, such as news.comp. ∗ .books. These keywords are
  said to indicate the subject of a message.
      Fundamental to its implementation is the use of broadcasting common in
  local-area networks, although it also uses more efficient communication facilities
  when possible. For example, if it is known exactly where a subscriber resides,
  point-to-point messages will generally be used. Each host on such a network will
  run a rendezvous daemon, which takes care that messages are sent and delivered
  according to their subject. Whenever a message is published, it is multicasted to
  each host on the network running a rendezvous daemon. Typically, multicasting

  is implemented using the facilities offered by the underlying network, such as
  IP-multicasting or hardware broadcasting.

     Publ. on A            Subs. to A            Subs. to A          Subs. to A   Subs. to B
                                                 Publ. on B          Subs. to B
        Subj: A                                     Subj: B

       RV lib                RV lib                RV lib               RV lib      RV lib

        RV                    RV                    RV                   RV          RV
      daemon                daemon                daemon               daemon      daemon

                                                                                      Network
     Multicast message
     on A to subscribers                Multicast message on B to subscribers

Figure 5.31: The principle of a publish/subscribe system as implemented
      in TIB/Rendezvous.

      Processes that subscribe to a subject pass their subscription to their local
  daemon. The daemon constructs a table of (process, subject), entries and whenever
  a message on subject S arrives, the daemon simply checks in its table for local
  subscribers, and forwards the message to each one. If there are no subscribers for
  S, the message is discarded immediately.
      When using multicasting as is done in TIB/Rendezvous, there is no reason
  why subscriptions cannot be elaborate and be more than string comparison, as
  is currently the case. The crucial observation here is that because messages are
  forwarded to every node anyway, the potentially complex matching of published
  data against subscriptions can be done entirely locally without further network
  communication needed.

    When subscriptions are allowed to be more expressive, scalability may
easily become a problem. In practice, expressive subscriptions take the form
of (attribute,value) pairs in which a value returns as an expression on the
possible values for the specified attribute. Examples include range values
(“1 ≤ x < 10”), containment (“x ∈ {red, blue}”), prefix and suffix expressions
(“url.startswith(“https”)”), etc. More complicated expressions including
combinations of conjunctions and disjunctions are, in theory, also possible,
thus gradually resembling what one would find in SQL queries for databases.
It is not hard to imagine that expressive subscriptions can be handled by
centralized brokers, but when scalability is at stake, we may need to limit
expressiveness altogether to the point that we find ourselves looking at topic-
based event matching.
    One way out that has been explored is combining peer-to-peer networks
and publish-subscribe systems, as described in Kermarrec and Triantafillou
[2013]. As the authors show, there is no simple general solution, and most
solutions often have very specific limitations.

Selective routing
If we consider that publish-subscribe is all about routing messages between
publishers and subscribers, one thought is to install specific filters in an overlay
network that effectively ignore paths toward nodes that are not interested in
what is being published. In other words, instead of flooding a network with
either subscriptions or publications, we apply selective routing, as proposed
by Carzaniga et al. [2004]. Consider a publish-subscribe system consisting
of N brokers to which clients (i.e., applications) can send subscriptions and
retrieve notifications. Carzaniga et al. propose a two-layered routing scheme,
in which the lowest layer consists of a shared broadcast tree connecting the
N brokers. There are various ways for setting up such a tree, ranging from
network-level multicast support to application-level multicast trees, as we
discussed in Chapter 4. Here, we also assume that such a tree has been set
up with the N brokers as end nodes, along with a collection of intermediate
nodes forming routers. Note that the distinction between a server and a router
is only a logical one: a single machine may host both kinds of processes.

                    (a)                                       (b)

Figure 5.32: A first approach toward content-based routing in which brokers
(a) first broadcast subscriptions to later (b) forward notifications only to
relevant brokers.

    Every broker broadcasts its subscriptions to all other brokers, as shown
in Figure 5.32(a). As a result, every broker will be able to compile a list of
(subject, destination) pairs. Then, whenever a process publishes a notification
N, its associated broker prepends the destination brokers to that message and
forwards the notification to the others, shown in Figure 5.32(b). When the
message reaches a router, the latter can use the list to decide on the paths that
the message should follow, as shown in Figure 5.32.
    We can now refine the capabilities of routers for deciding where to forward
notifications. To that end, each broker broadcasts its subscription across the
network so that routers can compose routing filters. For example, assume
that node 3 in Figure 5.32 subscribes to notifications for which an attribute a
lies in the range [0, 3], but that node 4 wants messages with a ∈ [2, 5]. In this

case, router R2 will create a routing filter as a table with an entry for each of
its outgoing links (in this case three: one to node 3, one to node 4, and one
toward router R1 ), as shown in Figure 5.33.

                         Interface          Filter
                         To node 3          a ∈ [0, 3]
                         To node 4          a ∈ [2, 5]
                         Toward router R1   (unspecified)

Figure 5.33: A partially filled routing table.

    More interesting is what happens at router R1 . In this example, the
subscriptions from nodes 3 and 4 dictate that any notification with a lying in
the interval [0, 3] ∪ [2, 5] = [0, 5] should be forwarded along the path to router
R2 , and this is precisely the information that R1 will store in its table. It is
not difficult to imagine that more intricate subscription compositions can be
supported.
    This simple example also illustrates that whenever a node leaves the
system, or when it is no longer interested in specific notifications, it should
cancel its subscription and essentially broadcast this information to all routers.
This cancellation, in turn, may lead to adjusting various routing filters. Late
adjustments will at worst lead to unnecessary traffic, as notifications may be
forwarded along paths for which there are no longer subscribers. Nevertheless,
timely adjustments are needed to keep performance at an acceptable level.

Gossiping
Selective routing may help to avoid broadcasting notifications to all routers,
but ultimately, it may still not be enough to reach acceptable scalable solutions.
Another approach is based on gossiping. The basic idea is that subscribers
interested in the same notifications form their own overlay network (which
is constructed through gossiping as we describe further below), so that once
a notification is published, it merely needs to be routed to the appropriate
overlay. For the latter, a random walk can be deployed. This approach is
following in TERA [Baldoni et al., 2007].
    A more sophisticated approach toward combining gossiping and event
matching is followed in Sub-2-Sub [Voulgaris et al., 2006]. It is still one
of the very few content-based approaches that combines scalability with
expressiveness of subscriptions. Consider a publish-subscribe system in
which data items can be described by N attributes a1 , . . . , aN whose value
can be directly mapped to a floating-point number. Such values include, for
example, floats, integers, enumerations, Booleans, and strings. A subscription
S takes the form of a tuple of (attribute, value/range) pairs, such as
                        S = ⟨a1 → 3.0, a4 → [0.0, 0.5)⟩

In this example, S specifies that a1 should be equal to 3.0, and a4 should lie in
the interval [0.0, 0.5). Other attributes are allowed to take on any value. For
clarity, assume that every node i enters only one subscription Si .
    Note that each subscription Si actually specifies a subset Si in the N-
dimensional space of floating-point numbers. Such a subset is also called a
hyperspace. For the system as a whole, notifications that fall in the union
S = ∪Si of these hyperspaces are the only ones of interest. The whole idea is
to automatically partition S into M disjoint hyperspaces S1 , . . . , SM such that
each falls completely in one of the subscription hyperspaces Si , and together
they cover all subscriptions. More formally, we have that:
                         (Sm ∩ Si ̸= ∅) ⇒ (Sm ⊆ Si )
Sub-2-Sub keeps M minimal in the sense that there is no partitioning with
fewer parts Sm . To this end, for each hyperspace Sm , it registers exactly those
nodes i for which Sm ⊆ Si . In that case, when a notification is published, the
system need merely find the Sm to which the associated event belongs, from
which point it can forward the notification to the appropriate nodes.
    To this end, nodes regularly exchange subscriptions through gossiping. If
two nodes i and j notice that their respective subscriptions intersect, that is,
Sij ≡ Si ∩ Sj ̸= ∅ they will record this fact and keep references to each other.
If they discover a third node k with Sijk ≡ Sij ∩ Sk ̸= ∅, the three of them
will connect to each other so that a notification N from Sijk can be efficiently
disseminated. Note that if Sij − Sijk ̸= ∅, nodes i and j will maintain their
mutual references, but now associate it strictly with Sij − Sijk .
    In essence, what we are seeking is a means to cluster nodes into M different
groups, such that nodes i and j belong to the same group if and only if their
subscriptions Si and Sj intersect. Moreover, nodes in the same group should
be organized into an overlay network that allows efficient dissemination of a
data item in the hyperspace associated with that group. This situation for a
single attribute is sketched in Figure 5.34.
    Here, we see a total of seven nodes, in which the horizontal line for node
i indicates its range of interest for the value of the single attribute. Also
shown is the grouping of nodes into disjoint ranges of interests in values of
the attribute. For example, nodes 3, 4, 7, and 10 will be grouped together
representing the interval [16.5, 21.0]. Any data item with a value in this range
should be disseminated to only these four nodes.
    To construct these groups, the nodes are organized into a gossip-based
unstructured network. Each node maintains a list of references to other
neighbors (i.e., a partial view), which it periodically exchanges with one of
its neighbors. Such an exchange allows a node to learn about random other
nodes in the system. Every node keeps track of the nodes it discovers with
overlapping interests (i.e., with an intersecting subscription).
    At a certain moment, every node i will generally have references to other
nodes with overlapping interests. As part of exchanging information with a

Figure 5.34: Grouping nodes for supporting range queries in a gossip-based
publish-subscribe system.

node j, node i orders these nodes by their identifiers and selects the one with
the lowest identifier i1 > j, such that its subscription overlaps with that of
node j, that is, Sj,i1 ≡ Si1 ∩ Sj ̸= ∅.
     The next one to be selected is i2 > i1 such that its subscription also overlaps
with that of j, but only if it contains elements not yet covered by node i1 . In
other words, we should have that Sj,i1 ,i2 ≡ (Si2 − Sj,i1 ) ∩ Sj ̸= ∅. This process
is repeated until all nodes that have an overlapping interest with node i have
been inspected, leading to an ordered list i1 < i2 < · · · < in . Note that a node
ik is in this list because it covers a region R of common interest to node i and j
not yet jointly covered by nodes with a lower identifier than ik . In effect, node
ik is the first node that node j should forward a notification to that falls in this
unique region R. This procedure can be expanded to let node i construct a
bidirectional ring. Such a ring is also shown in Figure 5.34.
     Whenever a notification N is published, it is disseminated as quickly
as possible to any node that is interested in it. As it turns out, with the
information available at every node finding a node i interested in N is simple.
From there on, node i need simply forward N along the ring of subscribers for
the particular range that N falls into. To speed up dissemination, shortcuts
are maintained for each ring as well.

5.6.2   Secure publish-subscribe solutions
A characteristic feature of publish-subscribe systems is that publishers and
subscribers are referentially decoupled, and possibly also temporally decou-
pled. Notably, referential decoupling means that in a secure system messages
should be able to flow from a publisher to subscribers while guaranteeing
mutual anonymity. To guarantee confidentiality and integrity of messages,
communicating parties usually set up a secure channel, but such an approach
would break the party’s anonymity.

    A simple solution is to let a (possibly distributed) broker handle messages.
The broker would handle all the matching and storage, if necessary. Obviously,
such a broker would need to be trusted. Yet, it is not obvious at all that such
trust is justified. For example, many publish-subscribe services are offered by
third parties operating in a cloud setting. It is often unclear to which extent
they can actually provide guarantees when it comes to protecting data. In
addition, messages may often contain information that should definitely not,
often even by law, be revealed to third parties, such as medical records.
    We now seem to have several clashing requirements. First, for any publish-
subscribe system, we need to ensure that the communicating parties remain
referentially decoupled, that is, we need to guarantee mutual anonymity. Not
knowing where messages come from imposes integrity issues: how can we be
sure the messages have not been tampered with? Second, we cannot simply
assume that brokers can be trusted. Facing confidentiality issues, we then
cannot allow them to see (all of) the content of messages, yet this may impose
serious routing problems. But there is more: if we cannot trust brokers, how
can we ensure availability in the sense that subscribers, entitled to specific
messages, actually receive those messages? Equally important is to ensure
that messages are not delivered to unauthorized subscribers. Cui et al. [2021]
also address an additional requirement: assuming there are colluders in place,
brokers should not learn about the interests of innocent subscribers.
    These problems are not unique to publish-subscribe systems, and have
become more prevalent with the advent of cloud-based services. The key
question is how to let a third party search through data to make decisions,
yet without revealing that data. This is also known as searchable encryp-
tion [Bosch et al., 2014]. For publish-subscribe systems, an important tech-
nique is to conduct secure keyword search. Boneh et al. [2004] introduced
Public Key Encryption with Keyword Search, generally known as PEKS. We
will explain only the principle of PEKS without going into the cryptographic
details.
    In PEKS, a message is accompanied by a collection of keywords. To that
end, using a public key PK, a message m and its n keywords KW1 , . . . , KWn
are stored at a server as the message m∗ :

      m∗ = [ PK (m)|PEKS(PK, KW1 )|PEKS(PK, KW2 )| · · · |PEKS(PK, KWn )]

For each keyword KWi a trapdoor TKWi is generated: TW (m∗ ) will return true
if W ∈ {KW1 , . . . , KWn } and false otherwise.
    Using PEKS, we can now set up a cloud-based publish-subscribe system
with (conceptually) a single broker that resides in the cloud. Such a scheme is
described in [Yang et al., 2017] and sketched in Figure 5.35. We note we have
deliberately simplified matters significantly to focus on the essentials.
    An important role is played by the key authority: a trusted third party that
generates keys for publishers and subscribers. In our example, it provides the

Figure 5.35: The principle of privacy-preserving publish-subscribe.

publisher with a key PK that can be used for encrypting the publication m. In
addition, the key is used for constructing the encrypted tags KWi∗ = PEKS(PK,
KWi ). Likewise, each subscriber is given a secret key SK that it can use to
generate a trapdoor TW to be used by the broker to see whether the tag W
is associated with the publication m. If there is a match, the broker returns
PK (m) which can then be decrypted using SK.
    Our simplified scheme misses many important details, for which we refer
the interested reader to Yang et al. [2017]. The authors assume that the broker
is honest-but-curious and does not collude with publishers or subscribers.
Honest-but-curious means that the server will behave according to the specifi-
cations, but may keep track of everything it does and use that information.
Cui et al. [2021] describe a system that drops the assumption on collusion, and
is one of the few known publish-subscribe systems that can handle colluding
brokers. An overview of the security issues in publish-subscribe systems is
given by Uzunov [2016]. For a good overview on preserving confidentiality,
we refer to Onica et al. [2016]. The authors also come to the conclusion that
security becomes easier if brokers can be trusted. Otherwise, good support
for operating on encrypted data is needed.

5.7      Location systems
When looking at large distributed systems that are dispersed across a wide-
area network, it is often necessary to take proximity into account. Just imagine
a distributed system organized as an overlay network in which two processes
are neighbors in the overlay network, but are actually placed far apart in
the underlying network. If these two processes communicate a lot, it may
have been better to ensure that they are also physically placed in each other’s
proximity. In this section, we take a look at location-based techniques to
coordinate the placement of processes and their communication.

5.7.1     GPS: Global Positioning System
Let us start by considering how to determine your geographical position
anywhere on Earth. This positioning problem is by itself solved through
a highly specific, dedicated distributed system, namely GPS, which is an

acronym for Global Positioning System. GPS is a satellite-based distributed
system that was launched in 1978. Although it initially was used mainly for
military applications, it by now has found its way to many civilian applications,
notably for traffic navigation. However, many more application domains exist.
For example, modern smartphones now allow owners to track each other’s
position. This principle can easily be applied to tracking other things as well,
including pets, children, cars, boats, and so on.
    GPS uses up to 72 satellites, each circulating in an orbit at a height of
approximately 20,000 km. Each satellite has up to four atomic clocks, which
are regularly calibrated from special stations on Earth. A satellite continuously
broadcasts its position, and time stamps each message with its local time. This
broadcasting allows every receiver on Earth to accurately compute its own
position using, in principle, only four satellites. To explain, let us first assume
that all clocks, including the receiver’s, are synchronized.
    To compute a position, consider first the two-dimensional case, as shown
in Figure 5.36, in which three satellites are drawn, along with the circles
representing points at the same distance from each respective satellite. We see
that the intersection of the three circles is a unique point.

Figure 5.36: Computing a node’s position in a two-dimensional space.

    This principle of intersecting circles can be expanded to three dimensions,
meaning that we need to know the distance to four satellites to determine the
longitude, latitude, and altitude of a receiver on Earth. This positioning is
all fairly straightforward, but determining the distance to a satellite becomes
complicated when we move from theory to practice. There are at least two
important real-world facts that we need to take into account:

   1. It takes a while before data on a satellite’s position reaches the receiver.
   2. The receiver’s clock is generally not in sync with that of a satellite.

   Assume that the timestamp from a satellite is completely accurate. Let
∆r denote the deviation of the receiver’s clock from the actual time. When a
message is received from satellite Si with timestamp Ti , then the measured
delay ∆i by the receiver consists of two components: the actual delay, along
with its own deviation:

                             ∆i = ( Tnow − Ti ) + ∆r

where Tnow is the actual current time. As signals travel with the speed of light,
c, the measured distance d˜i to satellite Si is equal to c · ∆i . With

                               di = c · ( Tnow − Ti )

being the real distance between the receiver and satellite Si , the measured
distance can be rewritten to d˜i = di + c · ∆r . The real distance is now computed
as:                         q
              d˜i − c · ∆r = ( xi − xr )2 + (yi − yr )2 + (zi − zr )2
where xi , yi , and zi denote the coordinates of satellite Si . What we see now is
a system of quadratic equations with four unknowns (xr , yr , zr , and also ∆r ).
We thus need four reference points (i.e., satellites) to find a unique solution
that will also give us ∆r . A GPS measurement will thus also give an account
of the actual time.
    So far, we have assumed that measurements are perfectly accurate. Of
course, they are not. There are many sources of errors, starting with the
fact that the atomic clocks in the satellites are not always in perfect sync, the
position of a satellite is not known precisely, the receiver’s clock has a finite
accuracy, the signal propagation speed is not constant (as signals appear to
slow down when entering, e.g., the ionosphere), and so on. On average, this
leads to an error of some 5–10 meters. Special modulation techniques, as
well as special receivers, are needed to improve accuracy. Using so-called
differential GPS, by which corrective information is sent through wide-area
links, accuracy can be further improved. More information can be found in
[LaMarca and de Lara, 2008], as well as an excellent overview by Zogg [2002].

5.7.2   When GPS is not an option
A major drawback of GPS is that it generally cannot be used indoors. For that
purpose, other techniques are necessary. An increasingly popular technique
is to make use of the numerous WiFi access points available. The basic idea
is simple: if we have a database of known access points along with their
coordinates, and we can estimate our distance to an access point, then with
only three detected access points, we should be able to compute our position.
Of course, it really is not that simple at all.
    A major problem is determining the coordinates of an access point. A
popular approach is to do this through war driving: using a WiFi-enabled

device along with a GPS receiver, someone drives or walks through an area
and records observed access points. An access point can be identified through
its SSID or its MAC-level network address. An access point AP should
be detected at several locations before its coordinates can be estimated. A
simple method is to compute the centroid: assume we have detected AP at
N different locations {⃗  x1 , x⃗2 , . . . , x⃗N }, where each location ⃗xi consists of a
(latitude, longitude)-pair as provided by the GPS receiver. We then simply
estimate AP’s location ⃗x AP as

                                             ∑iN=1 ⃗xi
                                   ⃗x AP =             .
                                                N
Accuracy can be improved by taking the observed signal strength into account,
and giving more weight to a location with relatively high observed signal
strength than to a location where only a weak signal was detected. In the end,
we obtain an estimation of the coordinates of the access point. The accuracy
of this estimation is strongly influenced by:
   • the accuracy of each GPS detection point ⃗xi
   • the fact that an access point has a nonuniform transmission range
   • the number of sampled detection points N.
Studies show that estimates of the coordinates of an access point may be
tens of meters off from the actual location (see, e.g., Kim et al. [2006] or
Tsui et al. [2010]). Moreover, access points come and go at a relatively high
rate. Nevertheless, locating and positioning access points is widely popular,
exemplified by the open-access Wigle database which is populated through
crowdsourcing.1

5.7.3      Logical positioning of nodes
Instead of trying to find the absolute location of a node in a distributed system,
an alternative is to use a logical, proximity-based location. In geometric
overlay networks each node is given a position in an m-dimensional geometric
space, such that the distance between two nodes in that space reflects a real-
world performance metric. Computing such a position is the core business of a
Network Coordinates System, or simply NCS, which are surveyed by Donnet
et al. [2010]. The simplest, and most applied example, is where distance
corresponds to internode latency. In other words, given two nodes P and Q,
then the distance dˆ(P, Q) reflects how long it would take for a message to
travel from P to Q and vice versa. We use the notation dˆ to denote distance in
a system where nodes have been assigned coordinates.
    There are many applications of geometric overlay networks. Consider the
situation where a Website at server O has been replicated to multiple servers
   1 See wigle.net.

S1 , . . . , SN on the Internet, as typically happens with a Content Delivery
Network (CDN). When a client C requests a page from O, the CDN may
decide to redirect that request to the server closest to C, that is, the one that
will give the best response time. If the geometric location of C is known, as
well as those of each replica server, the CDN can then simply pick that server
Si for which dˆ(C, Si ) is minimal.
     Another example is optimal replica placement. Consider again a CDN that
has gathered the positions of clients for one of its major customers. If the CDN
were to replicate content to N servers, it can compute the N best positions
where to place replicas such that the average client-to-replica response time is
minimal. Performing such computations is almost trivially feasible if clients
and servers have geometric positions that reflect internode latencies.
     As a last example, consider position-based routing (see, e.g., [Popescu
et al., 2012] or [Bilal et al., 2013]). In such schemes, a message is forwarded
to its destination using only positioning information. For example, a naive
routing algorithm to let each node forward a message to the neighbor closest
to the destination. Although it can be easily shown that this specific algorithm
need not converge, it illustrates that only local information is used to decide.
There is no need to propagate link information or such to all nodes in the
network, as is the case with conventional routing algorithms.

Centralized positioning
Positioning a node in an m-dimensional geometric space requires m + 1
distance measures to nodes with known positions. Assuming that node P
wants to compute its own position, it contacts three other nodes with known
positions and measures its distance to each of them. Contacting only one node
would tell P about the circle it is located on; contacting only two nodes would
tell it about the position of the intersection of two circles (which generally
consists of two points); a third node would subsequently allow P to compute
its actual location.
    Node P can compute its own coordinates ( x P , y P ) by solving the three
quadratic equations with the two unknowns x P and y P :
                   q
              d˜i = ( xi − x P )2 + (yi − y P )2         (i = 1, 2, 3)

Here, we use d˜ to denote measured, or estimated distance. As said, d˜i generally
corresponds to measuring the latency between P and the node at ( xi , yi ). This
latency can be estimated as being half the round-trip delay, but it should
be clear that its value will be different over time. The effect is a different
positioning whenever P would want to recompute its position. Moreover, if
other nodes would use P’s current position to compute their own coordinates,
then it should be clear that the error in positioning P will affect the accuracy
of the positioning of other nodes.

    It should also be clear that measured distances between a set of nodes
will generally not even be consistent. For example, assume we are computing
distances in a one-dimensional space, as shown in Figure 5.37. In this example,
we see that although R measures its distance to Q as 2.0, and d˜(P, Q) has been
measured to be 1.0, when R measures d˜(P, R) it finds 2.8, which is clearly
inconsistent with the other two measurements.

Figure 5.37: Inconsistent distance measurements in a one-dimensional space.

    Figure 5.37 also suggests how this situation can be improved. In our simple
example, we could solve the inconsistencies by merely computing positions
in a two-dimensional space. This by itself, however, is not a general solution
when dealing with many measurements. In fact, considering that Internet
latency measurements may violate the triangle inequality, it is generally
impossible to resolve inconsistencies completely. The triangle inequality states
that in a geometric space, for any arbitrary three nodes P, Q, and R it must
always be true that
                          d(P, R) ≤ d(P, Q) + d(Q, R).
    There are various ways to approach these issues. One common approach,
proposed by Ng and Zhang [2002], is to use N special nodes L1 , . . . , LN , known
as landmarks. Landmarks measure their pairwise latencies d˜(Li , Lj ) and
subsequently let a central node compute the coordinates for each landmark.
To this end, the central node seeks to minimize the following aggregated error
function:
                         N   N ? d˜(L , L ) − dˆ(L , L ) ?2
                                      i j             i j
                         ∑ ∑             ˜
                                        d ( Li , Lj )
                        i =1 j = i +1

where, again, dˆ(Li , Lj ) corresponds to the distance after nodes Li and Lj have
been positioned.
   The hidden parameter in minimizing the aggregated error function is the
dimension m. Obviously, we have that N > m, but nothing prevents us from
choosing a value for m that is much smaller than N. In that case, a node P
measures its distance to each of the N landmarks and computes its coordinates
by minimizing
                                N ? ˜                     ?2
                                   d(Li , P) − dˆ(Li , P)
                              ∑           d˜(Li , P)
                              i =1

As it turns out, with well-chosen landmarks, m can be as small as 6 or 7, with
dˆ(P, Q) being no more than a factor 2 different from the actual latency d(P, Q)
for arbitrary nodes P and Q [Szymaniak et al., 2004; 2008].

Decentralized positioning
Another way to tackle this problem is to view the collection of nodes as a huge
system in which nodes are attached to each other through springs. In this
case, |d˜(P, Q) − dˆ(P, Q)| indicates to what extent nodes P and Q are displaced
relative to the situation in which the system of springs would be at rest. By
letting each node (slightly) change its position, it can be shown that the system
will eventually converge to an optimal organization in which the aggregated
error is minimal. This approach is followed in Vivaldi, described in [Dabek
et al., 2004a].
    In a system with N nodes P1 , . . . , PN , Vivaldi aims at minimizing the
following aggregated error:

                            N   N
                            ∑ ∑ |d˜(Pi , Pj ) − dˆ(Pi , Pj )|2
                           i =1 j =1

where d˜(Pi , Pj ) is the measured distance (i.e., latency) between nodes Pi and
Pj , and dˆ(Pi , Pj ) the distance computed from the network coordinates of each
node. Let ⃗xi denote the coordinates of node Pi . In a situation that each node
is placed in a geometric space, the force that node Pi exerts on node Pj is
computed as:
                        ⃗Fij = d˜(Pi , Pj ) − dˆ(Pi , Pj ) × u(⃗xi − ⃗x j )
                                                           

with u(⃗xi − ⃗
             x j ) denoting the unit vector in the direction of ⃗xi − ⃗
                                                                      x j . In other
words, if Fij > 0, node Pi will push Pj away from itself, and will otherwise
pull it toward itself. Node Pi now repeatedly executes the following steps:

   1. Measure the latency d˜ij to node Pj , and also receive Pj ’s coordinates ⃗
                                                                               xj.
   2. Compute the error e = d˜(Pi , Pj ) − dˆ(Pi , Pj )
   3. Compute the direction ⃗u = u(⃗xi − ⃗
                                         x j ).
   4. Compute the force vector Fij = e · ⃗u
   5. Adjust own position by moving along the force vector: ⃗xi ← ⃗xi + δ · ⃗u.

A crucial element is the choice of δ: too large and the system will oscillate;
too small and convergence to a stable situation will take a long time. The
trick is to have an adaptive value, which is large when the error is large as
well, but small when only small adjustments are needed. Details can be found
in [Dabek et al., 2004a].

5.8    Summary
Strongly related to communication between processes is the issue of how
processes in distributed systems synchronize. Synchronization is all about
doing the right thing at the right time. A problem in distributed systems, and
computer networks in general, is that there is no notion of a globally shared
clock. In other words, processes on different machines have their own idea of
what time it is.
    There are various ways to synchronize clocks in a distributed system,
but all methods are essentially based on exchanging clock values, while
considering the time it takes to send and receive messages. Variations in
communication delays, and the way those variations are dealt with, largely
determine the accuracy of clock synchronization algorithms.
    Knowing the absolute time is often not necessary. What counts is that
related events at different processes happen in the correct order. Lamport
showed that by introducing a notion of logical clocks, it is possible for a
collection of processes to reach global agreement on the correct ordering of
events. In essence, each event e, such as sending or receiving a message,
is assigned a globally unique logical timestamp C (e) such that when event
a happened before b, C (a) < C (b). Lamport timestamps can be extended
to vector timestamps: if C (a) < C (b), we even know that event a causally
preceded b.
    An important class of synchronization algorithms is that of distributed
mutual exclusion. These algorithms ensure that in a distributed collection
of processes, at most one process at a time has access to a shared resource.
Distributed mutual exclusion can easily be achieved if we make use of a
coordinator that keeps track of whose turn it is. Fully distributed algorithms
also exist, but have the drawback that they are generally more susceptible to
communication and process failures.
    Synchronization between processes often requires that one process acts
as a coordinator. In those cases where the coordinator is not fixed, it is
necessary that processes in a distributed computation decide on who is
going to be that coordinator. Such a decision is taken by election algorithms.
Election algorithms are primarily used in cases where the coordinator can
crash. However, they can also be applied for the selection of superpeers in
peer-to-peer systems.
    The most important aspect in gossip-based coordination is being able to
select another peer randomly from an entire overlay. As it turns out, we can
implement such a peer-sampling service using gossiping, by ensuring that the
partial view is refreshed regularly and randomly. Combining peer sampling
with a selective replacement of entries in a partial view allows us to efficiently
construct structured overlay networks.
    Particularly challenging when it comes to coordination is distributed event
matching, which sits at the core of publish-subscribe systems. Relatively

5.8. SUMMARY                                                                323

simple is the case when we have a central implementation where matching
subscriptions against notifications can be done by essentially doing one-to-one
comparisons. However, as soon as we aim at distributing the load, we are
faced with the problem of deciding beforehand which node is responsible for
which part of the subscriptions, without knowing what kind of notifications
to expect. This is particularly problematic for content-based matching, which,
in the end, requires advanced filtering techniques to route notifications to the
proper subscribers.
    Related to these synchronization problems is positioning nodes in a ge-
ometric overlay. The basic idea is to assign each node coordinates from an
m-dimensional space such that the geometric distance can be used as an
accurate measure for the latency between two nodes. The method of assigning
coordinates strongly resembles the one applied in determining the location
and time in GPS.

