  06

NAMING

    Names play an important role in all computer systems. They are used
to sharing resources, to uniquely identify entities, to refer to locations, and
more. An important issue with naming is that a name can be resolved to the
entity it refers to. Name resolution thus allows a process to access the named
entity. To resolve names, it is necessary to implement a naming system. The
difference between naming in distributed systems and nondistributed systems
lies in the way naming systems are implemented.
    In a distributed system, the implementation of a naming system is itself
often distributed across multiple machines. How this distribution is done
plays a key role in the efficiency and scalability of the naming system. In this
chapter, we concentrate on three different, important ways that names are
used in distributed systems.
    First, we consider so-called flat-naming systems. In such systems, entities
are referred to by an identifier that, in principle, has no meaning at all. In
addition, flat names bear no structure, implying that we need special mecha-
nisms to trace the location of such entities. We discuss various approaches,
ranging from distributed hash tables to hierarchical location services.
    In practice, humans prefer to use readable names. Such names are of-
ten structured, as is well known from the way Web pages are referred to.
Structured names allow for a highly systematic way of finding the server
responsible for the named entity, as exemplified by the Domain Name System.
We discuss the general principles, as well as scalability issues.
    Finally, humans often prefer to describe entities through various charac-
teristics, leading to a situation in which we need to resolve a description
using the attributes assigned to an entity. As we shall see, this type of name
resolution is notoriously difficult, especially with searching.
    Name resolution and routing are closely related to each other. Normally,
we look up an address given a name, to subsequently access the named entity
through its address. As an alternative to looking up an address, researchers
have been exploring how a name can be directly used to route toward the
entity, to subsequently return a copy of its associated data. This so-called
named-based routing is gradually maturing as an alternative for a future
Internet. We discuss it briefly in this chapter.

6.1    Names, identifiers, and addresses

A name in a distributed system is a string of bits or characters that is used to
refer to an entity. An entity in a distributed system, can be practically any-
thing. Typical examples include resources such as hosts, printers, disks, and
files. Other well-known examples of entities that are often explicitly named
are processes, users, mailboxes, Web pages, graphical windows, messages,
network connections, and so on.

     Entities can be operated on. For example, a resource such as a printer
offers an interface containing operations for printing a document, requesting
the status of a print job, and the like. Furthermore, an entity such as a network
connection may provide operations for sending and receiving data, setting
quality-of-service parameters, requesting the status, and so forth.
     To operate on an entity, it is necessary to access it, for which we need an
access point. An access point is yet another, but special, kind of entity in a
distributed system. The name of an access point is called an address. The
address of an access point of an entity is also simply called an address of that
entity.
     An entity can offer more than one access point. As a comparison, a
telephone can be viewed as an access point of a person, whereas the phone
number corresponds to an address. Indeed, many people have several phone
numbers, each number corresponding to a point where they can be reached.
In a distributed system, a typical example of an access point is a host running
a specific server, with its address formed by the combination of, for example,
an IP address and port number (i.e., the server’s transport-level address).
     An entity may change its access points over time. For example, when a
mobile computer moves to another location, it is often assigned a different
IP address than the one it had before. Likewise, when a person changes jobs,
there is likely a change in phone numbers as well. Similarly, changing your
Internet Service Provider, often means changing an e-mail address.
     An address is thus just a special kind of name: it refers to an access point
of an entity. Because an access point is tightly associated with an entity, it
would seem convenient to use the address of an access point as a regular
name for the associated entity. Nevertheless, this is hardly ever done, as such
naming is generally very inflexible and often human unfriendly.
     For example, it is not uncommon to regularly reorganize a distributed
system so that a specific server is now running on a different host than it did
previously. The old machine on which the server used to be running may be
reassigned to a different server. In other words, an entity may easily change
an access point, or an access point may be reassigned to a different entity. If
an address is used to refer to an entity, we will have an invalid reference the
instant the access point changes or is reassigned to another entity. Therefore,
it is much better to let a service be known by a separate name independent of
the address of the associated server.
     Likewise, if an entity offers more than one access point, it is not clear which
address to use as a reference. For instance, many organizations distribute their
Web service across several servers. If we would use the addresses of those
servers as a reference for the Web service, it is not obvious which address
should be chosen as the best one. Again, a much better solution is to have a
single name for the Web service, independent of the addresses of the different
Web servers.

    These examples illustrate that a name for an entity that is independent of
its addresses is often much easier and more flexible to use. Such a name is
called location independent.
    In addition to addresses, there are other types of names that deserve
special treatment, such as names that are used to uniquely identify an entity.
A true identifier is a name that has the following properties [Wieringa and
de Jonge, 1995]:

   1. An identifier refers to at most one entity.
   2. Each entity is referred to by at most one identifier.
   3. An identifier always refers to the same entity (i.e., it is never reused).

    By using identifiers, it becomes much easier to unambiguously refer to
an entity. For example, assume two processes each refer to an entity by an
identifier. To check if the processes are referring to the same entity, it is
sufficient to test if the two identifiers are equal. Such a test would not be
sufficient if the two processes were using regular, nonunique, nonidentifying
names. For example, the name “John Smith” cannot be taken as a unique
reference to just a single person.
    Likewise, if an address can be reassigned to a different entity, we cannot
use an address as an identifier. Consider again the use of phone numbers,
which are reasonably stable in the sense that a phone number will often for
some time refer to the same person or organization. However, using a phone
number as an identifier will not work, as it can be, and often is, reassigned
over time. Consequently, Bob’s new bakery may be receiving phone calls for
Alice’s old antique store for a long time. In this case, it would have been better
to use a true identifier for Alice instead of her phone number.
    Addresses and identifiers are two important types of names that are each
used for very different purposes. In many computer systems, addresses and
identifiers are represented in machine-readable form only, that is, in the form
of bit strings. For example, an Ethernet address is essentially a random string
of 48 bits. Likewise, memory addresses are typically represented as 32-bit or
64-bit strings.
    Another important type of name is that which is tailored to be used by
humans, also referred to as human-friendly names. In contrast to addresses
and identifiers, a human-friendly name is generally represented as a character
string. These names appear in many different forms. For example, files in
Unix systems have character-string names that can generally be as long as 255
characters, and which are defined entirely by the user. Similarly, DNS names
are represented as relatively simple case-insensitive character strings.
    Having names, identifiers, and addresses brings us to the central theme of
this chapter: how do we resolve names and identifiers to addresses? As we
shall see, there are essentially two approaches. In the first one, we maintain

a (generally distributed) table of (name, address) pairs. This is the approach
followed by naming systems such as DNS, which we discuss extensively in
this chapter. In the second approach, a name is resolved by routing the request
gradually to the name’s associated address, or even directly to an access point.
Typically, this is the approach followed in structured peer-to-peer systems,
but also in what is known as information-centric networking (which we
also discuss later in this chapter). It is interesting to note that in such cases
the boundaries between name resolution and message routing are starting
to blur, as was noted by Shoch [1978] already almost 50 years ago. In fact,
we will challenge the need for name-to-address resolution when discussing
named-data networking. To stay in historical perspective, it is then also
interesting to note how certain discussions become topical again: in a sense,
naming and resolving a name to an address is precisely what is referred to
as the identifier-location split (see also Ramirez et al. [2014] and Feng et al.
[2017]).
    In the following sections, we will consider four different classes of naming
systems. First, we will take a look at how identifiers can be resolved to
addresses. In this case, we will also see an example where name resolution
is actually indistinguishable from message routing. After that, we consider
human-friendly names and then descriptive names (i.e., entities that are
described by a collection of names). Finally, we pay attention to named-based
networking.

6.2     Flat naming
Above, we explained that identifiers are convenient to uniquely represent enti-
ties. Often, identifiers are simply random bit strings, which we conveniently
refer to as unstructured, or flat names. An important property of such a name
is that it does not contain any information whatsoever on how to locate the
access point of its associated entity. In the following, we will take a look at
how flat names can be resolved, or, equivalently, how we can locate an entity
when given only its identifier.

6.2.1   Simple solutions
We first consider two simple solutions for locating an entity: broadcasting and
forwarding pointers. Both solutions are mainly applicable only to local-area
networks. Nevertheless, in that environment, they often do the job well,
making their simplicity particularly attractive.

Broadcasting
Consider a distributed system built on a computer network that offers efficient
broadcasting facilities. Typically, such facilities are offered by local-area

networks, in which all machines are connected to a single cable or the logical
equivalent thereof. Also, local-area wireless networks fall into this category.

    Locating an entity in such an environment is simple: a message containing
the identifier of the entity is broadcasted to each machine, and each machine is
requested to check whether it has that entity. Only the machines that can offer
an access point for the entity send a reply message containing the address of
that access point.

    This principle is used in the Internet Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) to
find the data-link address of a machine when given only an IP address [Plum-
mer, 1982]. In essence, a machine broadcasts a packet on the local-network
asking who is the owner of a given IP address. When the message arrives at
a machine, the receiver checks whether it should listen to the requested IP
address. If so, it sends a reply packet containing, for example, its Ethernet
address.

   Broadcasting becomes inefficient when the network grows. Not only is
network bandwidth wasted by request messages, but, more seriously, too
many hosts may be interrupted by requests they cannot answer. One possible
solution is to switch to multicasting, by which only a restricted group of hosts
receives the request. Ethernet networks support data-link level multicasting
directly in hardware.

   Multicasting can also be used to locate entities in point-to-point networks.
For example, the Internet supports network-level multicasting by allowing
hosts to join a specific multicast group. Such groups are identified by a
multicast address. When a host sends a message to a multicast address, the
network layer provides a best-effort service to deliver that message to all
group members. Efficient implementations for multicasting on the Internet
are discussed in Deering and Cheriton [1990] and Deering et al. [1996].

   A multicast address can be used as a general location service for multiple
entities. Consider an organization where each employee has his or her own
mobile computer. When such a computer connects to the locally available
network, it is dynamically assigned an IP address. In addition, it joins a
specific multicast group. When a process wants to locate a computer A, it
sends a “where is A?” request to the multicast group. If A is connected, it
responds with its current IP address.

    Another way to use a multicast address is to associate it with a replicated
entity, and to use multicasting to locate the nearest replica. When sending
a request to the multicast address, each replica responds with its current
(normal) IP address. A crude way to select the nearest replica is to choose the
one whose reply comes in first, but as it turns out, selecting a nearest replica
is generally not that easy.

Forwarding pointers
Another approach to locating mobile entities is to make use of forwarding
pointers [Fowler, 1985]. The principle is simple: when an entity moves from
A to B, it leaves behind in A a reference to its new location at B. The main
advantage of this approach is its simplicity: as soon as an entity has been
located, for example by using a traditional naming service, a client can look
up the current address by following the chain of forwarding pointers.
    There are also drawbacks. First, if no special measures are taken, a chain
for a highly mobile entity can become so long that locating that entity is
prohibitively expensive. Second, all intermediate locations in a chain will have
to maintain their part of the chain of forwarding pointers as long as needed.
A third (and related) drawback is the vulnerability to broken links. As soon
as any forwarding pointer is lost, the entity can no longer be reached. An
important issue is, therefore, to keep chains relatively short, and to ensure
that forwarding pointers are robust.

6.2.2   Home-based approaches
A popular approach to supporting mobile entities in large-scale networks is
to introduce a home location, which keeps track of the current location of
an entity. Special techniques may be applied to safeguard against network or
process failures. In practice, the home location is often chosen to be the place
where an entity was created.
    The home-based approach is used as a fall-back mechanism for location
services based on forwarding pointers. Another example where the home-
based approach is followed is in Mobile IP [Perkins et al., 2011]. Each mobile
host uses a fixed IP address. All communication to that IP address is initially
directed to the mobile host’s home agent. This home agent is located on the
local-area network corresponding to the network address contained in the
mobile host’s IP address. In the case of IPv6, it is realized as a network-layer
component. Whenever the mobile host moves to another network, it requests
a temporary address that it can use for communication. This care-of address
is registered at the home agent.
    When the home agent receives a packet for the mobile host, it looks up the
host’s current location. If the host is on the current local network, the packet
is simply forwarded. Otherwise, it is tunneled to the host’s current location,
that is, wrapped as data in an IP packet and sent to the care-of address. At the
same time, the sender of the packet is informed of the host’s current location.
This principle is shown in Figure 6.1 Note that the IP address is effectively
used as an identifier for the mobile host.
    An important aspect is that this whole mechanism is largely hidden for
applications. In other words, the original IP address associated with the
mobile host can be used by an application without further ado. Client-side

software that is part of the application-independent communication layer will
handle the redirection to the target’s current location. Likewise, at the target’s
location, a message that has been tunneled will be unpacked and handed
to the application on the mobile host as if it were using its original address.
Indeed, Mobile IP establishes a high degree of location transparency.

 Host's home
 location                        1. Send packet to host at its home

                          2. Return address
                             of current location

                                                                                  Client's
                                                                                  location

                        3. Tunnel packet to
                           current location

                                                           4. Send successive packets
                                                              to current location
                             Host's current location

Figure 6.1: The principle of Mobile IP.

   Figure 6.1 also illustrates a drawback of home-based approaches in large-
scale networks. To communicate with a mobile entity, a client first has to
contact the home, which may be at an entirely different location than the
entity itself. The result is an increase in communication latency.

   Another drawback of the home-based approach is the use of a fixed home
location. For one thing, it must be ensured that the home location always
exists. Otherwise, contacting the entity will become impossible. Problems
are aggravated when a long-lived entity decides to move permanently to an
entirely different part of the network than where its home is located. In that
case, it would have been better if the home could have moved along with the
host.

    A solution to this problem is to register the home at a traditional naming
service and to let a client first look up the location of the home. Because the
home location can be assumed to be relatively stable, that location can be
effectively cached after it has been looked up.

6.2.3   Distributed hash tables
Let us now take a closer look at how to resolve an identifier to the address of
the associated entity. We have already mentioned distributed hash tables a
number of times, but have deferred discussion on how they actually work. In
this section, we correct this situation by first considering the Chord system as
an easy-to-explain DHT-based system.

General mechanism
Many DHT-based systems have been developed in the past decade, with the
Chord system [Stoica et al., 2003] being a typical representative. Chord uses
an m-bit identifier space to assign randomly chosen identifiers to nodes as
well as keys to specific entities. The latter can be virtually anything: files,
processes, etc. The number m of bits is usually 128 or 160, depending on
which hash function is used. An entity with key k falls under the jurisdiction
of the node with the smallest identifier id ≥ k. This node is referred to as
the successor of k and denoted as succ(k). To keep our notation simple and
consistent, in the following, we refer to a node with identifier p as node p.
    The main issue in DHT-based systems is to efficiently resolve a key k to
the address of succ(k). A naive approach is to let each node p keep track of
the successor succ( p + 1). In that case, whenever a node p receives a request
to resolve key k, it will simply forward the request to its successor, unless
pred( p) < k ≤ p, in which case node p should return its own address to
the process that initiated the resolution of key k. A lookup request would,
on average, need to travel half of the ring. Obviously, this approach is not
scalable. Keeping track of the predecessor and forwarding a request in that
direction will cut the expected number of hops by only 50%, which is not by
far good enough.
    Instead of this linear approach toward key lookup, each Chord node
maintains a finger table containing s ≤ m entries. If FTp denotes the finger
table of node p, then
                             FTp [i ] = succ( p + 2i−1 )
Put in other words, the ith entry points to the first node succeeding p by at
least 2i−1 units. Note that these references are actually shortcuts to existing
nodes in the identifier space, where the short-cutted distance from node p
increases exponentially as the index in the finger table increases. To look up a
key k, node p will then immediately forward the request to node q with index
j in p’s finger table where:

                          q = FTp [ j] ≤ k < FTp [ j + 1]

or q = FTp [1] when p < k < FTp [1]. (For clarity, we ignore modulo arith-
metic.) Note that when the finger-table size s is equal to 1, a Chord lookup
corresponds to naively traversing the ring linearly, as we just discussed.

Figure 6.2: Resolving key 26 from node 1 and key 12 from node 28 in a Chord
system.

    To illustrate this lookup, consider resolving k = 26 from node 1 as shown in
Figure 6.2. First, node 1 will look up k = 26 in its finger table to discover that
this value is larger than FT1 [5], meaning that the request will be forwarded
to node 18 = FT1 [5]. Node 18, in turn, will select node 20, as FT18 [2] ≤ k <
FT18 [3]. Finally, the request is forwarded from node 20 to node 21 and from
there to node 28, which is responsible for k = 26. At that point, the address
of node 28 is returned to node 1 and the key has been resolved. For similar
reasons, when node 28 is requested to resolve the key k = 12, a request will
be routed as shown by the dashed line in Figure 6.2.
    It should come as no surprise that a lookup will generally require O(log( N ))
steps, with N being the number of nodes in the system. The result of a simple
experiment by which we look up k = p − 1 starting at node p, yet initially
ignore p’s predecessor, is shown in Figure 6.3. Note that, by ignoring p’s
predecessor at the first lookup step, we need to effectively go to a node at
distance roughly 2i−1 for decreasing values of i.

Figure 6.3: The length of a lookup path as function of the size of a Chord ring.

     In large distributed systems, the collection of participating nodes can be
expected to change all the time. Not only will nodes join and leave voluntarily,
we also need to consider the case of nodes failing (and thus effectively leaving
the system), to later recover again (at which point they rejoin).
     Joining a DHT-based system such as Chord is relatively simple. Suppose
node p wants to join. It simply contacts an arbitrary node in the existing
system and requests a lookup for succ( p + 1). Once this node has been
identified, p can insert itself into the ring. Likewise, leaving can be just as
simple. Note that nodes also keep track of their predecessor.
     Obviously, the complexity comes from keeping the finger tables up-to-date.
Most important is that for every node q, FTq [1] is correct as this entry refers
to the next node in the ring, that is, the successor of q + 1. To achieve this goal,
each node q regularly runs a simple procedure that contacts succ(q + 1) and
requests to return pred(succ(q + 1)). If q = pred(succ(q + 1)) then q knows its
information is consistent with that of its successor. Otherwise, if q’s successor
has updated its predecessor, then apparently a new node p had entered the
system, with q < p ≤ succ(q + 1), so that q will adjust FTq [1] to p. At that
point, it will also check whether p has recorded q as its predecessor. If not,
another adjustment of FTq [1] is needed.
     Similarly, to update a finger table, node q simply needs to find the successor
for k = q + 2i−1 for each entry i. Again, this can be done by issuing a request
to resolve succ(k). In Chord, such requests are issued regularly using a
background process.
     Likewise, each node q will regularly check whether its predecessor is alive.
If the predecessor has failed, the only thing that q can do is record the fact by
setting pred(q) to “unknown.” On the other hand, when node q is updating
its link to the next known node in the ring, and finds that the predecessor of
succ(q + 1) has been set to “unknown,” it will simply notify succ(q + 1) that

it suspects it to be the predecessor. By and large, these simple procedures
ensure that a Chord system is generally consistent, only perhaps except for a
few nodes. The details can be found in [Stoica et al., 2003].

  Note 6.1 (Advanced: Chord in Python)
  Coding Chord in Python is relatively simple. Again, omitting many of the
  nonessential coding details, the core of the behavior of a Chord node can be
  described as shown in Figure 6.4. The function finger(i) with succNode(i)
  computes succ(i ) for the given node. All nodes known to a specific Chord node
  are collected in a local set nodeSet, which is sorted by node identifier. The node
  first looks up its own position in this set, and that of its right-hand neighbor.
  The operation inbetween(k,l,u) computes if k ∈ [l, u), taking modulo arithmetic
  into account. Computing inbetween(k,l+1,u+1) is therefore the same as testing
  whether k ∈ (l, u]. We thus see that finger(i) returns the largest existing node
  identifier, less or equal to i.

      1   class ChordNode:
      2
      3    def __succNode(self, key):
      4      if (key <= self.nodeSet[0] or
      5          key > self.nodeSet[len(self.nodeSet)-1]): # key is in segment for which
      6        return self.nodeSet[0]                      # this node is responsible
      7      for i in range(1,len(self.nodeSet)):
      8        if (key <= self.nodeSet[i]):                # key is in segment for which
      9          return self.nodeSet[i]                    # node (i+1) may be responsible
   10
   11      def __finger(self, i):
   12        return self.__succNode((self.nodeID + pow(2,i-1)) % self.MAXPROC) # succ(p+2^(i-1))
   13
   14      def __recomputeFingerTable(self):
   15        self.FT[0] = self.nodeSet[(self.nodePos - 1)%len(self.nodeSet)] # Predecessor
   16        self.FT[1:] = [self.__finger(i) for i in range(1,self.nBits+1)] # Successors
   17        self.FT.append(self.nodeID)                                     # This node
   18
   19      def __localSuccNode(self, key):
   20        if self.__inbetween(key, self.FT[0]+1, self.nodeID+1): # key in (pred,self]
   21          return self.nodeID                                    # this node is responsible
   22        elif self.__inbetween(key, self.nodeID+1, self.FT[1]): # key in (self,FT[1]]
   23          return self.FT[1]                                     # successor responsible
   24        for i in range(1, self.nBits+1):                        # go through rest of FT
   25          if self.__inbetween(key, self.FT[i], self.FT[(i+1)]): # key in [FT[i],FT[i+1])
   26            return self.FT[i]                                   # FT[i] is responsible

Figure 6.4: The essence of a Chord node expressed in Python.

      Every time a node learns about a new node in the system (or discovers that
  one has left), it simply adjusts the local nodeSet and recomputes its finger table
  by calling recomputeFingerTable. The finger table itself is implemented as a local
  table FT, with FT[0] pointing to the node’s predecessor and FT[nBits+1] to the

  node itself, where nBits is the number of bits used for node identifiers and keys.
      The core of what a node does during a lookup is encoded in localSuccNode(k).
  When handed a key k, it will either return itself, its immediate successor FT[1],
  or go through the finger table to search the entry satisfying FT[i] ≤ k < FT[i+1].
  The code does not show what is done with the returned value (which is a node
  identifier), but typically in an iterative scheme, the referenced node will be contacted
  to continue looking up k, unless the node had returned itself as the one being
  responsible for k. When deploying a recursive scheme, the node itself contacts the
  referenced node.

Exploiting network proximity
One of the potential problems with systems such as Chord is that requests
may be routed erratically across the Internet. For example, assume that
node 1 in Figure 6.2 is placed in Amsterdam, The Netherlands; node 18
in San Diego, California; node 20 in Amsterdam again; and node 21 in
San Diego. The result of resolving key 26 will then incur three wide-area
message transfers, which arguably could have been reduced to at most one.
To minimize these pathological cases, designing a DHT-based system requires
taking the underlying network into account.
    Castro et al. [2002a] distinguish three different ways for making a DHT-
based system aware of the underlying network. In the case of topology-based
assignment of node identifiers the idea is to assign identifiers such that two
nearby nodes will have identifiers that are also close to each other. It is not
difficult to imagine that this approach may impose severe problems in the
case of relatively simple systems such as Chord. In the case where node
identifiers are sampled from a one-dimensional space, mapping a logical ring
to the Internet is far from trivial. Moreover, such a mapping can easily expose
correlated failures: nodes on the same enterprise network will have identifiers
from a relatively small interval. When that network becomes unreachable, we
suddenly have a gap in the otherwise uniform distribution of identifiers.
    With proximity routing, nodes maintain a list of alternatives to forward
a request to. For example, instead of having only a single successor, each
node in Chord could equally well keep track of r successors. In fact, this
redundancy can be applied for every entry in a finger table. For node p, FTp [i ]
normally points to the first node in the range [ p + 2i−1 , p + 2i − 1]. Whenever
it needs to look up a key k, it tries to prevent “overshooting” by passing the
request to a node q with k < q without knowing for sure if there is a node q′
with k ≤ q′ < q. For this reason, p passes k to the node known to p with the
largest identifier smaller or equal to k.
    However, there is no reason why p cannot keep track of r nodes in range
[ p + 2i−1 , p + 2i − 1]: each node q in this range can be used to route a lookup
request for a key k as long as q ≤ k. In that case, when choosing to forward

a lookup request, a node can pick one of the r successors that is closest to
itself while making sure not to “overshoot.” An additional advantage of
having multiple successors for every table entry is that node failures need not
immediately lead to failures of lookups, as multiple routes can be explored.
    Finally, in proximity neighbor selection the idea is to optimize routing
tables such that the nearest node is selected as neighbor. This selection works
only when there are more nodes to choose from. In Chord, this is normally
not the case. However, in other protocols such as Pastry [Rowstron and
Druschel, 2001], when a node joins, it receives information about the current
overlay from multiple other nodes. This information is used by the new node
to construct a routing table. Obviously, when there are alternative nodes
to choose from, proximity neighbor selection will allow the joining node to
choose the best one.
    Note that it may not be that easy to draw a line between proximity routing
and proximity neighbor selection. In fact, when Chord is modified to include
r successors for each finger table entry, proximity neighbor selection resorts
to identifying the closest r neighbors, which comes very close to proximity
routing, as we just explained [Dabek et al., 2004b].

6.2.4      Hierarchical approaches
We now discuss a general approach to a hierarchical location scheme, includ-
ing a number of optimizations. The approach we present is based on the
Globe location service [van Steen et al., 1998]. A detailed description can be
found in [Ballintijn, 2003]. This is a general-purpose location service that is
representative of many hierarchical location services proposed for what are
called Personal Communication Systems, of which a general overview can be
found in Pitoura and Samaras [2001].
    In a hierarchical scheme, a network is divided into a collection of domains.
There is a single top-level domain that spans the entire network. Each domain
can be subdivided into multiple, smaller subdomains. A lowest-level domain,
called a leaf domain, typically corresponds to a local-area network in a
computer network or a cell in a mobile telephone network. The general
assumption is that within a smaller domain, the average time it takes to
transfer a message from one node to another is less than in a large domain.
    Each domain D has an associated directory node dir(D) that keeps track
of the entities in that domain. This leads to a tree of directory nodes. The
directory node of the top-level domain, called the root (directory) node, knows
about all entities. This general organization of a network into domains and
directory nodes is illustrated in Figure 6.5
    To keep track of the whereabouts of an entity, each entity currently located
in a domain D is represented by a location record in the directory node
dir(D). A location record for entity E in the directory node N for a leaf
domain D contains the entity’s current address in that domain. In contrast,

Figure 6.5: Hierarchical organization of a location service into domains, each
having an associated directory node.

the directory node N′ for the next higher-level domain D′ that contains D,
will have a location record for E containing only a pointer to N. Likewise,
the parent node of N′ will store a location record for E containing only a
pointer to N′ . Consequently, the root node will have a location record for each
entity, where each location record stores a pointer to the directory node of the
next lower-level subdomain where that record’s associated entity is currently
located.
    An entity may have multiple addresses, for example if it is replicated.
If an entity has an address in leaf domain D1 and D2 respectively, then the
directory node of the smallest domain containing both D1 and D2 , will have
two pointers, one for each subdomain containing an address. This leads to
the general organization of the tree as shown in Figure 6.6.

Figure 6.6: An example of storing information of an entity having two ad-
dresses in different leaf domains.

    Let us now consider how a lookup operation proceeds in such a hierarchi-
cal location service. As is shown in Figure 6.7, client,nt wishing to locate an
entity E, issues a lookup request to the directory node of the leaf domain D in
which the client resides. If the directory node does not store a location record
for the entity, then the entity is currently not located in D. Consequently, the
node forwards the request to its parent. Note that the parent node represents
a larger domain than its child. If the parent also has no location record for E,
the lookup request is forwarded to a next level higher, and so on.

Figure 6.7: Looking up a location in a hierarchically organized location service.

    As soon as the request reaches a directory node M that stores a location
record for entity E, we know that E is somewhere in the domain dom(M)
represented by node M. In Figure 6.7, M is shown to store a location record
containing a pointer to one of its subdomains. The lookup request is then
forwarded to the directory node of that subdomain, which in turn forwards
it further down the tree, until the request finally reaches a leaf node. The
location record stored in the leaf node will contain the address of E in that
leaf domain. This address can then be returned to the client that initially
requested the lookup to take place.
    An important observation regarding hierarchical location services is that
the lookup operation exploits locality. In principle, the entity is searched
in a gradually increasing ring centered around the requesting client. The
search area is expanded each time the lookup request is forwarded to a next
higher-level directory node. In the worst case, the search continues until the
request reaches the root node. Because the root node has a location record
for each entity, the request can then simply be forwarded along a downward
path of pointers to one of the leaf nodes.
    Update operations exploit locality similarly, as shown in Figure 6.8. Con-
sider an entity E that has created a replica in a leaf domain D for which it
needs to insert its address. The insertion is initiated at the leaf node dir(D)

                                       (a)

                                       (b)

Figure 6.8: (a) An insert request is forwarded to the first node that knows
about entity E. (b) A chain of forwarding pointers to the leaf node is created.

of D which immediately forwards the insert request to its parent. The parent
will forward the insert request as well, until it reaches a directory node M that
already stores a location record for E.
    Node M will then store a pointer in the location record for E, referring to
the child node from where the insert request was forwarded. At that point,
the child node creates a location record for E, containing a pointer to the next
lower-level node from where the request came. This process continues until
we reach the leaf node from which the insert was initiated. The leaf node,
finally, creates a record with the entity’s address in the associated leaf domain.
    Inserting an address as just described leads to installing the chain of
pointers in a top-down fashion, starting at the lowest-level directory node
that has a location record for entity E. An alternative is to create a location

record before passing the insert request to the parent node. In other words,
the chain of pointers is constructed from the bottom up. The advantage of
the latter is that an address becomes available for lookups as soon as possible.
Consequently, if a parent node is temporarily unreachable, the address can
still be looked up within the domain represented by the current node.
     A delete operation is analogous to an insert operation. When an address
for an entity E in a leaf domain D needs to be removed, the directory node
dir(D) is requested to remove that address from its location record for E. If
that location record becomes empty, that is, it contains no other addresses
for E in D, the record can be removed. In that case, the parent node of dir(D)
wants to remove its pointer to dir(D). If the location record for E at the parent
now also becomes empty, that record should be removed as well and the next
higher-level directory node should be informed. Again, this process continues
until a pointer is removed from a location record that remains nonempty
afterward or until the root is reached.

  Note 6.2 (Advanced: Scalability issues)
  One question that immediately comes to mind is whether the hierarchical ap-
  proach just described can actually scale. A seemingly obvious design flaw, is
  that the root node needs to keep track of all identifiers. However, it is important
  to make a distinction between a logical design and its physical implementation.
  Let us make this distinction here and see how we can actually come to a highly
  scalable implementation of a hierarchical location service.
      To this end, we assume that each entity is assigned a unique identifier uniform
  at random from a large space of m-bit identifiers, just as in Chord. Furthermore,
  let us assume that there are a total of N physical hosts {H1 , H2 , . . . , HN } that can
  accommodate the lookup service, spread across the Internet. Each host is capable
  of running one or more location servers. Typically, two servers running on the
  same host will represent two nodes at different levels of the logical tree. Let Dk (A)
  denote the domain at level k that contains address A, with k = 0 denoting the
  root domain. Likewise, let LSk (E, A) denote the unique location server in Dk (A)
  responsible for keeping track of the whereabouts of the entity E.
      We can now make a distinction between a logical root and its implementation.
  Let Dk = {Dk,1 , Dk,2 , . . . , Dk,Nk } denote the Nk domains at level k, with, obviously,
  N0 = |D0 | = 1. For each level k, the set of hosts is partitioned into Nk subsets,
  with each host running a location server representing exactly one of the domains
  Dk,i from Dk . This principle is shown in Figure 6.9.
      In this example, we consider a simple tree with four levels and nine hosts.
  There are two level-1 domains, four level-2 domains, and eight leaf domains. We
  also show a tree for one specific entity E: any contact address associated with E
  will be stored in one of the eight level-3 location servers, depending, of course,
  on the domain to which that address belongs. The root location server for E is
  running on host H3 . Note that this host also runs a leaf-level location server for E.
      As explained by van Steen and Ballintijn [2002], by judiciously choosing which
  host should run a location server for E, we can combine the principle of local

  operations (which is good for geographical scalability) and full distribution of
  higher level servers (which is good for size scalability).

Figure 6.9: The principle of distributing logical location servers over
        physical hosts.

6.2.5    Secure flat naming
Flat names do not contain any information on how to resolve a name to the
entity it is referring to. As a consequence, one needs to, in principle, entirely
rely on the name-resolution process to eventually access the associated entity.
If the name-resolution process cannot be trusted, there is no reason to believe
that any response can be trusted as well. There are then, essentially, two
approaches to follow: (1) secure the name-resolution process, or (2) secure the
identifier-to-entity association. Let us first take a look at this last option.
    Securing the identifier-to-entity association is what happens in a so-called
self-certifying name. As a general principle, we can compute an identifier
from an entity by simply using a hash function:

                  id(entity) = hash(data associated with the entity).

The crux is, of course, which associated data is used. In the case of nonmodifi-
able entities, such as read-only files, a client can simply check that it received
the correct file by separately computing the hash over the file and comparing
it to the identifier it used for looking up that file. Of course, to make this
work, the client would need to know which hash function to use along with
perhaps other information.
    In practice, entities are modified, such as when dealing with mobile objects.
In that case, the entity is the current address of the object. What we need
to know, for sure, is that the returned address is indeed the one that can
be used for accessing the object. Likewise, when dealing with modifiable
files, the returned information should allow the client to check that it is

indeed accessing the correct file. Omitting various details, a scheme proposed
in [Dannewitz et al., 2010] is to have

                         id(entity) = public key(entity).

A client will be returned the associated entity, along with additional data
that will allow it to verify that it is indeed dealing with the correct entity.
For example, the additional data could contain a signed digest of the entity,
effectively forming a signature of the entity’s owner. If necessary, the returned
information could also contain a certificate stating the validity of the public
key that has been used as an identifier.
    By securing the identifier-to-entity binding, it becomes less important to
trust the name-resolution process. The worse that can now happen is that the
process returns false or no entities. However, whatever it returns, the client
will be able to verify its correctness. Trust is now degraded to providing a
decent service.
    Securing the name-resolution process is more involved, yet equally impor-
tant, if only to guarantee proper reliability (we will return to the relationship
between security and reliability in Chapter 8). For lookup services such as
those for mobile IP or hierarchical location services, we need to ensure that
returned (intermediate) answers make sense. We will discuss this in the
next section when zooming into Secure DNS. As mentioned before, securing
DHT-based systems has proved to be rather problematic. There are several
problems to deal with, yet the most important ones deal with addressing
Sybil and eclipse attacks, as also discussed in Section 9.4.2. The bottom line
is that robustness for DHT-based systems comes largely from ensuring that a
node identifier is genuine: it belongs to exactly one owner, and this fact can
be verified. In practice, this means that a centralized authority should be used
for handing out identifiers [Urdaneta et al., 2011].

6.3     Structured naming
Flat names are good for machines, but are generally not very convenient
for humans to use. As an alternative, naming systems generally support
structured names that are composed from simple, human-readable names.
Not only file naming, but also host naming on the Internet, follows this
approach. In this section, we concentrate on structured names and the way
that these names are resolved to addresses.

6.3.1      Name spaces
Names are commonly organized into what is called a name space. Name
spaces for structured names can be represented as a labeled, directed graph
with two types of nodes. A leaf node represents a named entity and has

the property that it has no outgoing edges. A leaf node generally stores
information on the entity it is representing–for example, its address–so that a
client can access it. Alternatively, it can store the state of that entity, such as in
the case of file systems in which a leaf node actually contains the complete
file it is representing. We return to the contents of nodes below.
    In contrast to a leaf node, a directory node has a number of outgoing
edges, each labeled with a name, as shown in Figure 6.10 Each node in a
naming graph is considered as yet another entity in a distributed system, and,
in particular, has an associated identifier. A directory node stores a table in
which an outgoing edge is represented as a pair (node identifier, edge label).
Such a table is called a directory table.

Figure 6.10: A general naming graph with a single root node.

    The naming graph shown in Figure 6.10 has one node, namely n0, which
has only outgoing and no incoming edges. Such a node is called the root
(node) of the naming graph. Although it is possible for a naming graph to
have several root nodes, for simplicity, many naming systems have only one.
Each path in a naming graph can be referred to by the sequence of labels
corresponding to the edges in that path, such as N:[label1 , label2 , ..., labeln ],
where N refers to the first node in the path. Such a sequence is called a path
name. If the first node in a path name is the root of the naming graph, it is
called an absolute path name. Otherwise, it is called a relative path name.
    It is important to realize that names are always organized in a name space.
As a consequence, a name is always defined relative only to a directory node.
In this sense, the term “absolute name” is somewhat misleading. Likewise,
the difference between global and local names can often be confusing. A
global name is a name that denotes the same entity, no matter where that
name is used in a system. In other words, a global name is always interpreted
regarding the same directory node. In contrast, a local name is a name whose
interpretation depends on where that name is being used. Put differently,
a local name is essentially a relative name whose directory in which it is
contained is (implicitly) known.

    This description of a naming graph comes close to what is implemented
in many file systems. However, instead of writing the sequence of edge
labels to represent a path name, path names in file systems are generally
represented as a single string in which the labels are separated by a special
separator character, such as a slash (“/”). This character is also used to indicate
whether a path name is absolute. For example, in Figure 6.10 instead of using
n0:[home, steen, mbox], that is, the actual path name, it is common practice to
use its string representation “/home/steen/mbox.” Note also that when there
are several paths that lead to the same node, that node can be represented by
different path names. For example, node n5 in Figure 6.10 can be referred to
by “/home/steen/keys” as well as “/keys.” The string representation of path
names can be equally well applied to naming graphs other than those used for
only file systems. In Plan 9 [Pike et al., 1995], all resources, such as processes,
hosts, I/O devices, and network interfaces, are named in the same fashion as
traditional files. This approach is analogous to implementing a single naming
graph for all resources in a distributed system.
    There are many ways to organize a name space. As we mentioned, most
name spaces have only a single root node. Often, a name space is also strictly
hierarchical, in the sense that the naming graph is organized as a tree. This
means that each node, except the root, has exactly one incoming edge; the
root has no incoming edges. As a consequence, each node also has exactly
one associated (absolute) path name.
    The naming graph shown in Figure 6.10 is an example of directed acyclic
graph. In such an organization, a node can have more than one incoming
edge, but the graph is not permitted to have a cycle. There are also name
spaces that do not have this restriction.

  Note 6.3 (More information: Implementing the Unix naming graph)
  To make matters more concrete, consider the way that files in a traditional Unix
  file system are named. In a naming graph for Unix a directory node represents a
  file directory, whereas a leaf node represents a file. There is a single root directory,
  represented in the naming graph by the root node. The implementation of the
  naming graph is an integral part of the complete implementation of the file system.
  That implementation consists of a contiguous series of blocks from a logical disk,
  generally divided into a boot block, a superblock, a series of index nodes (called
  inodes), and file data blocks. See also [Silberschatz et al., 2019] or [Tanenbaum
  and Bos, 2022]. This organization is shown in Figure 6.11.
       The boot block is a special block of data and instructions that are automatically
  loaded into main memory when the system is booted. The boot block is used to
  load the operating system into main memory.
       The superblock contains information on the entire file system, such as its size,
  which blocks on disk are not yet allocated, which inodes are not yet used, and so
  on. Inodes are referred to by an index number, starting at number zero, which is
  reserved for the inode representing the root directory.

Figure 6.11: The general organization of the Unix file system implementa-
        tion on a logical disk of contiguous disk blocks.

      Each inode contains information on where the data of its associated file can
  be found on disk. In addition, an inode contains information on its owner, time
  of creation and last modification, protection, and the like. Consequently, when
  given the index number of an inode, it is possible to access its associated file.
  Each directory is implemented as a file as well. This is also the case for the root
  directory, which contains a mapping between file names and index numbers of
  inodes. It is thus seen that the index number of an inode corresponds to a node
  identifier in the naming graph.

6.3.2    Name resolution
Name spaces offer a convenient mechanism for storing and retrieving infor-
mation about entities through names. More generally, given a path name, it
should be possible to look up any information stored in the node referred to
by that name. The process of looking up a name is called name resolution.
   To explain how name resolution works, let us consider a path name such
as N:[label1 , label2 , ..., labeln ]. Resolution of this name starts at node N of the
naming graph, where the name label1 is looked up in the directory table, and
which returns the identifier of the node to which label1 refers. Resolution then
continues at the identified node by looking up the name label2 in its directory
table, and so on. Assuming that the named path actually exists, resolution
stops at the last node referred to by labeln , by returning that node’s content.

  Note 6.4 (More information: The Unix naming graph again)
  A name lookup returns the identifier of a node, from where the name resolution
  process continues. In particular, it is necessary to access the directory table of
  the identified node. Consider again a naming graph for a Unix file system. As
  mentioned, a node identifier is implemented as the index number of an inode.
  Accessing a directory table means that first the inode has to be read to find out
  where the actual data are stored on disk, and then subsequently to read the data
  blocks containing the directory table.

Closure mechanism

Name resolution can take place only if we know how and where to start. In
our example, the starting node was given, and we assumed we had access to its
directory table. Knowing how and where to start name resolution is generally
referred to as a closure mechanism. Essentially, a closure mechanism deals
with selecting the initial node in a name space, from which name resolution
is to start [Radia, 1989]. What makes closure mechanisms sometimes hard
to understand is that they are necessarily partly implicit and may be very
different when comparing them to each other.
    Consider, for example, the string “00312059837784”. Many people will not
know what to do with these numbers, unless they are told that the sequence
is a telephone number. That information is enough to start the resolution
process, in particular, by entering the number at a device for making phone
calls. The telephone system subsequently does the rest.
    As another example, consider the use of global and local names in dis-
tributed systems. A typical example of a local name is an environment variable.
For example, in Unix systems, the variable named HOME is used to refer to
the home directory of a user. Each user has their own copy of this variable,
which is initialized to the global, systemwide name corresponding to the
user’s home directory. The closure mechanism associated with environment
variables ensure that the name of the variable is properly resolved by looking
it up in a user-specific table.

  Note 6.5 (More information: The Unix naming graph and its closure mechanism)
  Name resolution in the naming graph for a Unix file system makes use of the fact
  that the inode of the root directory is the first inode in the logical disk representing
  the file system. Its actual byte offset is calculated from the values in other fields
  of the superblock, together with hard-coded information in the operating system
  itself on the internal organization of the superblock.
       To make this point clear, consider the string representation of a file name,
  such as /home/steen/mbox. To resolve this name, it is necessary to already
  have access to the directory table of the root node of the appropriate naming
  graph. Being a root node, the node itself cannot have been looked up unless it
  is implemented as a different node in another naming graph, say G. But in that
  case, it would have been necessary to already have access to the root node of G.
  Consequently, resolving a file name requires that some mechanism has already
  been implemented by which the resolution process can start.
       In this respect, observe how the closure mechanism works in the case of
  containers: the chroot command is used to make applications within a specific
  container see a different root than those in another container. In other words, each
  container offers its own naming graph to the contained applications, whereas the
  operating system hosting the containers provides a closure to properly start name
  resolution independent of each other.

Linking and mounting
Strongly related to name resolution is the use of aliases. An alias is another
name for the same entity. An environment variable is an example of an alias.
In terms of naming graphs, there are basically two different ways to implement
an alias. The first approach is to simply allow multiple absolute paths names
to refer to the same node in a naming graph. This approach is illustrated in
Figure 6.10, in which the node n5 can be referred to by two different path
names. In Unix terminology, both path names /keys and /home/steen/keys
in Figure 6.12 are called hard links to node n5.
    The second approach is to represent an entity by a leaf node, say N, but
instead of storing the address or state of that entity, the node stores an absolute
path name. When first resolving an absolute path name that leads to N, name
resolution will return the path name stored in N, at which point it can continue
with resolving that new path name. This principle corresponds to the use of
symbolic links in Unix file systems, and is illustrated in Figure 6.12 In this
example, the path name /home/steen/keys, which refers to a node containing
the absolute path name /keys, is a symbolic link to node n5.

Figure 6.12: The concept of a symbolic link explained in a naming graph.

    Name resolution as described so far takes place completely within a single
name space. However, name resolution can also be used to merge different
name spaces transparently. Let us first consider a mounted file system. In
terms of our naming model, a mounted file system corresponds to letting a
directory node store the identifier of a directory node from a different name
space, which we refer to as a foreign name space. The directory node storing
the node identifier is called a mount point. Accordingly, the directory node in
the foreign name space is called a mounting point. Normally, the mounting
point is the root of a name space. During name resolution, the mounting point
is looked up and resolution proceeds by accessing its directory table.
    The principle of mounting can be generalized to other name spaces as
well. In particular, what is needed is a directory node that acts as a mount

point and stores all the necessary information for identifying and accessing
the mounting point in the foreign name space. This approach is followed in
many distributed file systems.
    Consider a collection of name spaces that is distributed across different
machines. In particular, each name space is implemented by a different server,
each possibly running on a separate machine. Consequently, if we want to
mount a foreign name space NS2 into a name space NS1 , it may be necessary
to communicate over a network with the server of NS2 , as that server may be
running on a different machine than the server for NS1 . To mount a foreign
name space in a distributed system requires at least the following information:

   1. The name of an access protocol.
   2. The name of the server.
   3. The name of the mounting point in the foreign name space.

    Note that each of these names needs to be resolved. The name of an access
protocol needs to be resolved to the implementation of a protocol by which
communication with the server of the foreign name space can take place. The
name of the server needs to be resolved to an address where that server can
be reached. As the last part in name resolution, the name of the mounting
point needs to be resolved to a node identifier in the foreign name space.
    In nondistributed systems, none of the three points may actually be needed.
For example, in Unix there is no access protocol and no server. Also, the name
of the mounting point is not necessary, as it is simply the root directory of the
foreign name space.
    The name of the mounting point is to be resolved by the server of the
foreign name space. However, we also need name spaces and implementations
for the access protocol and the server name. One possibility is to represent
the three names listed above as a URL.
    To make matters concrete, consider a situation in which a user with
a laptop computer wants to access files that are stored on a remote file
server. The client machine and the file server are both configured with the
Network File System (NFS). In particular, to allow NFS to work across
the Internet, a client can specify exactly which file it wants to access by
means of an NFS URL, for example, nfs : //flits.cs.vu.nl/home/steen. This URL
names a file (which happens to be a directory) called /home/steen on an NFS
file server flits.cs.vu.nl, which can be accessed by a client through the NFS
protocol [Haynes, 2015; Noveck and Lever, 2020].
    The name nfs is a well-known name, in the sense that worldwide agreement
exists on how to interpret that name. Given that we are dealing with a URL,
the name nfs will be resolved to an implementation of the NFS protocol. The
server name is resolved to its address using DNS, which is discussed in a
later section. As we said, /home/steen is resolved by the server of the foreign
name space.

Figure 6.13: Mounting remote name spaces through a specific protocol.

    The organization of a file system on the client machine is partly shown in
Figure 6.13 The root directory has a number of user-defined entries, including
a subdirectory called /remote. This subdirectory is intended to include mount
points for foreign name spaces, such as the user’s home directory at VU
University. To this end, a directory node named /remote/vu is used to store
the URL nfs : //flits.cs.vu.nl/home/steen.
    Now consider the name /remote/vu/mbox. This name is resolved by
starting in the root directory on the client’s machine and continues until the
node /remote/vu is reached. The process of name resolution then continues
by returning the URL nfs : //flits.cs.vu.nl/home/steen, in turn leading the client
machine to contact the file server flits.cs.vu.nl through the NFS protocol, and
to subsequently access directory /home/steen. Name resolution can then be
continued by reading the file named mbox in that directory, after which the
resolution process stops.
    Distributed systems that allow mounting a remote file system as just
described allow a client machine to, for example, execute the following com-
mands (assume the client machine is named horton):

      horton$ cd /remote/vu
      horton$ ls -l

which subsequently lists the files in the directory /home/steen on the remote
file server. The beauty of all this is that the user is spared the details of the

actual access to the remote server. Ideally, only some loss in performance is
noticed compared to accessing locally available files. In effect, to the client it
appears that the name space rooted on the local machine, and the one rooted
at /home/steen on the remote machine, form a single name space.

  Note 6.6 (More information: Mounting across a network in Unix)
  There are many ways in which mounting across a network can take place. One
  practical solution and adopted by many small-scale distributed systems, is to
  simply assign fixed IP addresses to machines and subsequently offer mounting
  points to clients. Consider the following example. Suppose we have a Unix
  machine named coltrane using the private address 192.168.2.3, storing a collection
  of music files under the local directory /audio. This directory can be exported as a
  mounting point, and as a consequence can be imported by another machine.
      Let quandar be such a machine, and suppose it wants to mount the collection
  of audio files at the local mount point /home/maarten/Music. The following
  command will do the job (assuming the correct privileges have been set):
        quandar$ mount -t nfs 192.168.2.3:/audio /home/maarten/Music
  From that moment on, all files available on coltrane in its directory /audio can be
  accessed by quandar in the directory /home/maarten/Music. The beauty of this
  scheme is that once mounted, there is no need to think of remote access anymore
  (until something fails, of course).

6.3.3      The implementation of a name space
A name space forms the heart of a naming service, that is, a service that
allows users and processes to add, remove, and look up names. A naming
service is implemented by name servers. If a distributed system is restricted
to a local-area network, it is often feasible to implement a naming service by
only a single name server. However, in large-scale distributed systems with
many entities, possibly spread across a large geographical area, it is necessary
to distribute the implementation of a name space over multiple name servers.

Name space distribution
Name spaces for a large-scale, possibly worldwide distributed system, are
usually organized hierarchically. As before, assume such a name space has
only a single root node. To effectively implement such a name space, it
is convenient to partition it into logical layers. Cheriton and Mann [1989]
distinguish the following three layers.
    The global layer is formed by highest-level nodes, that is, the root node
and other directory nodes logically close to the root, namely its children.
Nodes in the global layer are often characterized by their stability, in the
sense that directory tables are rarely changed. Such nodes may represent

organizations, or groups of organizations, for which names are stored in the
name space.
    The administrational layer is formed by directory nodes that, together, are
managed within a single organization. A characteristic feature of the directory
nodes in the administrational layer is that they represent groups of entities
that belong to the same organization or administrational unit. For example,
there may be a directory node for each department in an organization, or a
directory node from which all hosts can be found. Another directory node
may be used as the starting point for naming all users, and so forth. The
nodes in the administrational layer are relatively stable, although changes
generally occur more frequently than to nodes in the global layer.
    Finally, the managerial layer consists of nodes that may typically change
regularly. For example, nodes representing hosts in the local network belong
to this layer. For the same reason, the layer includes nodes representing shared
files, such as those for libraries or binaries. Another important class of nodes
includes those that represent user-defined directories and files. In contrast
to the global and administrational layer, the nodes in the managerial layer
are maintained not only by system administrators, but also by individual end
users of a distributed system.

 Global
  layer                            gov   mil   org      net
                  com       edu                                 jp    us
                                                                                         nl

            oracle       yale            acm            ieee     ac        co          uva               vu

            eng      cs      eng     jack        jill          keio         nec                          cs
Adminis-
trational
    layer                                                                                       ftp      www
                                                                cs              csl
            ai           linda

                                                               pc24
                 robot                                                                   pub

                                                                                      globule
 Mana-
 gerial
  layer                                                       Zone
                                                                                  index.htm

Figure 6.14: An example partitioning of the DNS name space, including
Internet-accessible files, into three layers.

   To make matters more concrete, Figure 6.14 shows an example of the
partitioning of part of the DNS name space, including the names of files within

an organization that can be accessed through the Internet, for example, Web
pages and transferable files. The name space is divided into nonoverlapping
parts, called zones in DNS [Mockapetris, 1987a;b]. A zone is a part of the
name space that is implemented by a separate name server. Some of these
zones are illustrated in Figure 6.14.
    If we take a look at availability and performance, name servers in each
layer have to meet different requirements. High availability is especially
critical for name servers in the global layer. If a name server fails, a large
part of the name space will be unreachable because name resolution cannot
proceed beyond the failing server.
    Performance is somewhat subtle. Due to the low rate of change of nodes
in the global layer, the results of lookup operations generally remain valid for
a long time. Consequently, those results can be effectively cached (i.e., stored
locally) by the clients. The next time the same lookup operation is performed,
the results can be retrieved from the client’s cache instead of letting the name
server return the results. As a result, name servers in the global layer do
not have to respond quickly to a single lookup request. On the other hand,
throughput may be important, especially in large-scale systems with millions
of users.
    The availability and performance requirements for name servers in the
global layer can be met by replicating servers, with client-side caching. Up-
dates in this layer generally do not have to come into effect immediately,
making it much easier to keep replicas consistent.
    Availability for a name server in the administrational layer is primarily
important for clients in the same organization as the name server. If the name
server fails, many resources within the organization become unreachable
because they cannot be looked up. On the other hand, it may be less important
that resources in an organization are temporarily unreachable for users outside
that organization.
    Regarding performance, name servers in the administrational layer have
similar characteristics as those in the global layer. Because changes to nodes
do not occur all that often, caching lookup results can be highly effective,
making performance less critical. However, in contrast to the global layer,
the administrational layer should take care that lookup results are returned
within a few milliseconds, either directly from the server or from the client’s
local cache. Likewise, updates should generally be processed quicker than
those of the global layer. For example, it is unacceptable that an account for a
new user takes hours to become effective.
    These requirements can often be met by using relatively powerful machines
to run name servers. In addition, client-side caching should be applied,
combined with replication, for increased overall availability.
    Availability requirements for name servers at the managerial level are
generally less demanding. In particular, it often suffices to use a single

machine to run name servers at the risk of temporary unavailability. However,
performance is crucial: operations must take place immediately. Because
updates occur regularly, client-side caching is often less effective.

             Issue                Global       Administrational     Managerial
      Geographical scale         Worldwide       Organization       Department
       Number of nodes             Few               Many          Vast numbers
   Responsiveness to lookups     Seconds         Milliseconds       Immediate
      Update propagation           Lazy           Immediate         Immediate
      Number of replicas          Many           None or few           None
      Client-side caching          Yes                Yes           Sometimes

Figure 6.15: A comparison between name servers for implementing nodes
from a large-scale name space partitioned into a global layer, an administra-
tional layer, and a managerial layer.

    A comparison between name servers at different layers is shown in Fig-
ure 6.15. In distributed systems, name servers in the global and administra-
tional layer are the most difficult to implement. Difficulties are caused by
replication and caching, which are needed for availability and performance,
but which also introduce consistency problems. Some of the problems are
aggravated by the fact that caches and replicas are spread across a wide-area
network, which may introduce long communication delays during lookups.

Implementation of name resolution
The distribution of a name space across multiple name servers affects the
implementation of name resolution. To explain the implementation of name
resolution in large-scale name services, we assume for the moment that name
servers are not replicated and that no client-side caches are used. Each
client has access to a local name resolver, which is responsible for ensuring
that the name resolution process is carried out. Referring to Figure 6.14,
assume the (absolute) path name root:[nl, vu, cs, ftp, pub, globe, index.html] is to
be resolved. Using a URL notation, this path name would correspond to
ftp : //ftp.cs.vu.nl/pub/globe/index.html. There are now two ways to imple-
ment name resolution.
     In iterative name resolution, a name resolver hands over the complete
name to the root name server. It is assumed that the address where the root
server can be contacted is well known. The root server will resolve the path
name as far as it can, and return the result to the client. In our example, the
root server can resolve only the label nl, for which it will return the address of
the associated name server.
     At that point, the client passes the remaining path name (i.e., nl:[vu, cs, ftp,
pub, globe, index.html]) to that name server. This server can resolve only the

label vu, and returns the address of the associated name server, along with
the remaining path name vu:[cs, ftp, pub, globe, index.html].
   The client’s name resolver will then contact this next name server, which
responds by resolving the label cs, and subsequently also ftp, returning the
address of the FTP server along with the path name ftp:[pub, globe, index.html].
The client then contacts the FTP server, requesting it to resolve the last part of
the original path name. The FTP server will subsequently resolve the labels
pub, globe, and index.html, and transfer the requested file (in this case using
FTP). This process of iterative name resolution is shown in Figure 6.16. (The
notation #[cs] is used to indicate the address of the server responsible for
handling the node referred to by [cs].)

Figure 6.16: The principle of iterative name resolution.

    In practice, the last step, namely contacting the FTP server and requesting
it to transfer the file with path name ftp:[pub, globe, index.html], is carried out
separately by the client process. In other words, the client would normally
hand only the path name root:[nl, vu, cs, ftp] to the name resolver, from which
it would expect the address where it can contact the FTP server, as is also
shown in Figure 6.16
    An alternative to iterative name resolution is to use recursion during name
resolution. Instead of returning each intermediate result to the client’s name
resolver, with recursive name resolution, a name server passes the result to
the next name server it finds. So, for example, when the root name server finds
the address of the name server implementing the node named nl, it requests
that name server to resolve the path name nl:[vu, cs, ftp, pub, globe, index.html].
Using recursive name resolution as well, this next server will resolve the
complete path and eventually return the file index.html to the root server,
which, in turn, will pass that file to the client’s name resolver.

   Recursive name resolution is shown in Figure 6.17. As in iterative name
resolution, the last step (contacting the FTP server and asking it to transfer
the indicated file) is generally carried out as a separate process by the client.

Figure 6.17: The principle of recursive name resolution.

    The main drawback of recursive name resolution is that it puts a higher
performance demand on each name server. Basically, a name server is required
to handle the complete resolution of a path name, although it may do so in
cooperation with other name servers. This additional burden is generally
so high that name servers in the global layer of a name space support only
iterative name resolution.
    There are two important advantages to recursive name resolution. The first
advantage is that caching results is more effective compared to iterative name
resolution. The second advantage is that communication costs may be reduced.
To explain these advantages, assume that a client’s name resolver will accept
path names referring only to nodes in the global or administrational layer
of the name space. To resolve that part of a path name that corresponds to
nodes in the managerial layer, a client will separately contact the name server
returned by its name resolver, as we discussed above.
    Recursive name resolution allows each name server to gradually learn
the address of each name server responsible for implementing lower-level
nodes. As a result, caching can be effectively used to enhance performance.
For example, when the root server is requested to resolve the path name
root:[nl, vu, cs, ftp], it will eventually get the address of the name server imple-
menting the node referred to by that path name. To come to that point, the
name server for the nl node has to look up the address of the name server for
the vu node, whereas the latter has to look up the address of the name server
handling the cs node.
    Because changes to nodes in the global and administrational layer do not
occur often, the root name server can effectively cache the returned address.

Moreover, because the address is also returned, by recursion, to the name
server responsible for implementing the vu node and to the one implementing
the nl node, it might as well be cached at those servers too.
   Likewise, the results of intermediate name lookups can also be returned
and cached. For example, the server for the nl node will have to look up the
address of the vu node server. That address can be returned to the root server
when the nl server returns the result of the original name lookup. A complete
overview of the resolution process, and the results that can be cached by each
name server, is shown in Figure 6.18.

Server       Should           Looks up   Passes to       Receives         Returns
for node     resolve                     child           and caches       to requester
cs           [ftp]            #[ftp]     —               —                #[ftp]
vu           [cs, ftp]        #[cs]      [ftp]           #[ftp]           #[cs]
                                                                          #[cs, ftp]
nl           [vu, cs, ftp]    #[vu]      [cs, ftp]       #[cs]            #[vu]
                                                         #[cs, ftp]       #[vu, cs]
                                                                          #[vu, cs, ftp]
root         [nl, vu, cs, ftp] #[nl]     [vu, cs, ftp]   #[vu]            #[nl]
                                                         #[vu, cs]        #[nl, vu]
                                                         #[vu, cs, ftp]   #[nl, vu, cs]
                                                                          #[nl, vu, cs, ftp]

Figure 6.18: Recursive name resolution of [nl, vu, cs, ftp]. Name servers cache
intermediate results for subsequent lookups.

    The main benefit of this approach is that, eventually, lookup operations
can be handled quite efficiently. For example, suppose that another client later
requests resolution of the path name root:[nl, vu, cs, flits]. This name is passed
to the root, which can immediately forward it to the name server for the cs
node, and request it to resolve the remaining path name cs:[flits].
    With iterative name resolution, caching is necessarily restricted to the
client’s name resolver. Consequently, if a client A requests the resolution of a
name, and another client B later requests that same name to be resolved, name
resolution will have to pass through the same name servers as was done for
client A. As a compromise, many organizations use a local, intermediate name
server that is shared by all clients. This local name server handles all naming
requests and caches results. Such an intermediate server is also convenient
from a management point of view. For example, only that server needs to
know where the root name server is located; other machines do not require
this information.
    The second advantage of recursive name resolution is that it is often
cheaper regarding communication. Again, consider the resolution of the path
name root:[nl, vu, cs, ftp] and assume the client is located in San Francisco.
Assuming that the client knows the address of the server for the nl node,

with recursive name resolution, communication follows the route from the
client’s host in San Francisco to the nl server in The Netherlands, shown
as R1 in Figure 6.19 From there on, communication is subsequently needed
between the nl server and the name server of VU University on the campus in
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. This communication is shown as R2. Finally,
communication is needed between the vu server and the name server in the
Computer Science Department, shown as R3. The route for the reply is the
same, but in the opposite direction. Clearly, communication costs are dictated
by the message exchange between the client’s host and the nl server.
    In contrast, with iterative name resolution, the client’s host has to commu-
nicate separately with the nl server, the vu server, and the cs server, of which
the total costs may be roughly three times that of recursive name resolution.
The arrows in Figure 6.19 labeled I1, I2, and I3 show the communication path
for iterative name resolution.

Figure 6.19: The comparison between recursive and iterative name resolution
regarding communication costs.

6.3.4   Example: The Domain Name System
One of the largest distributed naming services in use today is the Internet
Domain Name System (DNS). DNS is primarily used for looking up IP
addresses of hosts and mail servers. In the following pages, we concentrate
on the organization of the DNS name space and the information stored in its
nodes. Also, we take a closer look at the actual implementation of DNS. More
information can be found in [Mockapetris, 1987a;b] and [Liu and Albitz, 2006].
An excellent tutorial on DNS is provided by van der Toorn et al. [2022].

The DNS name space
The DNS name space is hierarchically organized as a rooted tree. A label is
a case-insensitive string made up of alphanumeric characters. A label has
a maximum length of 63 characters; the length of a complete path name is

restricted to 255 characters. The string representation of a path name consists
of listing its labels, starting with the rightmost one, and separating the labels
by a dot (“.”). The root is represented by a dot. So, for example, the path
name root:[nl, vu, cs, flits], is represented by the string “flits.cs.vu.nl.”, which
includes the rightmost dot to indicate the root node. We generally omit this
dot for readability.
    Because each node in the DNS name space has exactly one incoming edge
(except for the root node, which has no incoming edges), the label attached to
a node’s incoming edge is also used as the name for that node. A subtree is
called a domain; a path name to its root node is called a domain name. Note
that, just like a path name, a domain name can be either absolute or relative.
    The contents of a node is formed by a collection of resource records.
There are different types of resource records. The major ones are shown in
Figure 6.20.

           Type       Refers to   Description
           SOA        Zone        Holds info on the represented zone
           A          Host        IP addr. of host this node represents
           MX         Domain      Mail server to handle mail for this node
           SRV        Domain      Server handling a specific service
           NS         Zone        Name server for the represented zone
           CNAME      Node        Symbolic link
           PTR        Host        Canonical name of a host
           HINFO      Host        Info on this host
           TXT        Any kind    Any info considered useful

Figure 6.20: The most important types of resource records forming the con-
tents of nodes in the DNS name space.

   A node in the DNS name space will often represent several entities at the
same time. For example, a domain name such as vu.nl is used to represent
a domain and a zone. In this case, the domain is implemented by means of
several (nonoverlapping) zones.
   An SOA (start of authority) resource record contains information such as
an e-mail address of the system administrator responsible for the represented
zone, the name of the host where data on the zone can be fetched, and so on.
   An A (address) record, represents a particular host on the Internet. The A
record contains an IP address for that host to allow communication. If a host
has several IP addresses, as is the case with multi-homed machines, the node
will contain an A record for each address.
   Another type of record is the MX (mail exchange) record, which is like a
symbolic link to a node representing a mail server. For example, the node
representing the domain cs.vu.nl has an MX record that used to contain the

name zephyr.cs.vu.nl which refers to a mail server. That server would handle
all incoming mail addressed to users in the cs.vu.nl domain. There may be
several MX records stored in a node.
    Related to MX records are SRV records, which contain the name of a server
for a specific service. The service itself is identified through a name along with
the name of a protocol. For example, the Web server in the cs.vu.nl domain
could be named using an SRV record, such as website.cs.vu.nl. This record
would then refer to the actual name of the server (which is soling.cs.vu.nl).
An important advantage of SRV records is that clients need no longer know
the DNS name of the host providing a specific service. Instead, only service
names need to be standardized, after which the providing host can be looked
up.
    Nodes that represent a zone, contain one or more NS (name server) records.
Like MX records, an NS record contains the name of a name server that
implements the zone represented by the node. In principle, each node in
the name space can store an NS record referring to the name server that
implements it. However, as we discuss below, the implementation of the
DNS name space is such that only nodes representing zones need to store NS
records.
    DNS distinguishes aliases from what are called canonical names. Each
host is assumed to have a canonical, or primary name. An alias is implemented
using a node storing a CNAME record containing the canonical name of a host.
The name of the node storing such a record is thus the same as a symbolic
link, as was shown in Figure 6.12.
    DNS maintains an inverse mapping of IP addresses to host names using
PTR (pointer) records. To accommodate the lookups of host names when
given only an IP address, DNS maintains a domain named in-addr.arpa, which
contains nodes that represent Internet hosts and which are named by the IP
address of the represented host. For example, host www.cs.vu.nl once had
IP address 130.37.20.20. DNS creates a node named 20.20.37.130.in-addr.arpa,
which is used to store the canonical name of that host (which happens to be
soling.cs.vu.nl in a PTR record).
    Finally, an HINFO (host info) record is used to store additional information
on a host, such as its machine type and operating system. Similarly, TXT
records are used for any other kind of data that a user finds useful to store
about the entity represented by the node.

DNS implementation

In essence, the DNS name space can be divided into a global layer and an
administrational layer, as shown in Figure 6.14. The managerial layer, which
is generally formed by local file systems, is formally not part of DNS, and is
therefore also not managed by it.

    Each zone is implemented by a name server, which is virtually always
replicated for availability. Updates for a zone are normally handled by the
primary name server. Updates take place by modifying the DNS database
local to the primary server. Secondary name servers do not access the database
directly, but, instead, request the primary server to transfer its content. The
latter is called a zone transfer in DNS terminology.
    A DNS database is implemented as a (small) collection of files, of which
the most important one contains all the resource records for all the nodes in a
particular zone. This approach allows nodes to be simply identified through
their domain name, by which the notion of a node identifier reduces to an
(implicit) index into a file.

  Note 6.7 (More information: An example DNS database)
  To better understand these implementation issues, Figure 6.21 shows a small part
  of the file that contains most of the information for a previous organization of the
  cs.vu.nl domain. Note that we have deliberately chosen an outdated version for
  security reasons. The file has been edited for readability. It shows the content
  of several nodes that used to be part of the cs.vu.nl domain, where each node is
  identified through its domain name.
      In this example, the node cs.vu.nl represents the domain as well as the zone.
  Its SOA resource record contains specific information on the validity of this file,
  which will not concern us further. There are four name servers for this zone,
  referred to by their canonical host names in the NS records. The TXT record is
  used to give some additional information on this zone, but cannot be automatically
  processed by any name server. Furthermore, there is a single mail server that can
  handle incoming mail addressed to users in this domain. The number preceding
  the name of a mail server specifies a selection priority. A sending mail server
  should always first attempt to contact the mail server with the lowest number.
      The host star.cs.vu.nl operates as a name server for this zone. Name servers
  are critical to any naming service. What can be seen about this name server
  is that additional robustness has been created by giving two separate network
  interfaces, each represented by a separate A resource record. In this way, the
  effects of a broken network link can be somewhat alleviated, as the server will
  remain accessible.
      The next four lines (for zephyr.cs.vu.nl) give the necessary information about
  one of the department’s mail servers. Note that this mail server is also backed up
  by another mail server, whose path is tornado.cs.vu.nl.
      The next six lines show a typical configuration in which the department’s
  Web server, as well as the department’s FTP server, are implemented by a single
  machine, called soling.cs.vu.nl. By executing both servers on the same machine
  (and essentially using that machine only for Internet services and not anything
  else), system management becomes easier. For example, both servers will have
  the same view of the file system, and for efficiency, part of the file system may be
  implemented on soling.cs.vu.nl. This approach is often applied in the case of Web
  and FTP services.

      The following two lines show information on one of the department’s server
  clusters at that time. In this case, it tells us that the address 130.37.198.0 is
  associated with the host name vucs-das1.cs.vu.nl.
     Name                  Record type   Record value
     cs.vu.nl.             SOA           star.cs.vu.nl. hostmaster.cs.vu.nl.
                                         2005092900 7200 3600 2419200 3600
     cs.vu.nl.             TXT           “VU University - Computer Science”
     cs.vu.nl.             MX            1 mail.few.vu.nl.
     cs.vu.nl.             NS            ns.vu.nl.
     cs.vu.nl.             NS            top.cs.vu.nl.
     cs.vu.nl.             NS            solo.cs.vu.nl.
     cs.vu.nl.             NS            star.cs.vu.nl.
     star.cs.vu.nl.        A             130.37.24.6
     star.cs.vu.nl.        A             192.31.231.42
     star.cs.vu.nl.        MX            1 star.cs.vu.nl.
     star.cs.vu.nl.        MX            666 zephyr.cs.vu.nl.
     star.cs.vu.nl.        HINFO         “Sun” “Unix”
     zephyr.cs.vu.nl.      A             130.37.20.10
     zephyr.cs.vu.nl.      MX            1 zephyr.cs.vu.nl.
     zephyr.cs.vu.nl.      MX            2 tornado.cs.vu.nl.
     zephyr.cs.vu.nl.      HINFO         “Sun” “Unix”
     ftp.cs.vu.nl.         CNAME         soling.cs.vu.nl.
     www.cs.vu.nl.         CNAME         soling.cs.vu.nl.
     soling.cs.vu.nl.      A             130.37.20.20
     soling.cs.vu.nl.      MX            1 soling.cs.vu.nl.
     soling.cs.vu.nl.      MX            666 zephyr.cs.vu.nl.
     soling.cs.vu.nl.      HINFO         “Sun” “Unix”
     vucs-das1.cs.vu.nl.   PTR           0.198.37.130.in-addr.arpa.
     vucs-das1.cs.vu.nl.   A             130.37.198.0
     inkt.cs.vu.nl.        HINFO         “OCE” “Proprietary”
     inkt.cs.vu.nl.        A             192.168.4.3
     pen.cs.vu.nl.         HINFO         “OCE” “Proprietary”
     pen.cs.vu.nl.         A             192.168.4.2
     localhost.cs.vu.nl.   A             127.0.0.1

Figure 6.21: An excerpt from an (old) DNS database for the zone cs.vu.nl.

      The next four lines show information on two major printers connected to the
  local network. Note that addresses in the range 192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255
  are private: they can be accessed only from inside the local network and are
  inaccessible from an arbitrary Internet host.
      Because the cs.vu.nl domain was implemented as a single zone, Figure 6.21
  does not include references to other zones. The way to refer to nodes in a
  subdomain that are implemented in a different zone is shown in Figure 6.22.
  What needs to be done is to specify a name server for the subdomain by simply

  giving its domain name and IP address. When resolving a name for a node that
  lies in the cs.vu.nl domain, name resolution will continue at a certain point by
  reading the DNS database stored by the name server for the cs.vu.nl domain.

                    Name             Record type    Record value
                    cs.vu.nl.        NS             solo.cs.vu.nl.
                    cs.vu.nl.        NS             star.cs.vu.nl.
                    cs.vu.nl.        NS             ns.vu.nl.
                    cs.vu.nl.        NS             top.cs.vu.nl.
                    ns.vu.nl.        A              130.37.129.4
                    top.cs.vu.nl.    A              130.37.20.4
                    solo.cs.vu.nl.   A              130.37.20.5
                    star.cs.vu.nl.   A              130.37.24.6
                    star.cs.vu.nl.   A              192.31.231.42

Figure 6.22: Part of the description for the vu.nl domain which contains
      the cs.vu.nl domain.

Modern DNS
Following the terminology from van der Toorn et al. [2022], we speak of
the modern DNS to refer to the current-day implementation of DNS. There
are a number of changes to the DNS implementation that are important for
understanding its behavior. The presentation so far, roughly assumes that that
applications contact a local DNS resolver, and that this resolver subsequently
contacts various name servers, as shown in Figure 6.23(a). The bounding
boxes with dashed lines represent the borders of the organization where the
clients, resolver, and name servers belong to, respectively. In the traditional
setup, the clients contact the local DNS resolver, which can be thought of as
connected to the same local network, or the one from the local ISP. The name
servers each belong to a different organization.
    In the modern DNS, we see three phenomena. First, many organizations
will make use of an external DNS resolver. We explained in Section 3.4.4 that
services like CDNs use the client’s address to select a nearby server when
resolving a URL. However, the address that the CDN service gets is not that
of the client, but of the DNS resolver that the client uses. Clearly, if the DNS
resolver is not close to the client, then a CDN may make a poor decision on
selecting a nearby server. This problem can be mitigated if the local DNS
resolver allows the client (or the requesting host) to also specify its own IP
address. In that case, a CDN DNS name server can use that address to select
the best server to eventually redirect the client to [Contavalli et al., 2016].
    Second, is that many clients, and notably browsers, may actually bypass
any configuration of their local organization and directly contact the DNS

                                      (a)

                                      (b)

Figure 6.23: (a) The traditional organization of the implementation of DNS and
(b) the modern organization that has already been partly realized (adapted
from [van der Toorn et al., 2022]).

resolver of their own choice. Of course, there is nothing wrong with this, yet
it makes it much harder to measure what is happening with DNS requests
from an organization’s perspective, especially if the client-to-resolver com-
munication is also encrypted. In addition, the drawback of using an external
resolver for redirecting requests to a nearby server also holds in this case.
    The third phenomenon is that increasingly fewer organizations are running
their own DNS servers. Instead, the name-resolution process is outsourced to
third parties. In a sense, this means that the DNS is becoming increasingly
less decentralized [Moura et al., 2020]. It is yet unclear what the consequences
are of this centralization, but considering the many discussions on the role
of the Big Tech companies, striving for spreading the DNS across multiple
organizations may not be a bad idea.
   As with so many (public) naming and lookup services, we need to provide
the means for checking the validity of an answer. DNS is in the sense no
exception. Moreover, being one of the most used and even necessary services
on the Internet, securing the DNS is crucial. At the same time, when we
realize that the DNS is becoming more centralized and end users are actually
submitting a lot of information on how they make use of the Internet using
their DNS queries, we also need to consider protecting the privacy of end
users. Let us look briefly into these two subjects. A systematic overview of
security and privacy issues in DNS is provided by Khormali et al. [2021].

Securing DNS responses Discussions on facilitating the validation of DNS
responses started already in the 1990s. At present, we see that in a vast major-
ity of countries worldwide, all top-level domains support what is known as
DNSSEC, i.e., DNS Security extensions. DNSSEC is, in principle, a straight-
forward system by which resource records are signed by the organization
owning a zone. To this end, DNS needed to be extended in two ways. The
first, obvious one, is that new fields needed to be added to the set of records
for containing signatures and keys. Second, and quite important, is that larger
queries and responses had to be supported than what traditional UDP mes-
sages would allow. The original DNS completely relied on fitting everything
into 512-byte packets. Using so-called extension mechanisms for DNS allows
for the acceptance of DNS queries and responses beyond 512 bytes [Damas
et al., 2013].
    The basic idea is simple. First, resource records of the same type are
grouped into a separate set, which is then subsequently signed. So, for
example, a zone will contain a separate set with all its IPv4 addresses, a
separate set for all its IPv6 addresses, its name servers, and so on. The public
key associated with the secret key used for signing a set of resource records
is also added to a zone. At that point, any client receiving a set of resource
records can check that set against the provided signature. To recall, this means
that the set of resource records is hashed, and the hashed value is encrypted
with the secret key of the zone owner. When receiving the set, the client
hashes it as well, and decrypts the version that was also in the response.
When the two match, the client will believe the returned records are valid.
    Of course, the client will need to trust that the provided public key, known
as a zone-signing key is valid. To this end, all the provided zone-signing keys
are grouped again into a separate set, which is subsequently signed using yet
another secret key. The associated public key is known as the key-signing
key. What happens is that a hash of the key-signing key is stored, and signed
by the parent domain. The parent domain, of course, signs this hash with
the secret key associated with its zone-signing key, which, in turn, is signed
with the secret key associated with the parent’s key-signing key. In this way,
we establish a trust chain all the way to the root. This scheme of signing in
DNSSEC is shown in Figure 6.24.
    We show part of the zone information available at three different levels,
including the root level (level 0). For the lowest level, we show only one specific
set of resource records RR. The zone at each level k includes information
concerning which hash function HZk is used for signing records, or HKk for
signing a zone-signing key. We use the notation SKZk to denote the secret key
associated with the (public) key ZSKk and, likewise, SKKk for the secret key
associated with the key-signing key KSKk . Knowing HZ2 and ZSK2 will allow
a client to verify the signature SKZ2 (HZ2 (RR)) by checking
                                                ?
                      ZSK2 (SKZ2 (HZ2 (RR))) = HZ2 (RR)

Figure 6.24: The relation between various resource records and keys in
DNSSEC across three levels.

If the client wants to be sure that the public zone-signing key ZSK2 is in order,
it needs to get information from the parent zone, i.e., the zone at level 1. At
that level, the zone owner has stored a signed hash value SKZ1 (HZ1 (KSK2 )),
effectively allowing anyone to validate the key-signing key KSK2 and the use
of its associated secret key SKK2 that was used for signing ZSK2 . Obviously,
the parent zone would never store such information without having going
through a process of ensuring that its child zone is indeed properly owned
and operating as it should.

Protecting DNS users In general, one can state that information stored in
DNS is public: it can be viewed as a huge open database that allows us
to resolve human-friendly names to addresses and other data. However,
what a client is asking from the DNS is, in principle, no one else’s business.
That means that queries should be kept confidential. There are roughly two
increasingly often supported protection mechanisms deployed in the modern
DNS.
    First, systems today allow applications to set up a secure channel to a
remote DNS resolver through TLS, mostly by that application’s local resolver,
which runs on the local operating system. We discuss TLS in Section 9.3.2. In
effect, having DNS over TLS prevents a third party from discovering to which
Websites an application is actually referring. Obviously, both the local DNS
resolver and the remote resolver need to be trusted not to leak information,
and are sufficiently protected against attacks. Note that facilitating DNS over
TLS requires that a resolver uses a specific port (in this case, port 853).
    Second, many modern browsers support issuing DNS queries over HTTPS.
In this case, the browser is configured to directly access a remote DNS resolver
that supports DNS over HTTPS. As HTTPS runs over TLS, this mechanism
essentially offers the same protection as DNS over TLS. A major difference, of
course, is that DNS queries are now completely handled out of the control of
local administrators. This also means that local policies concerning allowing
or denying access to certain sites are bypassed, for better or for worse.
    Using DNS over either TLS or HTTPS is already an improvement over

having no confidentiality concerning DNS queries, yet it may not be suffi-
cient. Name resolution as explained so far, and illustrated in Figure 6.16 and
Figure 6.17, shows that the entire path is sent to a name server. Of course,
the queries between name servers can also be protected, yet a more efficient
and generally sufficient protection mechanism is to let a name server ask for
resolving only the relevant part of a path. So, for example, instead of asking
to return an answer for ftp.cs.vu.nl (and get the address for the name server
handling the nl domain), a resolver asks the root server to resolve .nl. We omit
a few important details (such as how does the resolver know whether multiple
components in a path are handled by the same name server), yet it can be
seen that simply limiting a query can indeed help in attaining confidentiality.

  Note 6.8 (Advanced: Decentralized versus hierarchical DNS implementations)
  The implementation of DNS we described so far is the standard one. It follows
  a hierarchy of servers with 13 well-known root nodes and ending in millions of
  servers at the leaves (but read on). An important observation is that higher-level
  nodes receive many more requests than lower-level nodes. Only by caching the
  name-to-address bindings of these higher levels, it becomes possible to avoid
  sending requests to them and thus swamping them.
       These scalability problems can, in principle, be avoided altogether with fully
  decentralized solutions. In particular, we can compute the hash of a DNS name,
  and subsequently take that hash as a key value to be looked up in a distributed
  hash table or a hierarchical location service with a fully partitioned root node.
  The obvious drawback of this approach is that we lose the structure of the original
  name. This loss may prevent efficient implementations of, for example, finding all
  children in a specific domain.
       As argued by Walfish et al. [2004], when there is a need for many names,
  using identifiers as a semantic-free way of accessing data will allow different
  systems to make use of a single naming system. The reason is simple: by now,
  it is well understood how a huge collection of (flat) names can be efficiently
  supported. What needs to be done is to maintain the mapping of identifier-to-
  name information, where in this case a name may come from the DNS space,
  be a URL, and so on. Using identifiers can be made easier by letting users or
  organizations use a strict local name space. The latter is completely analogous to
  maintaining a private setting of environment variables on a computer.
       Nevertheless, stating that a decentralized implementation of DNS will cir-
  cumvent many of its scalability problems is too simple. In a comparative study,
  Pappas et al. [2006] showed that there are many trade-offs to consider and that
  the current, hierarchical design of DNS is not so bad for at least two reasons:
      • In a hierarchical design, not all nodes are equal and in the case of DNS,
        notably the higher-level nodes are engineered differently. For example,
        despite that there are officially 13 root nodes, each of these nodes is highly
        distributed and replicated for performance and availability. To illustrate,
        the root node provided by RIPE NCC is implemented at some 25 different

          sites (all using the same IP address), each implemented as a highly robust
          and replicated server cluster.
          Again, we see the important difference between a logical and physical
          design. Exploiting this difference is crucial for the operation of a distributed
          system such as DNS. However, in virtually all DHT-based systems, making
          this distinction can be much more difficult when dealing with a logical
          naming hierarchy, as all names are necessarily treated to be equal. In such
          cases, it becomes much more difficult to engineer the system so that, for
          example, top-level domains are separated out by special (physical) nodes.
          Of course, the obvious drawback of not having all nodes being equal, is that
          special measures need to be taken to protect the more important parts of a
          system against abuse. We have already mentioned that top-level nodes in
          DNS are implemented as distributed and replicated servers (clusters), but
          also that an associated server will not provide recursive name resolution.
          Such implementation decisions are necessary also from a perspective of
          robustness.
        • DNS caches are highly effective and driven almost entirely by the local
          distribution of queries: if a domain D is queried often at a server S, then the
          references for name servers of D will be cached at S. The behavior at another
          server S′ is determined by what is queried at S′ . This important feature has
          been confirmed in a more recent study that also shows how difficult it can
          be to understand the effectiveness of caching and the locality principles of
          DNS resolvers. In particular, an ISP’s DNS resolver may be very effective in
          redirecting traffic to content that is localized in that ISP [Ager et al., 2010].
          In contrast, caching and replication in DHT-based systems generally does
          not show such principles of locality: results are simply cached at nodes on
          the return path of a lookup and have very little to do with the fact that a
          lookup was locally initiated at a specific node in the DHT, or a resolver for
          which the local ISP can assist in looking up content.
  The fact remains that replacing DNS by a decentralized implementation is not
  necessarily a good idea. DNS as it stands today, is a well-engineered system that
  is difficult to beat when it comes to performance and robustness (see Vixie [2009],
  Vixie [2014], but also Allman [2020]).

6.3.5     Example: The Network File System
As another, and very different example, consider naming in NFS. The funda-
mental idea underlying the NFS naming model is to provide clients complete
transparent access to a remote file system as maintained by a server. This
transparency is achieved by letting a client be able to mount a remote file
system into its own local file system, as shown in Figure 6.25.
   Instead of mounting an entire file system, NFS allows clients to mount
only part of a file system, as also shown in Figure 6.25. A server is said to

           Client A                               Server                                   Client B

      remote            bin                   users                                 work                bin

               vu                                     steen                                  me

                      mbox                                 mbox                                       mbox

                         Exported directory                    Exported directory
                         mounted by client                     mounted by client
                                                                                           Network

Figure 6.25: Mounting (part of) a remote file system in NFS.

export a directory when it makes that directory and its entries available to
clients. An exported directory can be mounted into a client’s local name space.
    This design approach has a serious implication: in principle, users do not
share name spaces. As shown in Figure 6.25 the file named /remote/vu/mbox
at client A is named /work/me/mbox at client B. A file’s name therefore
depends on how clients organize their own local name space, and where
exported directories are mounted. The drawback of this approach in a dis-
tributed file system is that sharing files becomes much harder. For example,
Alice cannot tell Bob about a file using the name she assigned to that file, for
that name may have an entirely different meaning in Bob’s name space of
files.
    There are several ways to solve this problem, but the most common one
is to provide each client with a name space that is partly standardized. For
example, each client may be using the local directory /usr/bin to mount a
file system containing a standard collection of programs that are available to
everyone. Likewise, the directory /local may be used as a standard to mount
a local file system that is located on the client’s host.
    An NFS server can itself mount directories that are exported by other
servers. However, it is not allowed to export those directories to its own
clients. Instead, a client will have to explicitly mount such a directory from
the server that maintains it, as shown in Figure 6.26. This restriction comes
partly from simplicity. If a server could export a directory that it mounted
from another server, it would have to return special file handles that include
an identifier for a server. NFS does not support such file handles.
    To explain this point in more detail, assume that the server A hosts a file
system FSA from which it exports the directory /packages. This directory
contains a subdirectory /draw that acts as a mount point for a file system

                         Exported directory
                         contains imported
                           subdirectory
         Client                               Server A                         Server B

         bin                              packages
                              Client
                             imports
                             directory
            draw               from               draw
                             server A                              Server A
                                                                   imports
                                                                   directory
                   install                               install     from                  install
                                                                   server B

                                                                                  Network
                   Client needs to
                   explicitly import
                   subdirectory from
                   server B

Figure 6.26: Mounting nested directories from multiple servers in NFS.

FSB that is exported by the server B and mounted by A. Let A also export
/packages/draw to its own clients, and assume that a client has mounted
/packages into its local directory /bin as shown in Figure 6.26.
    If name resolution is iterative, then to resolve the name /bin/draw/install,
the client contacts server A when it has locally resolved /bin and requests A to
return a file handle for directory /draw. In that case, server A should return a
file handle that includes an identifier for server B, as only B can resolve the
rest of the path name, in this case /install. As we have said, this kind of name
resolution is not supported by NFS.
    Name resolution in earlier versions of NFS is strictly iterative, in the sense
that only a single file name at a time can be looked up. In other words,
resolving a name such as /bin/draw/install requires three separate calls to the
NFS server. Moreover, the client is fully responsible for implementing the
resolution of a path name. NFSv4 also supports recursive name lookups. In
this case, a client can pass a complete path name to a server and request that
server to resolve it.
    There is another peculiarity with NFS name lookups that has been solved
with the most recent version (NFSv4). Consider a file server hosting several
file systems. With the strict iterative name resolution, whenever a lookup is
done for a directory on which another file system was mounted, the lookup
would return the file handle of the directory. Subsequently, reading that
directory would return its original content, not that of the root directory of the
mounted file system.

     To explain, assume that in our previous example that both file systems FSA
and FSB are hosted by a single server. If the client has mounted /packages into
its local directory /bin, then looking up the file name draw at the server would
return the file handle for draw. A subsequent call to the server for listing
the directory entries of draw by readdir would then return the list of directory
entries that were originally stored in FSA in subdirectory /packages/draw. Only
if the client had also mounted file system FSB , would it be possible to properly
resolve the path name draw/install relative to /bin.
     NFSv4 solves this problem by allowing lookups to cross mount points at a
server. In particular, lookup returns the file handle of the mounted directory
instead of that of the original directory. The client can detect that the lookup
has crossed a mount point by inspecting the file system identifier of the looked
up file. If required, the client can locally mount that file system as well.
     A file handle is a reference to a file within a file system. It is independent
of the name of the file it refers to. A file handle is created by the server that is
hosting the file system and is unique regarding all file systems exported by
the server. It is created when the file is created. The client is kept ignorant of
the actual content of a file handle; it is completely opaque. File handles were
32 bytes in NFS version 2, but were variable up to 64 bytes in version 3 and
128 bytes in version 4. Of course, the length of a file handle is not opaque.
     Ideally, a file handle is implemented as a true identifier for a file relative to
a file system. For one thing, this means that as long as the file exists, it should
have one and the same file handle. This persistence requirement allows a
client to store a file handle locally once the associated file has been looked up
through its name. One benefit is performance: as most file operations require
a file handle instead of a name, the client can avoid having to look up a name
repeatedly before every file operation. Another benefit of this approach is that
the client can now access the file regardless which (current) name it has.
     Because a file handle can be locally stored by a client, it is also important
that a server does not reuse a file handle after deleting a file. Otherwise, a
client may mistakenly access the wrong file when it uses its locally stored file
handle.
     Note that the combination of iterative name lookups and not letting a
lookup operation allow crossing a mount point introduces a problem with
getting an initial file handle. To access files in a remote file system, a client
will need to provide the server with a file handle of the directory where the
lookup should take place, along with the name of the file or directory that is
to be resolved. NFSv3 solves this problem through a separate mount protocol,
by which a client actually mounts a remote file system. After mounting, the
client is passed back the root file handle of the mounted file system, which it
can subsequently use as a starting point for looking up names.
     In NFSv4, this problem is solved by providing a separate operation
putrootfh that tells the server to solve all file names relative to the root file

handle of the file system it manages. The root file handle can be used to
look up any other file handle in the server’s file system. This approach has
the additional benefit that there is no need for a separate mount protocol.
Instead, mounting can be integrated into the regular protocol for looking up
files. A client can simply mount a remote file system by requesting the server
to resolve names relative to the file system’s root file handle using putrootfh.

  Note 6.9 (Advanced: Automounting)
  As we mentioned, the NFS naming model essentially provides users with their
  own name space. Sharing in this model may become difficult if users name the
  same file differently. One solution to this problem is to provide each user with a
  local name space that is partly standardized, and subsequently mounting remote
  file systems the same for each user.
       Another problem with the NFS naming model has to do with deciding when a
  remote file system should be mounted. Consider a large system with thousands
  of users. Assume that each user has a local directory /home that is used to mount
  the home directories of other users. For example, Alice’s home directory may
  be locally available to her as /home/alice, although the actual files are stored on
  a remote server. This directory can be automatically mounted when Alice logs
  into her workstation. In addition, she may have access to Bob’s public files by
  accessing Bob’s directory through /home/bob.
       The question, however, is whether Bob’s home directory should also be
  mounted automatically when Alice logs in. The benefit of this approach would be
  that the whole business of mounting file systems would be transparent to Alice.
  However, if this policy were followed for every user, logging in could incur a lot
  of communication and administrative overhead. In addition, it would require
  that all users are known in advance. A much better approach is to transparently
  mount another user’s home directory on demand, that is, when it is first needed.
       On-demand mounting of a remote file system (or actually an exported direc-
  tory) is handled in NFS by an automounter, which runs as a separate process
  on the client’s machine. The principle underlying an automounter is relatively
  simple. Consider a simple automounter implemented as a user-level NFS server
  on a Unix operating system. (For other implementations, see [Callaghan, 2000]).
       Assume that for each user, the home directories of all users are available
  through the local directory /home, as described above. When a client machine
  boots, the automounter starts with mounting this directory. The effect of this local
  mount is that whenever a program attempts to access /home, the Unix kernel will
  forward a lookup operation to the NFS client, which, in this case, will forward the
  request to the automounter in its role as NFS server, as shown in Figure 6.27.
       For example, suppose that Alice logs in. The login program will attempt to
  read the directory /home/alice to find information such as login scripts. The
  automounter will thus receive the request to look up subdirectory /home/alice,
  for which reason it first creates a subdirectory /alice in /home. It then looks up
  the NFS server that exports Alice’s home directory to subsequently mount that
  directory in /home/alice. At that point, the login program can proceed.

                Client machine                                              Server machine

                    1. Lookup "/home/alice"
                                                                                    users
                                                 3. Mount request
       NFS client                 Automounter
                                                                            alice
             2. Create subdir "alice"

            Local file system interface

                     home

                          alice

                                                4. Mount subdir "alice"
                                                   from server

Figure 6.27: A simple automounter for NFS.

      The problem with this approach is that the automounter will have to be
  involved in all file operations to guarantee transparency. If a referenced file is not
  locally available because the corresponding file system has not yet been mounted,
  the automounter will have to know. In particular, it will need to handle all read
  and write requests, even for file systems that have already been mounted. This
  approach may incur a large performance problem. It would be better to have
  the automounter only mount and unmount directories, and otherwise, stay out
  of the loop. A simple solution is to let the automounter mount directories in a
  special subdirectory, and install a symbolic link to each mounted directory. This
  approach is shown in Figure 6.28.

Figure 6.28: Using symbolic links with automounting.

      In our example, the user home directories are mounted as subdirectories of
  /tmp_mnt. When Alice logs in, the automounter mounts her home directory
  in /tmp_mnt/home/alice and creates a symbolic link /home/alice that refers to
  that subdirectory. In this case, whenever Alice executes a command such as ls
  –l /home/alice the NFS server that exports Alice’s home directory is contacted
  directly without further involvement of the automounter.

6.4     Attribute-based naming
Flat and structured names generally provide a unique and location-independent
way of referring to entities. Moreover, structured names have been partly
designed to provide a human-friendly way to name entities so that they can be
conveniently accessed. In most cases, it is assumed that the name refers to only
a single entity. However, location independence and human friendliness are
not the only criterion for naming entities. In particular, as more information
is being made available, it becomes important to effectively search for entities.
This approach requires that a user can provide merely a description of what
she is looking for.
    There are many ways in which descriptions can be provided, but a popular
one in distributed systems is to describe an entity in terms of (attribute, value)
pairs, generally referred to as attribute-based naming. In this approach,
an entity is assumed to have an associated collection of attributes. Each
attribute says something about that entity. By specifying which values a
specific attribute should have, a user essentially constrains the set of entities
that she is interested in. It is up to the naming system to return one or more
entities that meet the user’s description. In this section, we take a closer look
at attribute-based naming systems.

6.4.1   Directory services
Attribute-based naming systems are also known as directory services, whereas
systems that support structured naming are generally called naming systems.
With directory services, entities have a set of associated attributes that can be
used for searching. In some cases, the choice of attributes can be relatively
simple. For example, in an e-mail system, messages can be tagged with
attributes for the sender, recipient, subject, and so on. However, even in the
case of e-mail, matters become difficult when other types of descriptors are
needed, as is illustrated by the difficulty of developing filters that will allow
only certain messages (based on their descriptors) to be passed through.
    What it all boils down to is that designing an appropriate set of attributes
is not trivial. In most cases, attribute design has to be done manually. Even if
there is consensus on the set of attributes to use, practice shows that setting
the values consistently by a diverse group of people is a problem by itself, as
many will have experienced when accessing music and video databases on
the Internet.
    To alleviate some of these problems, research has been conducted on
unifying the ways that resources can be described. In the context of distributed
systems, one particularly relevant development is the Resource Description
Framework (RDF). Fundamental to the RDF model is that resources are
described as triplets consisting of a subject, a predicate, and an object. For
example, (Person, name, Alice) describes a resource referred to as Person whose

name is Alice. In RDF, each subject, predicate, or object can be a resource itself.
This means that Alice may be implemented as a reference to a file that can
be subsequently retrieved. In the case of a predicate, such a resource could
contain a textual description of that predicate. Resources associated with
subjects and objects can be anything. References in RDF are essentially URLs.
    If resource descriptions are stored, it becomes possible to query that
storage in a way that is common for many attribute-based naming systems.
For example, an application could ask for the information associated with a
person named Alice. Such a query would return a reference to the person
resource associated with Alice. This resource can then subsequently be fetched
by the application.
    In this example, the resource descriptions are stored at a central location.
There is no reason why the resources should reside at the same location as
well. However, not having the descriptions in the same place may incur a
serious performance problem. Unlike structured naming systems, looking up
values in an attribute-based naming system essentially requires an exhaustive
search through all descriptors. (Various techniques can be applied to avoid
such exhaustive searches, an obvious one being indexing.) When considering
performance, an exhaustive search may be less of a problem within a single,
nondistributed data store, but simply sending a search query to hundreds of
servers that jointly implement a distributed data store is generally not such
a good idea. In the following, we will take a look at different approaches to
solving this problem in distributed systems.

6.4.2      Hierarchical implementations: LDAP
A common approach to tackling distributed directory services is to combine
structured naming with attribute-based naming. This approach has been
widely adopted, for example, in Microsoft’s Active Directory service and other
systems. Many of these systems use, or rely on the Lightweight Directory
Access Protocol commonly referred simply as LDAP. The LDAP directory
service has been derived from OSI’s X.500 directory service. As with many OSI
services, the quality of their associated implementations hindered widespread
use, and simplifications were needed to make it useful. Detailed information
on LDAP can be found in [Arkills, 2003].
    Conceptually, an LDAP directory service consists of a number of records,
usually referred to as directory entries. A directory entry is comparable
to a resource record in DNS. Each record is made up of a collection of (at-
tribute, value) pairs, where each attribute has an associated type. A distinction
is made between single-valued attributes and multiple-valued attributes. The
latter typically represent arrays and lists. As an example, a simple direc-
tory entry identifying the network addresses of some general servers from
Figure 6.22 is shown in Figure 6.28.

       Attribute            Abbr.    Value
       Country              C        NL
       Locality             L        Amsterdam
       Organization         O        VU University
       OrganizationalUnit   OU       Computer Science
       CommonName           CN       Main server
       Mail_Servers         –        137.37.20.3, 130.37.24.6, 137.37.20.10
       FTP_Server           –        130.37.20.20
       WWW_Server           –        130.37.20.20

Figure 6.29: A simple example of an LDAP directory entry using LDAP
naming conventions.

    In our example, we have used a naming convention described in the
LDAP standards, which applies to the first five attributes. The attributes
Organization and OrganizationUnit describe, respectively, the organization and
the department associated with the data that are stored in the record. Likewise,
the attributes Locality and Country provide additional information on where
the entry is stored. The CommonName attribute is often used as an (ambiguous)
name to identify an entry within a limited part of the directory. For example,
the name “Main server” may be enough to find our example entry given the
specific values for the other four attributes Country, Locality, Organization, and
OrganizationalUnit. In our example, only attribute Mail_Servers has multiple
values associated with it. All other attributes have only a single value.
    The collection of all directory entries in an LDAP directory service is
called a directory information base (DIB). An important aspect of a DIB
is that each record is uniquely named so that it can be looked up. Such a
globally unique name appears as a sequence of naming attributes in each
record. Each naming attribute is called a relative distinguished name, or
RDN for short. In our example in Figure 6.29 the first five attributes are
all naming attributes. Using the conventional abbreviations for representing
naming attributes in LDAP, as shown in Figure 6.29, the attributes Country,
Organization, and OrganizationalUnit could be used to form the name

      /C = NL/O = VU University/OU = Computer Science

which is globally unique, analogous to the DNS name nl.vu.cs.
    As in DNS, the use of globally unique names by listing RDNs in sequence,
leads to a hierarchy of the collection of directory entries, which is referred to
as a directory information tree (DIT). A DIT essentially forms the naming
graph of an LDAP directory service, in which each node represents a directory
entry. In addition, a node may also act as a directory in the traditional sense,
in that there may be several children for which the node acts as parent. To
explain, consider the naming graph, as partly shown in Figure 6.30. (Recall
that labels are associated with edges.)

                                          (a)

   Attribute            Value                   Attribute            Value
   Locality             Amsterdam               Locality             Amsterdam
   Organization         VUUniversity            Organization         VUUniversity
   OrganizationalUnit   ComputerScience         OrganizationalUnit   ComputerScience
   CommonName           Mainserver              CommonName           Mainserver
   HostName             star                    HostName             zephyr
   HostAddress          192.31.231.42           HostAddress          137.37.20.10

                                          (b)

Figure 6.30: (a) Part of a directory information tree. (b) Two directory entries
having HostName as RDN.

   The node N corresponds to the directory entry shown in Figure 6.29. At
the same time, this node acts as a parent to a number of other directory
entries that have an additional naming attribute HostName that is used as an
RDN. For example, such entries may be used to represent hosts as shown in
Figure 6.30.
   A node in an LDAP naming graph can thus simultaneously represent a
directory in the traditional sense, as we discussed previously, as well as an
LDAP record. This distinction is supported by two different lookup operations.
The read operation is used to read a single record given its path name in the
DIT. In contrast, the list operation is used to list the names of all outgoing
edges of a given node in the DIT. Each name corresponds to a child node of
the given node. Note that the list operation does not return any records; it
merely returns names. In other words, calling read with as input the name

      /C = NL/O = VU University/OU = Computer Science/CN = Main server

will return the record shown in Figure 6.30, whereas calling list will return
the names star and zephyr from the entries shown in Figure 6.30 as well as the
names of other hosts that have been registered in a similar way.

    Implementing an LDAP directory service proceeds in much the same way
as implementing a naming service, such as DNS, except that LDAP supports
more lookup operations, as we will discuss shortly. When dealing with a large-
scale directory, the DIT is usually partitioned and distributed across several
servers, known as directory service agents (DSA). Each part of a partitioned
DIT thus corresponds to a zone in DNS. Likewise, each DSA behaves very
much the same as a normal name server, except that it implements a number
of typical directory services, such as advanced search operations.
    Clients are represented by what are called directory user agents, or simply
DUA. A DUA is similar to a name resolver in structured-naming services. A
DUA exchanges information with a DSA according to a standardized access
protocol.
    What makes an LDAP implementation different from a DNS implementa-
tion are the facilities for searching through a DIB. In particular, facilities are
provided to search for a directory entry given a set of criteria that attributes
of the searched entries should meet. For example, suppose that we want a list
of all main servers at VU University. Using the notation defined in Smith and
Howes [2006], such a list can be returned using a search operation like

      search(“(C=NL)(O=VU University)(OU=*)(CN=Main server)”)

In this example, we have specified that the place to look for main servers
is the organization named VU_University in country NL, but that we are not
interested in a particular organizational unit. However, each returned result
should have the CN attribute equal to Main_server.
    As we already mentioned, searching in a directory service is generally an
expensive operation. For example, to find all main servers at VU University
requires searching all entries at each department and combining the results
in a single answer. In other words, we will generally need to access several
leaf nodes of a DIT in order to get an answer. In practice, this also means that
several DSAs need to be accessed. In contrast, naming services can often be
implemented in such a way that a lookup operation requires accessing only a
single leaf node.
    This whole setup of LDAP can be taken one step further by allowing
several trees to co-exist, while also being linked to each other. This ap-
proach is followed in Microsoft’s Active Directory leading to a forest of LDAP
domains [Allen and Lowe-Norris, 2003]. Obviously, searching in such an
organization can be overwhelmingly complex. To circumvent some of the
scalability problems, Active Directory usually assumes there is a global index
server (called a global catalog) that can be searched first. The index will
indicate which LDAP domains need to be searched further.
    Although LDAP by itself already exploits hierarchy for scalability, it is
common to combine LDAP with DNS. For example, every tree in LDAP needs
to be accessible at the root (known in Active Directory as a domain controller).

The root is often known under a DNS name, which, in turn, can be found
through an appropriate SRV record, as we explained above.

6.4.3      Decentralized implementations
Notably with the advent of peer-to-peer systems, researchers have also been
looking for solutions for decentralized attribute-based naming systems. In
particular, peer-to-peer systems are often used to store files. Initially, files
could not be searched—they could only be looked up by their key. However,
having the possibility to search for a file based on descriptors can be extremely
convenient, where each descriptor is nothing but an (attribute, value) pair.
Obviously, querying every node in a peer-to-peer system to see if it contains
a file matching one or more of such pairs, is infeasible. What we need is a
mapping of (attribute, value) pairs to index servers, which, in turn, point to
files matching those pairs.

Using a distributed index
Let us first look at the situation of building a (distributed) index. The basic
idea is that a search query is formulated as a list of (attribute, value) pairs, just
as in the case of our LDAP examples. The result should be a list of (references
to) entities that match all pairs. In the case of a peer-to-peer system storing
files, a list of keys to relevant files may be returned, after which the client can
look up each of those files using the returned keys.
    A straightforward approach toward a distributed index is the following.
Assume there are d different attributes. In that case, we can use a server for
each of the d attributes, where a server for attribute A maintains a set of (E,val)
pairs for each entity E that has the value val for attribute A. A search query
such as
        search(“(Country=NL)(Organization=VU University)
               (OrganizationalUnit=*)(CommonName=Main server)”)

would be sent to the servers for Country, Organization, and CommonName,
respectively, after which the client would need to see which entities occur in
all three sets as returned by the servers. To prevent that a server needs to
maintain a large set of entities, the set for each server can be further partitioned
and distributed across several subservers, each subserver associated with the
same attribute.
    More precisely, if we have a set of attributes {a1 , . . . , aN }, then for each
attribute ak we associate a set Sk = {Sk1 , . . . , Sknk } of nk servers. Assuming that
an attribute ak takes values from a set Rk , we construct a global mapping F
such that

        F (ak , v) = Skj with Skj ∈ Sk and v ∈ Rk

In this example, the server Skj would keep track of each key associated with a
file having ak = v. The beauty of this scheme is its simplicity. If L(ak , v) is the
set of keys returned by the server F (ak , v), then a query can be formulated as
a logical expression such as

        F (a1 , v1 ) ∧ F (a2 , v2 ) ∨ F (a3 , v3 )
                                    

which can then be processed on the client side by constructing the set

      L(a1 , v1 ) ∩ L(a2 , v2 ) ∪ L(a3 , v3 )
                                

    Unfortunately, there are important drawbacks to this scheme. First, any
query involving k attributes requires contacting k index servers, which may
incur significant communication costs. Furthermore, and related, is that the
client is required to process the sets returned by the index servers. Just
imagine that each file has two attributes firstName and lastName, respectively,
and that a client is looking for the file owned by Pheriby Smith. Now, although
Pheriby may be quite unique for a first name, Smith definitely is not. However,
our poor client will have to receive perhaps millions of keys of files for which
lastName = Smith, while there may actually be only a handful of files for
which firstName = Pheriby. Thirdly, although this scheme does allow leaving
certain attributes unspecified (by simply not mentioning them in the query),
it does not easily support range queries, such as, price = [1000 − −2500].

Space-filling curves
A common approach to implementing decentralized attribute-based naming
systems is to use what are known as space-filling curves. The basic idea is to
map the N-dimensional space covered by the N attributes {a1 , . . . , aN } into a
single dimension, and then use, for example, a simple hashing technique to
distribute the resultant space among index servers. One of the key issues is to
have (attribute, value) pairs that are “close” to each other be handled by the
same index server.
    Let us make matters concrete and look into one popular case, namely
Hilbert space-filling curves (see, for example, [Lawder and King, 2000]). These
are easiest to explain by looking at only two dimensions, that is, considering
only two distinct attributes. The possible values that each attribute can have
corresponds to one axis in a two-dimensional space. Without loss of generality,
we assume that each attribute takes on values in the interval [0, 1). As a first
approximation of the square, we divide it into four quadrants, as shown in
Figure 6.31(a). All data values ( x, y) with 0 ≤ x, y < 0.5 are associated with
index 0. Values ( x, y) with 0.5 ≤ x, y < 1.0 are associated with index 2.
    We can repeat this procedure recursively for each subsquare: divide it
into four smaller squares and connect the smaller squares through a single
line. Using rotation and reflection, we make sure that this line can be nicely

                 (a)                                             (b)

Figure 6.31: Reducing a two-dimensional space to a single dimension through
a Hilbert space-filling curve of (a) order 1, and (b) order 4.

connected to the one in the previously neighboring larger subsquare (which
has also been divided into smaller squares). To illustrate, where Figure 6.31(a)
shows a Hilbert curve of order 1, Figure 6.31(b) shows a curve of order 4 with
256 indices. In general, a Hilbert curve of order k connects 22k subsquares,
and thus has also 22k indices. There are various ways in which we can
systematically draw a curve through a two-dimensional space that has been
partitioned into equally sized squares. Furthermore, the process can be easily
expanded to higher dimensions, as explained by Sagan [1994] and Bader
[2013].
       An important property of space-filling curves is that they preserve locality:
two indices that are close to each other on the curve correspond to two
points that are also close to each other in the multidimensional space. (Note
that the reverse is not always true: two points close to each other in the
multidimensional space need not necessarily lie close to each other on the
curve.)
       To complete the story, several things need to be done. First, attribute values
need to be indexed. Assume that we are dealing with a total of N possible
attributes {a1 , . . . , aN }, and that each entity assigns a value to each of these N
attributes (possibly including the equivalent of a “don’t care” value). To keep
matters simple, we assume that each attribute value is normalized to a value
in the interval [0, 1). Then clearly, an entity E having the tuple of values (v1 ,
. . . , vN ) is associated with a real-valued coordinate in an N-dimensional space,
in turn uniquely associated with an N-dimensional subsquare as we discussed
for the two-dimensional case. The center of such a subsquare corresponds to
an index on the associated Hilbert space-filling curve, and is now the index
associated with the entity E. Of course, multiple entities whose associated

coordinates fall in the same subsquare will all have the same index. If we want
to avoid such collisions as much as possible, we need to use high-ordered
space-filling curves. Orders of 32 or 64 are not uncommon.
    Second, we also need to be able to search for entities. The principle of
searching for entities based on their attribute values should now be clear.
Suppose we were looking for files whose two attribute values a1 and a2 lie
in intervals [vl1 , vu1 ) and [vl2 , vu2 ), respectively (with vli < vui ). Clearly, this
delineates a rectangular region through which the curve passes, and all files
indexed by those segments of the curve that intersect with that region match
the search criterion. We therefore need an operation that returns a series of
curve-related indices given a region (expressed in terms of subsquares) in
the associated N-dimensional space. Such an operation is clearly dependent
on which space-filling curve has been used, but interestingly, need not be
dependent on actual entities.
    Finally, we need to maintain (references to) the entities associated with
indices. One approach, used in the Squid system [Schmidt and Parashar,
2008], is to use a Chord ring. In Squid, the index space is chosen to be the
same as that of the Chord ring, that is, both use m-bit identifiers. Then clearly,
the Chord node responsible for index i will store (references to) the entities
indexed by i.

  Note 6.10 (Example: The SWORD system)
  Decentralized implementations of attribute-based naming systems have received
  a lot of attention. The ones based on space-filling curves are relatively popular,
  but several alternatives have been proposed as well. As an example, we discuss a
  solution adopted in the SWORD resource discovery system [Albrecht et al., 2008].
       In SWORD, (attribute, value) pairs are first transformed into a key for a DHT.
  These pairs always contain a single value; only queries may contain value ranges
  for attributes. When computing the key (by means of a hash) the name of the
  attribute and its value are kept separate. Specific bits in the key will identify the
  attribute name, while others identify its value. In addition, the key will contain
  a number of random bits to guarantee uniqueness among all keys that need to
  be generated. In this way, the space of attributes is conveniently partitioned: if
  n bits are reserved to code attribute names, 2n different server groups can be
  used, one group for each attribute name. Likewise, by using m bits to encode
  values, a further partitioning per server group can be applied to store specific
  (attribute, value) pairs. DHTs are used only for distributing attribute names.
       For each attribute name, the possible range of its value is partitioned into
  subranges and a single server is assigned to each subrange. To explain, consider
  a resource description with two attributes: a1 taking values in the range [1..10]
  and a2 taking values in the range [101...200]. Assume there are two servers for
  a1 : S11 takes care of recording values of a1 in [1..5], and S12 for values in [6..10].
  Likewise, server S21 records values for a2 in range [101..150] and server S22
  for values in [151..200]. Then, when an entity E has associated attribute values

  (a1 = 7, a2 = 175), server S12 and server S22 will maintain a copy of, or a reference
  to E.
      The advantage of this scheme is that range queries can be easily supported.
  When a query is issued to return resources that have a2 lying between 165 and 189,
  the query can be forwarded to the server S22 who can then return the resources
  that match the query range. The drawback, however, is that updates need to be
  sent to multiple servers. Moreover, it is not immediately clear how well the load is
  balanced between the various servers. In particular, if certain range queries turn
  out to be very popular, specific servers will receive a high fraction of all queries.

Summarizing remarks There are indeed many ways of supporting attribute-
based naming systems in a decentralized fashion. The essence in all cases is to
assign attributes to servers so that clients know where to direct their queries,
yet at the same time make sure that there is a balance in the load for the set of
servers. In this light, supporting range queries requires special attention, if
only to decide which server will be responsible for which subrange.
    In practice, we see that when dealing with N attributes, many systems
model the collection of (attribute, value) pairs as an N-dimensional space in
which each entity is represented by a unique point in that space. Conceptually,
a search addresses a subspace and leads to identifying the servers responsible
for that subspace. In the simplest case, we assign each attribute to one server,
leading to O( N ) servers. In this scheme, a query addressing k attributes needs
to be sent to k servers, while the querying client needs to combine the results.
We have discussed this case previously. The problem is to divide the ranges
per attribute among subservers such that we have a reasonable balance of the
workload. A solution to this problem is discussed in [Bharambe et al., 2004].
    Instead of letting a client combine results, we can let servers collaborate. To
this end, the N-dimensional space is divided into subspaces by splitting each
dimension d into nd intervals. This splitting leads to a total of n1 × · · · × n N
subspaces, where each subspace is assigned to a separate server. Even with
nd = 2 for each dimension, we will face a total of O(2 N ) servers. Using
space-filling curves, we can reduce the number of dimensions to one, and use
a separate technique for deciding which N-dimensional subspace is served
by which server. Practice indicates that load balancing may become an issue.
An alternative solution in which the number of dimensions is still reduced,
but larger than one, while also maintaining load balancing, has been built
into HyperDex [Escriva et al., 2012]. The authors also address the problem of
replication and consistency in case the naming system at the same time stores
the entities which it indexes. In that case, whenever a server indexes an entity
E, it will have to be copied to the respective server.
    Attribute-based naming is particularly relevant for distributed systems
when it comes to resource discovery and selection. An interesting case is

described by Stratan et al. [2012]. Again, the attribute space is modeled by an
N-dimensional space in which each resource is associated with a coordinate.
In this situation, each resource maintains a link to another resource, but one
that is responsible for a subspace of exponentially increasing size. The net
effect is that each resource needs to have only a fixed number of neighbors,
while routing a query to the relevant subspace, takes only a linear number
of steps. The organization is akin to the use of finger tables in Chord. An
extensive overview of resource discovery in distributed systems is discussed
by Zarrin et al. [2018].

6.5     Named-data networking
In our discussion so far, we have made a distinction between names, identifiers,
and addresses. In particular, we have argued that a name needs to be resolved
to an address, to access the named entity (recall that we referred to an address
as the name of an entity’s access point). At least on one occasion, we dropped
this name-resolution process, namely when discussing how an identifier as
used in Chord, or other DHTs, could be directly used to route a lookup
request to a specific node. Let us now challenge the need for name-to-address
resolution by taking a closer look into Information-centric networking, or
simply ICN [Ahlgren et al., 2012]. In particular, we concentrate on its perhaps
most popular form, namely named-data networking (NDN).

6.5.1   Basics
Named-data networking revolves around the principle that applications are
not really interested to know where an entity is stored, but rather that they can
get a copy to access it locally when needed. To this end, much research has
been spent since approximately 2007 on designing an alternative to the host-
based addressing schemes that are common in today’s Internet. In particular,
the main idea is that an application can retrieve an entity from the network
by using that entity’s name. The network takes that name as input, and
subsequently routes a request to an appropriate location where the entity is
stored, to return a copy to the requester. In effect, NDN takes over the role of
IP in a future architecture of the Internet, as illustrated in Figure 6.32.
    An important consequence of this organization is that instead of first
resolving a name to an address, and then routing a request toward that
address, the name of an entity is directly used to fetch the associated data.
We already came across this scheme when discussing how a lookup request
in DHTs, based on a unique key associated with an entity, is routed toward a
node responsible for that key.
    In NDN, names are assumed to be structured. For example, this chapter
may be referred to as

Figure 6.32: The role of NDN in comparison to IP when viewing the Internet
protocol stack as an hourglass (slightly adapted from [Afanasyev et al., 2018]).

      /distributed-systems.net/books/Distributed Systems/4/01/Naming

indicating the book at distributed-systems.net entitled Distributed Systems, its
4th edition, version 01, and, in particular, the chapter called Naming. This
immediately raises the question how users and applications can and should
name entities. One way or the other, the name, or naming scheme, of an
entity should be globally known, and otherwise it becomes impossible to
fetch the data associated with a name. Likewise, globally available entities
should have globally unique names. How this naming is realized is outside
the scope of NDN. A general overview and introduction to NDN can be found
in [Afanasyev et al., 2018] and [Saxena et al., 2016].
    Note that named-data networking assumes that data cannot be modified
without generating a new name. Without this assumption, efficiency may be
at stake, as caching by routers becomes by far less effective (as we describe
shortly). This may seem to be a drawback, yet as long as a user knows that
updates may be available, she can always ask for the latest version. There
are various ways to achieve this. For example, when sending out a request
for named data, a source may respond with the required data, but also with
additional information that an update is available (and may even send that
update along with the originally requested data). An example of how such
schemes can be deployed for keeping up-to-date in a chat conversation is
described in [Zhu and Afanasyev, 2013].
    To better facilitate updates, named-data networking provides separate
synchronization protocols, which are surveyed in [Moll et al., 2021]. In essence,
all these protocols allow the owner of named data to announce updates to
interested parties, thus essentially sending a multicast message within an
NDN network. Depending on what is actually announced, a recipient may
subsequently decide to fetch the update through an explicit request (which,
again, is a name for the updated data).

6.5.2    Routing
For our discussion, perhaps the most interesting part of NDN is how to realize
routing and forwarding of requests for named data. Initially, one might think
that with seemingly arbitrary structured names routing may be inherently
subject to serious scalability problems, for how to find content on the Internet
by using just its name? When giving the matter some thought, the problem is
fundamentally not very different when deploying IP addresses, for how would
one find the access point associated with the IPv4 address 145.100.190.243, or
the IPv6 address 2001:610:508:108:192:87:108:15 (both belong to surf.nl)?
As argued by Zhang et al. [2019], there is really no difference and a decision
needs to be made on which part of a name or address (i.e., a prefix) should be
announced within a global routing substrate, just as is currently done with
IPv4 addresses with BGP routers. Once a named packet has found its way
into an organization’s network, specific techniques can be used to forward it
to places where the associated content can be found.
    Returning to our example name, for

        distributed-systems.net/books/Distributed Systems/4/01/Naming

we could decide to use /distributed-systems.net as a global prefix that should
be used at the level of BGP routers for globally routing requests to an organi-
zation’s network responsible for that prefix. Within that network, we can use
the rest of the name to search for the associated content. Special NDN routers
will be needed for this purpose, which we explain next.
    An NDN router, shown in Figure 6.33, consists of three elements:

   1. A content store is essentially a cache for keeping data associated with a
      (previously looked up) name. If a named request enters a router, and
      the named data is in this cache, the router immediately returns that data
      to the requester, as shown in Figure 6.33(a).
   2. A pending interest table is nothing but a table that keeps track of a
      (name,interface) pair: if a request for data named N arrived through
      interface I of the router, then (N,I) is stored. This will allow a router to
      return a response whenever the associated data arrives at the router. As
      shown in Figure 6.33(b), if data enters the router but there is no (longer
      any) interest, the router can decide to drop the data.
   3. A forwarding information base tells the router what to do when it
      cannot serve a request, as shown in Figure 6.33(a). For example, the
      request may be flooded to all neighboring routers, a random walk may be
      initiated, or, perhaps for whatever reason, the request may be dropped.
      Again, note that these decisions are fundamentally not different from
      routing using IPv4 or IPv6 address.

                                      (a)

                                      (b)

Figure 6.33: The proposed general organization of an NDN router when (a) a
request flows in to the router and (b) the data is returned from another router
or the source.

   When a request forwarded by a router eventually returns a response, the
router will look up whether there was a pending request, send it through the
associated interface, and clear the entry in the pending interest table. Also,
the router may decide to store the returned content in its content store for
future requests, as also shown in Figure 6.33(b).
   This design opens many opportunities for routing optimizations, including
decisions on what to cache, when to evict data from the content store, how
and to whom to forward requests, and so on. Practice will have to show
whether named-data networking can indeed form a (partial) replacement of
the current IP-based Internet.

6.5.3      Security in named-data networking
There are various aspects related to security in named-data networking. Be-
sides secure naming, a weak aspect of any naming system is that the name
servers and routers need to be protected as well. There are numerous threats
to the NDN routers, which in the end all boil down to effectively attempting to
disrupt the service. A complete overview of the various threats and possible

solutions is provided by Tourani et al. [2018] to which we refer the interested
reader. Here, analogous to our discussion on secure DNS, we briefly discuss
secure naming.
    Secure naming is all about ensuring that the provided name is unforgeably
linked to the content it refers to. The simplest way of doing this, is by including
a signed digest of that content into the name, similar to self-certifying names,
as we discussed in Section 6.2.5. Assuming additional information is available
to the recipient of the named data, such as information on which hash function
has been used, as well as the public key (perhaps including its certificate), the
recipient can verify that the returned content is indeed associated with the
name.

6.6   Summary
Names are used to refer to entities. Essentially, there are three types of names.
An address is the name of an access point associated with an entity, also
simply called the address of an entity. An identifier is another type of name.
It has three properties: each entity is referred to by exactly one identifier, an
identifier refers to only one entity, and is never assigned to another entity.
Finally, human-friendly names are targeted to be used by humans, and as such
are represented as character strings. Given these types, we make a distinction
between flat naming, structured naming, and attribute-based naming.
    Systems for flat naming essentially need to resolve an identifier to the
address of its associated entity. This locating of an entity can be done in
different ways. The first approach is to use broadcasting or multicasting. The
identifier of the entity is broadcast to every process in the distributed system.
The process offering an access point for the entity responds by providing an
address for that access point. Obviously, this approach has limited scalability.
    A second approach is to use forwarding pointers. Each time an entity
moves to a next location, it leaves behind a pointer telling where it will be
next. Locating the entity requires traversing the path of forwarding pointers.
To avoid large chains of pointers, it is important to reduce chains periodically
    A third approach is to allocate a home to an entity. Each time an entity
moves to another location, it informs its home where it is. Locating an entity
proceeds by first asking its home for the current location.
    A fourth approach is to organize all nodes into a structured peer-to-peer
system, and systematically assign nodes to entities, taking their respective
identifiers into account. By subsequently devising a routing algorithm by
which lookup requests are moved toward the node responsible for a given
entity, efficient and robust name resolution is possible.
    A fifth approach is to build a hierarchical search tree. The network is
divided into nonoverlapping domains. Domains can be grouped into higher-
level (nonoverlapping) domains, and so on. There is a single top-level domain

that covers the entire network. Each domain at every level has an associated
directory node. If an entity is located in a domain D, the directory node of the
next higher-level domain will have a pointer to D. A lowest-level directory
node stores the address of the entity. The top-level directory node knows
about all entities.
    Structured names are easily organized in a name space. A name space
can be represented by a naming graph in which a node represents a named
entity and the label on an edge represents the name under which that entity
is known. A node having multiple outgoing edges represents a collection of
entities and is also known as a context node or directory. Large-scale naming
graphs are often organized as rooted acyclic directed graphs.
    Naming graphs are convenient to organize human-friendly names in a
structured way. An entity can be referred to by a path name. Name resolution
is the process of traversing the naming graph by looking up the components
of a path name, one at a time. A large-scale naming graph is implemented by
distributing its nodes across multiple name servers. When resolving a path
name by traversing the naming graph, name resolution continues at the next
name server as soon as a node is reached, implemented by that server.
    More problematic are attribute-based naming schemes in which entities are
described by a collection of (attribute, value) pairs. Queries are also formulated
as such pairs, essentially requiring an exhaustive search through all descriptors.
Such a search is feasible only when the descriptors are stored in a single
database. However, alternative solutions have been devised by which the pairs
are mapped onto DHT-based systems, essentially leading to a distribution of
the collection of entity descriptors. Using space-filling curves, we can then
make different nodes responsible for different values of an attribute, which
helps in effectively distributing the load among the nodes in the case of search
operations.
    Instead of making the distinction between the name and an address of
an entity, researchers have been exploring the possibility of routing requests
directly based on an entity’s name, similar to using an identifier when looking
up information in a peer-to-peer system. In so-called named-data networks,
an application systematically fetches (read only) data by providing a name. In
the end, the network returns the associated data instead of an address of the
access point.

