    07

CONSISTENCY
   AND
REPLICATION

    An important issue in distributed systems is the replication of data. Data
are generally replicated to enhance reliability or improve performance. One
of the major problems is keeping replicas consistent. Informally, this means
that when one copy is updated, we need to ensure that the other copies are
updated as well; otherwise the replicas will no longer be the same. In this
chapter, we take a detailed look at what consistency of replicated data actually
means, and the various ways that consistency can be achieved.
   We start with a general introduction discussing why replication is useful
and how it relates to scalability. We then continue by focusing on what consis-
tency actually means. An important class of what are known as consistency
models assumes that multiple processes simultaneously access shared data.
Consistency for these situations can be formulated regarding what processes
can expect when reading and updating the shared data, knowing that others
are accessing that data as well.
    Consistency models for shared data are often hard to implement efficiently
in large-scale distributed systems. Moreover, often simpler models can be
used, which are also often easier to implement. One specific class is formed
by client-centric consistency models, which concentrate on consistency from
the perspective of a single (possibly mobile) client. Client-centric consistency
models are discussed in a separate section.
   Consistency is only half of the story. We also need to consider how
consistency is actually implemented. There are essentially two, more or less
independent, issues we need to consider. First, we start with concentrating on
managing replicas, which considers not only the placement of replica servers,
but also how content is distributed to these servers.
   The second issue is how replicas are kept consistent. In most cases,
applications require a strong form of consistency. Informally, this means that
updates are to be propagated more or less immediately between replicas.
There are various alternatives for implementing strong consistency, which are
discussed in a separate section. Also, attention is paid to caching protocols,
which form a special case of consistency protocols.
    Being arguably the largest distributed system, we pay separate attention
to caching and replication in Web-based systems, notably looking at content
delivery networks as well as edge-server caching techniques.

7.1    Introduction

In this section, we start with discussing the important reasons for wanting to
replicate data in the first place. We concentrate on replication as a technique
for achieving scalability, and motivate why reasoning about consistency is so
important.

7.1.1   Reasons for replication
There are two primary reasons for replicating data. First, data are replicated
to increase the reliability of a system. If a file system has been replicated,
it may be possible to continue working after one replica crashes by simply
switching to one of the other replicas. Also, by maintaining multiple copies,
it becomes possible to provide better protection against corrupted data. For
example, imagine there are three copies of a file, and every read and write
operation is performed on each copy. We can safeguard ourselves against a
single, failing write operation, by considering the value that is returned by at
least two copies as being the correct one.
     The other reason for replicating data is performance. Replication for
performance is important when a distributed system needs to scale in terms
of size or in terms of the geographical area it covers. Scaling regarding size
occurs, for example, when an increasing number of processes needs to access
data that are managed by a single server. In that case, performance can be
improved by replicating the server and subsequently dividing the workload
among the processes accessing the data.
     Scaling regarding a geographical area may also require replication. The
basic idea is that by placing a copy of data in proximity of the process using
them, the time to access the data decreases. As a consequence, the performance
as perceived by that process increases. This example also illustrates that the
benefits of replication for performance may be hard to evaluate. Although a
client process may perceive better performance, it may also be the case that
more network bandwidth is now consumed keeping all replicas up to date.
     If replication helps to improve reliability and performance, who could be
against it? Unfortunately, there is a price to be paid when data are replicated.
The problem with replication is that having multiple copies may lead to
consistency problems. Whenever a copy is modified, that copy becomes
different from the rest. Consequently, modifications have to be carried out on
all copies to ensure consistency. Exactly when and how those modifications
need to be carried out determines the price of replication.
     To understand the problem, consider improving access times to Web pages.
If no special measures are taken, fetching a page from a remote Web server
may sometimes even take seconds to complete. To improve performance,
Web browsers often locally store a copy of a previously fetched Web page
(i.e., they cache a Web page). If a user requires that page again, the browser
automatically returns the local copy. The access time as perceived by the user,
is excellent. However, if the user always wants to have the latest version of a
page, she may be in for bad luck. The problem is that if the page has been
modified in the meantime, modifications will not have been propagated to
cached copies, making those copies out-of-date.
     One solution to the problem of returning a stale copy to the user is to
forbid the browser to keep local copies in the first place, effectively letting the

server be fully in charge of replication. However, this solution may still lead
to poor access times if no replica is placed near the user. Another solution is
to let the Web server invalidate or update each cached copy, but this requires
that the server keeps track of all caches and sending them messages. This,
in turn, may degrade the overall performance of the server. We return to
performance versus scalability issues below.
    In the following, we will mainly concentrate on replication for performance.
Replication for reliability is discussed in Chapter 8.

7.1.2      Replication as scaling technique
Replication and caching for performance are widely applied as scaling tech-
niques. Scalability issues generally appear in the form of performance prob-
lems. Placing copies of data close to the processes using them can improve
performance through reduction of access time, and thus solve scalability
problems.
    A possible trade-off that needs to be made is that keeping copies up to date
may require more network bandwidth. Consider a process P that accesses
a local replica N times per second, whereas the replica itself is updated M
times per second. Assume that an update completely refreshes the previous
version of the local replica. If N ≪ M, that is, the access-to-update ratio is
very low, we have the situation where many updated versions of the local
replica will never be accessed by P, rendering the network communication
for those versions useless. In this case, it may have been better not to install
a local replica close to P, or to apply a different strategy for updating the
replica.
    A more serious problem, however, is that keeping multiple copies con-
sistent may itself be subject to serious scalability problems. Intuitively, a
collection of copies is consistent when the copies are always the same. This
means that a read operation performed at any copy will always return the
same result. Consequently, when an update operation is performed on one
copy, the update should be propagated to all copies before a subsequent
operation takes place, no matter at which copy that operation is initiated or
performed.
    This type of consistency is sometimes informally (and imprecisely) re-
ferred to as tight consistency, as provided by what is also called synchronous
replication. (In Section 7.2, we will provide precise definitions of consistency
and introduce a range of consistency models.) The key idea is that an update
is performed at all copies as a single atomic operation, or transaction. Unfor-
tunately, implementing atomicity involving many replicas that may be widely
dispersed across a large-scale network is inherently difficult when operations
are also required to complete quickly.
    Difficulties come from the fact that we need to synchronize all replicas. In
essence, this means that all replicas first need to reach agreement on when

exactly an update is to be performed locally. For example, replicas may need
to decide on a global ordering of operations using Lamport timestamps, or
let a coordinator assign such an order. Global synchronization simply takes
a lot of communication time, especially when replicas are spread across a
wide-area network.
    We are now faced with a dilemma. On the one hand, scalability problems
can be alleviated by applying replication and caching, leading to improved per-
formance. On the other hand, to keep all copies consistent generally requires
global synchronization, which is inherently costly in terms of performance.
The cure may be worse than the disease.
    Often, the only real solution is to relax the consistency constraints. In
other words, if we can relax the requirement that updates need to be executed
as atomic operations, we may be able to avoid (instantaneous) global syn-
chronizations, and may thus gain performance. The price paid is that copies
may not always be the same everywhere. As it turns out, to what extent
consistency can be relaxed depends highly on the access and update patterns
of the replicated data, as well as on the purpose for which those data are used.
    There is a range of consistency models and many ways to implement
models through what are called distribution and consistency protocols. Ap-
proaches to classifying consistency and replication can be found in [Gray et al.,
1996; Wiesmann et al., 2000; Aguilera and Terry, 2016], and [Viotti and Vukolic,
2016].

7.2   Data-centric consistency models
Traditionally, consistency has been discussed in the context of read and write
operations on shared data, available through (distributed) shared memory, a
(distributed) shared database, or a (distributed) file system. Here, we use the
broader term data store. A data store may be physically distributed across
multiple machines. In particular, each process that can access data from the
store is assumed to have a local (or nearby) copy available of the entire store.
Write operations are propagated to the other copies, as shown in Figure 7.1. A
data operation is classified as a write operation when it changes the data, and
is otherwise classified as a read operation.
    A (data centric) consistency model is essentially a contract between pro-
cesses and the data store. It says that if processes agree to obey certain rules,
the store promises to work correctly. Normally, a process that performs a read
operation on a data item, expects the operation to return a value that shows
the results of the last write operation on that data.
    Lacking a global clock, it is difficult to define precisely which write opera-
tion is the last one. As an alternative, we need to provide other definitions,
leading to a range of consistency models. Each model effectively restricts the
values that a read operation on a data item can return. As is to be expected,

Figure 7.1: The general organization of a logical data store, physically dis-
tributed and replicated across multiple processes.

the ones with major restrictions are easy to use, for example when developing
applications, whereas those with minor restrictions are generally considered
to be difficult to use in practice. The trade-off is, of course, that the easy-to-use
models do not perform nearly as well as the difficult ones. Such is life.

7.2.1      Consistent ordering of operations
There is a huge body of work on data-centric consistency models from the
past decades. An important class of models comes from the field of parallel
programming. Confronted with the fact that in parallel and distributed
computing multiple processes will need to share resources and access these
resources simultaneously, researchers have sought to express the semantics
of concurrent accesses when shared resources are replicated. The models
that we discuss here all deal with consistently ordering operations on shared,
replicated data.

Sequential consistency

In the following, we will use a special notation in which we draw the opera-
tions of a process along a time axis. The time axis is always drawn horizontally,
with time increasing from left to right. We use the notation Wi (x)a to denote
that process Pi writes value a to data item x. Similarly, Ri (x)b represents the
fact that process Pi reads x and is returned the value b. We assume that each
data item has an initial value NIL. When there is no confusion about which
process is accessing data, we omit the index from the symbols W and R.
     As an example, in Figure 7.2 P1 does a write to a data item x, modifying
its value to a. Note that, according to our system model the operation W1 (x)a
is first performed on a copy of the data store that is local to P1 , and only then
is it propagated to the other local copies. In our example, P2 later reads the
value NIL, and some time after that a (from its local copy of the store). What

Figure 7.2: Behavior of two processes operating on the same data item. The
horizontal axis is time.

we are seeing here is that it took some time to propagate the update of x to
P2 , which is perfectly acceptable.
    Sequential consistency is an important data-centric consistency model,
which was first defined by Lamport [1979] in the context of shared memory
for multiprocessor systems. A data store is said to be sequentially consistent
when it satisfies the following condition:

     The result of any execution is the same as if the (read and write) operations
     by all processes on the data store were executed in some sequential order
     and the operations of each individual process appear in this sequence in
     the order specified by its program.

    What this definition means is that when processes run concurrently on
(possibly) different machines, any valid interleaving of read and write op-
erations is acceptable behavior, but all processes see the same interleaving of
operations. Note that nothing is said about time; that is, there is no reference
to the “most recent” write operation on a data item. Also, a process “sees”
the writes from all process, but only through its own reads.
    That time does not play a role can be seen from Figure 7.3. Consider four
processes operating on the same data item x. In Figure 7.3(a) process P1 first
performs W1 (x)a on x. Later (in absolute time), process P2 also performs
a write operation W2 (x)b, by setting the value of x to b. However, both
processes P3 and P4 first read value b, and later value a. In other words,
the write operation W2 (x)b of process P2 appears to have taken place before
W1 (x)a of P1 .

                  (a)                                             (b)
Figure 7.3: (a) A sequentially consistent data store. (b) A data store that is not
sequentially consistent.

   In contrast, Figure 7.3(b) violates sequential consistency because not all
processes see the same interleaving of write operations. In particular, to

process P3 , it appears as if the data item has first been changed to b, and later
to a. On the other hand, P4 will conclude that the final value is b.

                        Process P1          Process P2         Process P3
                        x ← 1;              y ← 1;             z ← 1;
                        print(y,z);         print(x,z);        print(x,y);

Figure 7.4: Three concurrently executing processes.

    To make the notion of sequential consistency more concrete, consider
three concurrently executing processes P1 , P2 , and P3 , shown in Figure 7.4
(taken from [Dubois et al., 1988]). The data items in this example are formed
by the three integer variables x, y, and z, which are stored in a (possibly
distributed) shared sequentially consistent data store. We assume that each
variable is initialized to 0. In this example, an assignment corresponds to a
write operation, whereas a print statement corresponds to a simultaneous read
operation of its two arguments. All statements are assumed to be indivisible.
    Various interleaved execution sequences are possible. With six indepen-
dent statements, there are potentially 720 (6!) possible execution sequences,
although some of these violate program order. Consider the 120 (5!) sequences
that begin with x ← 1. Half of these have print(x,z) before y ← 1 and
thus violate program order. Half also have print(x,y) before z ← 1 and
also violate program order. Only 1/4 of the 120 sequences, or 30, are valid.
Another 30 valid sequences are possible starting with y ← 1 and another 30
can begin with z ← 1, for a total of 90 valid execution sequences. Four of
these are shown in Figure 7.5.

        Execution 1               Execution 2              Execution 3              Execution 4

 P1 :     x ← 1;           P1 :     x ← 1;          P2 :     y ← 1;          P2 :     y ← 1;
 P1 :     print(y,z);      P2 :     y ← 1;          P3 :     z ← 1;          P1 :     x ← 1;
 P2 :     y ← 1;           P2 :     print(x,z);     P3 :     print(x,y);     P3 :     z ← 1;
 P2 :     print(x,z);      P1 :     print(y,z);     P2 :     print(x,z);     P2 :     print(x,z);
 P3 :     z ← 1;           P3 :     z ← 1;          P1 :     x ← 1;          P1 :     print(y,z);
 P3 :     print(x,y);      P3 :     print(x,y);     P1 :     print(y,z);     P3 :     print(x,y);

 Prints: 001011            Prints: 101011           Prints: 010111           Prints: 111111
 Signature: 0 0 1 0 1 1    Signature: 1 0 1 0 1 1   Signature: 1 1 0 1 0 1   Signature: 1 1 1 1 1 1

            (a)                       (b)                      (c)                      (d)

Figure 7.5: Four valid execution sequences for the processes of Figure 7.4. The
vertical axis is time.

    In Figure 7.5(a) the three processes are run in order, first P1 , then P2 ,
then P3 . The other three examples demonstrate different, but equally valid,
interleaving of the statements in time. Each of the three processes prints

two variables. Since the only values each variable can take on are the initial
value (0), or the assigned value (1), each process produces a 2-bit string. The
numbers after Prints are the actual outputs that appear on the output device.
    If we concatenate the output of P1 , P2 , and P3 in that order, we get a 6-bit
string that characterizes a particular interleaving of statements. This is the
string listed as the Signature in Figure 7.5. Below, we will characterize each
ordering by its time-independent signature rather than by its printout.
    Not all 64 signature patterns are allowed. As a trivial example, 00 00 00 is
not permitted because that would imply that the print statements ran before
the assignment statements, violating the requirement that statements are
executed in program order. A more subtle example is 00 10 01. The first two
bits, 00, mean that y and z were both 0 when P1 did its printing. This situation
occurs only when P1 executes both statements before P2 or P3 starts. The next
two bits, 10, mean that P2 must run after P1 has started but before P3 has
started. The last two bits, 01, mean that P3 must complete before P1 starts, but
we have already seen that P1 must go first. Therefore, 00 10 01 is not allowed.
    In short, the 90 different valid statement orderings produce a variety of
different program results (less than 64, though) that are allowed under the
assumption of sequential consistency. The contract between the processes and
the distributed shared data store is that the processes must accept all of these
as valid results. In other words, the processes must accept the four results
shown in Figure 7.5 and all the other valid results as proper answers, and
must work correctly if any of them occurs. A program that works for some of
these results and not for others violates the contract with the data store and is
incorrect.
    This example also shows that sequential consistency is not easy to under-
stand at first sight. In the following note, we zoom more into the intricacies.

  Note 7.1 (Advanced: The importance and intricacies of sequential consistency)
  There is no doubt that sequential consistency is an important model. In essence, of
  all consistency models that exist and have been developed, it is the easiest one to
  understand when developing concurrent and parallel applications. This is because
  the model matches our expectations best when we let several programs operate
  on shared data simultaneously. At the same time, implementing sequential
  consistency is far from trivial [Adve and Boehm, 2010]. To illustrate, consider the
  example involving two variables x and y, shown in Figure 7.6.

Figure 7.6: Both x and y are each handled in a sequentially consistent
      manner, but taken together, sequential consistency is violated.

     If we just consider the write and read operations on x, the fact that P1 reads

  the value a is perfectly consistent. The same holds for the operation R2 (y)b by
  process P2 . However, when taken together, there is no way that we can order the
  write operations on x and y such that, after they completed, we have R1 (x)a and
  R2 (y)b (note that we need to keep the ordering as executed by each process):

                        Ordering of operations                   Result
                   W1 (x)a; W1 (y)a; W2 (y)b; W2 (x)b     R1 ( x ) b R2 ( y ) b
                   W1 (x)a; W2 (y)b; W1 (y)a; W2 (x)b     R1 ( x ) b R2 ( y ) a
                   W1 (x)a; W2 (y)b; W2 (x)b; W1 (y)a     R1 ( x ) b R2 ( y ) a
                   W2 (y)b; W1 (x)a; W1 (y)a; W2 (x)b     R1 ( x ) b R2 ( y ) a
                   W2 (y)b; W1 (x)a; W2 (x)b; W1 (y)a     R1 ( x ) b R2 ( y ) a
                   W2 (y)b; W2 (x)b; W1 (x)a; W1 (y)a     R1 ( x ) a R2 ( y ) a
  In terms of transactions, the operations carried out by P1 and P2 are not serializ-
  able. Our example shows that sequential consistency is not compositional: when
  having data items that are each kept sequentially consistent, their composition
  as a set need not be so [Herlihy et al., 2021]. The problem of noncompositional
  consistency can be solved by assuming linearizability. This is best explained
  by making a distinction between the start and completion of an operation, and
  assuming that it may take some time. Linearizability [Herlihy and Wing, 1991]
  states that:
           Each operation should appear to take effect instantaneously at some moment
           between its start and completion.
  Returning to our example, Figure 7.7 shows the same set of write operations, but
  we have now also indicated when they take place: the shaded area designates
  the time the operation is being executed. Linearizability states that the effect of
  an operation should take place somewhere during the interval indicated by the
  shaded area. In principle, this means that at the time of completion of a write
  operation, the results should be propagated to the other data stores.

Figure 7.7: An example of taking linearizable sequential consistency into
      account, with only one possible outcome for x and y.

  With that in mind, the possibilities for properly ordering become limited:

                        Ordering of operations                   Result
                   W1 (x)a; W2 (y)b; W1 (y)a; W2 (x)b     R1 ( x ) b R2 ( y ) a
                   W1 (x)a; W2 (y)b; W2 (x)b; W1 (y)a     R1 ( x ) b R2 ( y ) a
                   W2 (y)b; W1 (x)a; W1 (y)a; W2 (x)b     R1 ( x ) b R2 ( y ) a
                   W2 (y)b; W1 (x)a; W2 (x)b; W1 (y)a     R1 ( x ) b R2 ( y ) a

  In particular, W2 (y)b is completed before W1 (y)a starts, so that y will have the
  value a. Likewise, W1 (x)a completes before W2 (x)b starts, so that x will have

  value b. It should not come as a surprise that implementing linearizability on
  a many-core architecture may impose serious performance problems. Yet at the
  same time, it eases programmability considerably, so a trade-off needs to be made.

Causal consistency
The causal consistency model [Hutto and Ahamad, 1990] represents a weak-
ening of sequential consistency in that it makes a distinction between events
that are potentially causally related and those that are not. We already came
across causality when discussing vector timestamps in the previous chapter.
If event b is caused or influenced by an earlier event a, causality requires that
everyone else first see a, then see b.
    Consider a simple interaction using a distributed shared database. Suppose
that process P1 writes a data item x. Then P2 reads x and writes y. Here, the
reading of x and the writing of y are potentially causally related because the
computation of y may have depended on the value of x as read by P2 (i.e., the
value written by P1 ).
    On the other hand, if two processes spontaneously and simultaneously
write two different data items, these are not causally related. Operations that
are not causally related are said to be concurrent.
    For a data store to be considered causally consistent, it is necessary that
the store obeys the following condition:
     Writes that are potentially causally related must be seen by all processes
     in the same order. Concurrent writes may be seen in a different order on
     different machines.
As an example of causal consistency, consider Figure 7.8. Here we have an
event sequence that is allowed with a causally consistent store, but which is
forbidden with a sequentially consistent store or a strictly consistent store.
The thing to note is that the writes W2 (x)b and W1 (x)c are concurrent, so it is
not required that all processes see them in the same order.

Figure 7.8: This sequence is allowed with a causally consistent store, but not
with a sequentially consistent store.

    Now consider a second example. In Figure 7.9(a) we have W2 (x)b poten-
tially depending on W1 (x)a because writing the value b into x may be a result

of a computation involving the previously read value by R2 (x)a. The two
writes are causally related, so all processes must see them in the same order.
Therefore, Figure 7.9(a) is incorrect. On the other hand, in Figure 7.9(b) the
read has been removed, so W1 (x)a and W2 (x)b are now concurrent writes.
A causally consistent store does not require concurrent writes to be globally
ordered, so Figure 7.9(b) is correct. Note that Figure 7.9(b) reflects a situation
that would not be acceptable for a sequentially consistent store.

                                       (a)

                                       (b)

Figure 7.9: (a) A violation of a causally consistent store. (b) A correct sequence
of events in a causally consistent store.

   Implementing causal consistency requires keeping track of which processes
have seen which writes. There are many subtle issues to consider. To illustrate,
assume we replace W2 (x)b in Figure 7.9(a) with W2 (y)b, and likewise R3 (x)b
with R3 (y)b, respectively. This situation is shown in Figure 7.10.

Figure 7.10: A slight modification of Figure 7.9(a). What should R3 (x) or R4 (y)
return?

    Let us first look at operation R3 (x). Process P3 executes this operation
after R3 (y)b. We know at this point for sure that W(x)a happened before W(y)b.
In particular, W(x)a → R(x)a → W(y)b, meaning that if we are to preserve
causality, reading x after reading b from y can return only a. If the system
returned NIL to P3 it would violate the preservation of causal relationships.

    What about R4 (y)? Could it return the initial value of y, namely NIL? The
answer is affirmative: although we have the formal happened-before relationship
W(x)a → W(y)b, without having read b from y, process P4 can still justifiably
observe that W(x)a took place independently of the initialization of y.
    Implementation wise, preserving causality introduces some interesting
questions. Consider, for example, the middleware underlying process P3
from Figure 7.10. At the point that this middleware returns the value b from
reading y, it must know about the relationship W(x)a → W(y)b. In other
words, when the most recent value of y was propagated to P3 ’s middleware,
at the very least, metadata on y’s dependency should have been propagated
as well. Alternatively, the propagation may have also been done together
with updating x at P3 ’s node. By-and-large, the bottom line is that we need a
dependency graph of which operation is dependent on which other operations.
Such a graph may be pruned at the moment that dependent data is also locally
stored.

Grouping operations
Many consistency models are defined at the level of elementary read and write
operations. This level of granularity is for historical reasons: these models
have initially been developed for shared-memory multiprocessor systems and
were actually implemented at the hardware level.
    The fine granularity of these consistency models often does not match the
granularity as provided by applications. What we see there is that concurrency
between programs sharing data is generally kept under control through syn-
chronization mechanisms for mutual exclusion and transactions. Effectively,
what happens is that at the program level, read and write operations are
bracketed by the pair of operations ENTER_CS and LEAVE_CS. A process
that has successfully executed ENTER_CS will be ensured that all the data
in its local store is up-to-date. At that point, it can safely execute a series of
read and write operations on that store, and subsequently wrap things up by
calling LEAVE_CS. Data and instructions between ENTER_CS and LEAVE_CS
is denoted as a critical region.
    In essence, what happens is that within a program, the data that are
operated on by a series of read and write operations are protected against
concurrent accesses that would lead to seeing something else than the result
of executing the series as a whole. Put differently, the bracketing turns the
series of read and write operations into an atomically executed unit, thus
raising the level of granularity.
    To reach this point, we do need to have precise semantics concerning the
operations ENTER_CS and LEAVE_CS. These semantics can be formulated
in terms of shared synchronization variables, or simply locks. A lock has
shared data items associated with it, and each shared data item is associated
with at most one lock. In the case of coarse-grained synchronization, all

shared data items would be associated to just a single lock. Fine-grained
synchronization is achieved when each shared data item has its own unique
lock. Of course, these are just two extremes of associating shared data to a
lock. When a process enters a critical region, it should acquire the relevant
locks, and likewise when it leaves the critical region, it releases these locks.
   Each lock has a current owner, namely, the process that last acquired it. A
process not currently owning a lock but wanting to acquire it has to send a
message to the current owner asking for ownership and the current values of
the data associated with that lock. While having exclusive access to a lock, a
process is allowed to perform read and write operations. It is also possible for
several processes to simultaneously have nonexclusive access to a lock, meaning
that they can read, but not write, the associated data. Of course, nonexclusive
access can be granted if and only if there is no other process having exclusive
access.
   We now demand that the following criteria are met [Bershad et al., 1993]:

   • Acquiring a lock can succeed only when all updates to its associated
     shared data have completed.
   • Exclusive access to a lock can succeed only if no other process has
     exclusive or nonexclusive access to that lock.
   • Nonexclusive access to a lock is allowed only if any previous exclusive
     access has been completed, including updates to the lock’s associated
     data.

Note that we are effectively demanding that the usage of locks is linearized,
adhering to sequential consistency. Figure 7.11 shows an example of what
is known as entry consistency. We associate a lock with each data item
separately. We use the notation L(x) as an abbreviation for acquiring the lock
for x, that is, locking x. Likewise, U(x) stands for releasing the lock on x, or
unlocking it. In this case, P1 locks x, changes x once, after which it locks y.
Process P2 also acquires the lock for x but not for y so that it will read value a
for x, but may read NIL for y. However, because process P3 first acquires the
lock for y, it will read the value b when y was unlocked by P1 . It is important
to note here that each process has a copy of a variable, but that this copy
need not be instantly or automatically updated. When locking or unlocking a
variable, a process is explicitly telling the underlying distributed system that
the copies of that variable need to be synchronized. A simple read operation
without locking may thus result in reading a local value that is effectively
stale.
    One of the programming problems with entry consistency is properly
associating data with locks. One straightforward approach is to explicitly
tell the middleware which data will be accessed, as is generally done by
declaring which database tables will be affected by a transaction. In an object-

Figure 7.11: A valid event sequence for entry consistency.

based approach, we could associate a unique lock with each declared object,
effectively serializing all invocations to such objects.

  Note 7.2 (More information: Consistency models, serializability, transactions)
  Coming to this point, the consistency models may at first sight appear to be
  overwhelming. Yet, despite their seemingly complexity, there are strong analogies
  with models that many of us are used to. In particular, let us consider transactions.
  As discussed in Section 1.3.2, transactions effectively group a series of read and
  write operations such that it is guaranteed that these operations are executed in
  the order of their appearance in the transaction. Moreover, when considering
  a collection of transactions that simultaneously operate on a data set, then the
  final values of that data set can be explained by one specific ordering of those
  transactions.
      The keyword here is serializability: can we order the execution of operations
  that comprise the transactions in such a way that the final result matches a serial
  execution of the transactions? Consider the example shown in Figure 7.12. It is
  important to note that it is not necessary to know what is exactly being computed,
  but instead, only that we are dealing with read and write operations. In this sense,
  each transaction Ti can be represented as the series ⟨Wi (x); Ri (x); Wi (x)⟩.
           BEGIN_TRANSACTION      BEGIN_TRANSACTION BEGIN_TRANSACTION
             x = 0                  x = 0              x = 0
             x = x + 1              x = x + 2          x = x + 3
           END_TRANSACTION        END_TRANSACTION    END_TRANSACTION
              Transaction T1          Transaction T2    Transaction T3

Figure 7.12: Three transactions.

      To ensure consistency, the underlying transaction system will have to devise
  legal schedules: orderings of the read and write operations from the three
  transactions such that the final result corresponds to a serial execution of those
  transactions. Consider the four schedules shown in Figure 7.13.
      Both schedules S1 and S2 produce the result x == 3. This result can be
  explained by assuming that the scheduler executed the transactions in the order
  T1 → T2 → T3 . This ordering happens to match S1, but not S2, yet that is
  not relevant. Likewise, S3 is an illegal schedule, having the final result x == 5.
  Schedule S4 is interesting: the final result is x == 3, but that is only because of a
  coincidence. As the scheduler sees only (read and) write operations, and not the

  effects of write operations, scheduling the operations x = x + 1 and then x = x + 2
  is illegal.
                                          Time −→
   S1      x =1 0   x =1 x + 1   x =2 0       x =2 x + 2   x =3 0       x =3 x + 3   Legal
   S2      x =2 0   x =2 x + 2   x =1 0       x =1 x + 1   x =3 0       x =3 x + 3   Legal
   S3      x =1 0   x =2 0       x =1 x + 1   x =3 0       x =2 x + 2   x =3 x + 3   Illegal
   S4      x =1 0   x =2 0       x =3 x + 3   x =3 0       x =1 x + 1   x =2 x + 2   Illegal

Figure 7.13: Various schedules from the transactions shown in Figure 7.12,
        where =i denotes the write operation in transaction Ti .

      Note that what we have just described corresponds to entry consistency.
  Transactions consisting of only a single operation are, from a consistency point of
  view, analogous to sequential consistency.

Consistency versus coherence
At this point, it is useful to clarify the difference between two closely related
concepts. The models we have discussed so far, all deal with the fact that a
number of processes execute read and write operations on a set of data items.
A consistency model describes what can be expected regarding that set when
multiple processes concurrently operate on that data. The set is then said to
be consistent if it adheres to the rules described by the model.
     Where data consistency is concerned with a set of data items, coher-
ence models describe what can be expected to hold for only a single data
item [Cantin et al., 2005]. In this case, we assume that a data item is replicated;
it is said to be coherent when the various copies abide to the rules as defined
by its associated consistency model. A popular model is that of sequential
consistency, but now applied to only a single data item. In effect, it means
that in the case of concurrent writes, all processes will eventually see the same
order of updates taking place.

7.2.2      Eventual consistency
To what extent processes actually operate in a concurrent fashion, and to
what extent consistency needs to be guaranteed, may vary. There are many
examples in which concurrency appears only in a restricted form. For exam-
ple, in many database systems, most processes hardly ever perform update
operations; they mostly read data from the database. Only one, or very few,
processes perform update operations. The question then is how fast updates
should be made available to only-reading processes. In the advent of globally
operating content delivery networks, developers often choose to propagate
updates slowly, implicitly assuming that most clients are always redirected to
the same replica and will therefore never experience inconsistencies.

     Another example is the Web. In virtually all cases, Web pages are updated
by a single authority, such as a webmaster or the actual owner of the page.
There are normally no write-write conflicts to resolve. On the other hand, to
improve efficiency, browsers and Web proxies are often configured to keep a
fetched page in a local cache and to return that page upon the next request.
An important aspect of both types of Web caches is that they may return
out-of-date Web pages. In other words, the cached page that is returned to
the requesting client is an older version compared to the one available at
the actual Web server. As it turns out, many users find this inconsistency
acceptable (to a certain degree), as long as they have access only to the same
cache. In effect, they remain unaware of the fact that an update had taken
place, just as in the previous case of content delivery networks.
     Yet another example, is a worldwide naming system such as DNS. The DNS
name space is partitioned into domains, where each domain is assigned to a
naming authority, which acts as owner of that domain. Only that authority is
allowed to update its part of the name space. Consequently, conflicts resulting
from two operations that both want to perform an update on the same data
(i.e., write-write conflicts), never occur. The only situation that needs to be
handled are read-write conflicts, in which one process intends to update a
data item while another is concurrently attempting to read that item. As it
turns out, also in this case it is often acceptable to propagate an update in
a lazy fashion, meaning that a reading process will see an update only after
some time has passed since the update took place.
     These examples can be viewed as cases of (large scale) distributed and
replicated databases that tolerate a relatively high degree of inconsistency.
They have in common that if no updates take place for a long time, all replicas
will gradually become consistent, that is, have the same data stored. This
form of consistency is called eventual consistency [Vogels, 2009].
     Data stores that are eventually consistent thus have the property that
lacking write-write conflicts, all replicas will converge toward identical copies
of each other. Eventual consistency essentially requires only that updates
are guaranteed to propagate to all replicas. Write-write conflicts are often
relatively easy to solve when assuming that only a small group of processes
can perform updates. In practice, we often also see that in the case of conflicts,
one specific write operation is (globally) declared as “winner,” overwriting
the effects of any other conflicting write operation. Eventual consistency is
therefore often cheap to implement.

  Note 7.3 (Advanced: Making eventual consistency stronger)
  Eventual consistency is a relatively easy model to understand, but equally im-
  portant is the fact that it is also relatively easy to implement. Nevertheless, it
  is a weak-consistency model with its own peculiarities. Consider a calendar
  shared between Alice, Bob, and Chuck. A meeting M has two attributes: a pro-

  posed starting time and a set of people who have confirmed their attendance.
  When Alice proposes to start meeting M at time T, and assuming no one else
  has confirmed attendance, she executes the operation WA (M)[T, {A}]. When
  Bob confirms his attendance, he will have read the tuple [T, {A}] and update M
  accordingly: WB (M)[T, {A, B}]. In our example two meetings M1 and M2 need to
  be planned.
      Assume the sequence of events

                      WA (M1 )[T1 , {A}] → RB (M1 )[T1 , {A}] →

                      WB (M1 )[T1 , {A, B}] → WB (M2 )[T2 , {B}].
  In other words, Bob confirms his attendance at M1 and then immediately proposes
  to schedule M2 at T2 . Unfortunately, Chuck concurrently proposes to schedule M1
  at T3 when Bob confirms he can attend M1 at T1 . Formally, using the symbol “∥”
  to denote concurrent operations, we have,

                       WB (M1 )[T1 , {A, B}] ∥ WC (M1 )[T3 , {C}].

  Using our usual notation, these operations can be illustrated as shown in Fig-
  ure 7.14.

Figure 7.14: The situation of updating two meetings M1 and M2 .

  Eventual consistency may lead to very different scenarios. There are a number
  of write-write conflicts, but in any case, eventually [T2 , {B}] will be stored for
  meeting M2 , as the result of the associated write operation by Bob. For the value
  of meeting M1 there are different options. In principle, we have three possible
  outcomes: [T1 , {A}], [T1 , {A, B}], and [T3 , {C}]. Assuming we can maintain some
  notion of a global clock, it is not very likely that WA (M1 )[T1 , {A}] will prevail.
  However, the two write operations WB (M1 )[T1 , {A, B}] and WC (M1 )[T3 , {C}] are
  truly in conflict. In practice, one of them will win, presumably through a decision
  by a central coordinator.
      Researchers have been seeking to combine eventual consistency with stricter
  guarantees on ordering. Bailis et al. [2013] propose to use a separate layer
  that operates on top of an eventually consistent, distributed store. This layer
  implements causal consistency, of which it has been formerly proven that it is
  the best attainable consistency in the presence of network partitioning [Mahajan
  et al., 2011]. In our example, we have only one chain of dependencies:

                      WA (M1 )[T1 , {A}] → RB (M1 )[T1 , {A}] →

                      WB (M1 )[T1 , {A, B}] → WB (M2 )[T2 , {B}].

  An important observation is that with causal consistency in place, once a pro-
  cess reads [T2 , {B}] for meeting M2 , obtaining the value for M1 returns ei-
  ther [T1 , {A, B}] or [T3 , {C}], but certainly not [T1 , {A}]. The reason is that
  WB (M1 )[T1 , {A, B}] immediately precedes WB (M2 )[T2 , {B}], and at worse may
  have been overwritten by WC (M1 )[T3 , {C}]. Causal consistency rules out that the
  system could return [T1 , {A}].
      However, eventual consistency may overwrite previously stored data items.
  In doing so, dependencies may be lost. To make this point clear, it is impor-
  tant to realize that in practice, an operation at best keeps track of the immedi-
  ate preceding operation it depends on. As soon as Wc (M1 )[T3 , {C}] overwrites
  WB (M1 )[T1 , {A, B}] (and propagates to all replicas), we also break the chain of
  dependencies

         WA (M1 )[T1 , {A}] → RB (M1 )[T1 , {A}] → · · · → WB (M2 )[T2 , {B}]

  which would normally prevent WA (M1 )[T1 , {A}] ever overtaking
  WB (M1 )[T1 , {A, B}] and any operation depending on it. As a consequence,
  maintaining causal consistency requires that we do maintain a history of
  dependencies, instead of just keeping track of immediately preceding operations.

    Assuming that write-write conflicts hardly occur is generally not realistic.
As mentioned, improvements can be made by grouping operations and using
locks. What this entails, is that processes need to coordinate their actions by
making use of mutual-exclusion mechanisms. For many large-scale systems,
coordination among processes has turned out to form a real performance
bottleneck. Note that we are dealing here with coordination for consistency.
Alleviating potential bottleneck problems then boils down to bringing down
coordination, or weakening consistency requirements. At least two approaches
have been, by now, reasonably well explored, and are gradually finding their
way into practical solutions.
    The first one, referred to as strong eventual consistency, ensures that
if there are conflicting updates, that nevertheless the replicas where those
updates have taken place, are in the same state. Note that this is indeed
stronger than (weak) eventual consistency, as in that case, nothing is specified
what to do when the same replicated data item is updated by two different
processes, except that the conflict may be reported. The seminal paper by
Shapiro et al. [2011] introduced the Conflict-Free Replicated Data Type, or
simply CRDT. A CRDT is a data type that can be replicated at many different
sites, yet most importantly, can be updated in a concurrent fashion without
further coordination. Of course, the meaning of concurrent updates may be
different per type. For example, in the case of a variable for which the last
update wins, its implementation will need to keep track of dependencies. A
crude, but perhaps acceptable semantics, is that a good approximation of the
actual time when an update is initiated is considered (e.g., using NTP), along

with some random number to come to a deterministic choice when several
updates happen within the same small time span. An alternative is to keep
all updates so that a final decision can be made at application level. Many of
such examples are discussed by Preguica [2018]. Kleppmann and Beresford
[2017] describe how CRDTs can be implemented to support data structures in
which no update is lost. In effect, it boils down to keeping all updates while at
the same time avoiding clear duplicates, and maintaining clear dependencies.
    The second approach is to move away from data-centric consistency and
to look at program consistency. Again motivated by the observation that
coordination for consistency may be extremely costly, the question arises if and
where coordination is truly necessary. Program consistency is all about the
question whether a program produces the expected outcome, despite various
kinds of anomalies that may occur (like race conditions). A key observation is
that of problem monotonicity:
        A problem P is monotonic if for any input sets S and T, P(S) ⊆ P( T ).
The basic idea behind a monotonic problem is that it can come to a (partial)
solution even if certain input information is missing. In other words, a
program solving a monotonic problem can start with incomplete information,
but is guaranteed not to have to roll back when missing information becomes
available. A typical example of such a problem is filling a (digital) shopping
cart: operations can be performed in any order by any server. Indeed, there
is no write-write conflict. However, if we also need to support the removal
of items, we bump into a problem. In this case, monotonicity can help if we
split the add and delete operations into two different sets, and let each of
them simply grow to a final state. In this case, we need to coordinate only
when each set has converged to a final state. The difference between what
has been added and what has been deleted is what needs to be coordinated
to reach consistency. Further details on program consistency can be found
in [Hellerstein and Alvaro, 2020].

7.2.3      Continuous consistency
There is no such thing as the best solution to replicating data. Replicating data
poses consistency problems that cannot be solved efficiently in a general way.
Only if we loosen consistency can there be hope for attaining efficient solutions.
Unfortunately, there are also no general rules for loosening consistency: exactly
what can be tolerated is highly dependent on applications.
   There are different ways for applications to specify what inconsistencies
they can tolerate. Yu and Vahdat [2002] take a general approach by distin-
guishing three independent axes for defining inconsistencies: deviation in
numerical values between replicas, deviation in staleness between replicas,
and deviation with respect to the ordering of update operations. They refer to
these deviations as forming continuous consistency ranges.

    Measuring inconsistency in terms of numerical deviations can be used
by applications for which the data have numerical semantics. One obvious
example is the replication of records containing stock market prices. In this
case, an application may specify that two copies should not deviate more than
$0.02, which would be an absolute numerical deviation. Alternatively, a relative
numerical deviation could be specified, stating that two copies should differ by
no more than, for example, 0.5%. In both cases, we would see that if a stock
goes up (and one of the replicas is immediately updated) without violating
the specified numerical deviations, the replicas would still be considered to
be mutually consistent.
    Numerical deviation can also be understood in terms of the number of
updates that have been applied to a given replica, but have not yet been seen
by others. For example, a Web cache may not have seen a batch of operations
carried out by a Web server. In this case, the associated deviation in the value
is also referred to as its weight.
    Staleness deviations relate to the last time a replica was updated. For some
applications, it can be tolerated that a replica provides old data as long as it is
not too old. For example, weather reports typically stay reasonably accurate
over some time, say a few hours. In such cases, a main server may receive
timely updates, but may decide to propagate updates to the replicas only once
in a while.
    Finally, there are classes of applications in which the ordering of updates
is allowed to be different at the various replicas, as long as the differences
remain bounded. One way of looking at these updates is that they are applied
tentatively to a local copy, awaiting global agreement from all replicas. As
a consequence, some updates may need to be rolled back and applied in a
different order before becoming permanent. Intuitively, ordering deviations
are much harder to grasp than the other two consistency metrics.

The notion of a conit
To define inconsistencies, Yu and Vahdat introduce a consistency unit, ab-
breviated to conit. A conit specifies the unit over which consistency is to
be measured. For example, in our stock-exchange example, a conit could
be defined as a record representing a single stock. Another example is an
individual weather report.
    To give an example of a conit, and at the same time illustrate numerical
and ordering deviations, consider the situation of keeping track of a fleet of
cars. In particular, the fleet owner is interested in knowing how much she
pays on average for gas. To this end, whenever a driver tanks gasoline, she
reports the amount of gasoline that has been tanked (recorded as g), the price
paid (recorded as p), and the total distance since the last time she tanked
(recorded by the variable d). Technically, the three variables g, p, and d form a
conit. This conit is replicated across two servers, as shown in Figure 7.15, and

a driver regularly reports her gas usage to one of the servers by separately
updating each variable (without further considering the car in question).
    The task of the servers is to keep the conit “consistently” replicated. To
this end, each replica server maintains a two-dimensional vector clock. We
use the notation ⟨ T, R⟩ to express an operation that was carried out by replica
R at (its) logical time T.

Figure 7.15: An example of keeping track of consistency deviations.

   In this example, we see two replicas that operate on a conit containing the
data items g, p, and d from our example. All variables are assumed to have
been initialized to 0. Replica A received the operation

                              ⟨5, B⟩ : g ← g + 45
from replica B. We have shaded this operation gray to indicate that A has
committed this operation to its local store. In other words, it has been made
permanent and cannot be rolled back. Replica A also has three tentative
update operations listed: ⟨8, A⟩, ⟨9, A⟩, and ⟨10, A⟩, respectively. In terms of
continuous consistency, the fact that A has three tentative operations pending
to be committed is referred to as an order deviation of, in this case, value 3.
Analogously, with in total three operations of which two have been committed,
B has an order deviation of 1.
    From this example, we see that A’s logical clock value is now 11. Because
the last operation from B that A had received had timestamp 5, the vector
clock at A will be (11, 5), where we assume the first component of the vector
is used for A and the second for B. Along the same lines, the logical clock at
B is (0, 8).
    The numerical deviation at a replica R consists of two components: the
number of operations at all other replicas that have not yet been seen by

R, along with the sum of corresponding missed values (more sophisticated
schemes are, of course, also possible). In our example, A has not yet seen
operations ⟨6, B⟩ and ⟨7, B⟩ with a total value of 70 + 412 units, leading to a
numerical deviation of (2, 482). Likewise, B is still missing the three tentative
operations at A, with a total summed value of 686, bringing B’s numerical
deviation to (3, 686).
    Using these notions, it becomes possible to specify specific consistency
schemes. For example, we may restrict order deviation by specifying an
acceptable maximal value. Likewise, we may want two replicas to never nu-
merically deviate by more than 1000 units. Having such consistency schemes
does require that a replica knows how much it is deviating from other replicas,
implying that we need separate communication to keep replicas informed.
The underlying assumption is that such communication is much less expen-
sive than communication to keep replicas synchronized. Admittedly, it is
questionable if this assumption also holds for our example.

  Note 7.4 (Advanced: On the granularity of conits)
  There is a trade-off between maintaining fine-grained and coarse-grained conits.
  If a conit represents a lot of data, such as a complete database, then updates are
  aggregated for all the data in the conit. As a consequence, this may bring replicas
  sooner in an inconsistent state. For example, assume that in Figure 7.16 two
  replicas may differ in no more than one outstanding update. In that case, when
  the data items in Figure 7.16 have each been updated once at the first replica, the
  second one will need to be updated as well. This is not the case when choosing
  a smaller conit, as shown in Figure 7.16 There, the replicas are still considered
  to be up-to-date. This problem is particularly important when the data items
  contained in a conit are used completely independently, in which case they are
  said to falsely share the conit.

                   (a)                                         (b)

Figure 7.16: Choosing the appropriate granularity for a conit. (a) Two
      updates lead to update propagation. (b) No update propagation is needed.

      Unfortunately, making conits small is not a good idea, for the simple reason
  that the total number of conits that need to be managed grows as well. In other
  words, there is an overhead related to managing the conits that needs to be
  considered. This overhead, in turn, may adversely affect overall performance,
  which also has to be considered.

    Although, from a conceptual point of view, conits form an attractive means
for capturing consistency requirements, there are two important issues that
need to be dealt with before they can be put to practical use. First, to enforce
consistency, we need to have protocols. Protocols for continuous consistency
are discussed later in this chapter.
   A second issue is that program developers must specify the consistency
requirements for their applications. Practice indicates that obtaining such
requirements may be extremely difficult. Programmers are generally not used
to handling replication, let alone understanding what it means to provide
detailed information on consistency. Therefore, it is mandatory that there are
simple and easy-to-understand programming interfaces.

  Note 7.5 (Advanced: Programming conits)
  Continuous consistency can be implemented as a toolkit which appears to pro-
  grammers as just another library that they link with their applications. A conit is
  simply declared alongside an update of a data item. For example, the fragment of
  pseudocode
           AffectsConit(ConitQ, 1, 1);
           append message m to queue Q;
  states that appending a message to queue Q belongs to a conit named ConitQ.
  Likewise, operations may now also be declared as being dependent on conits:
           DependsOnConit(ConitQ, 4, 0, 60);
           read message m from head of queue Q;
  In this case, the call to DependsOnConit() specifies that the numerical deviation,
  ordering deviation, and staleness should be limited to the values 4, 0, and 60
  (seconds), respectively. This can be interpreted as that there should be at most
  4 unseen update operations at other replicas, there should be no tentative local
  updates, and the local copy of Q should have been checked for staleness no more
  than 60 seconds ago. If these requirements are not fulfilled, the underlying
  middleware will attempt to bring the local copy of Q to a state such that the read
  operation can be carried out.
      The question, of course, is how does the system know that Q is associated
  with ConitQ? For practical reasons, we can avoid explicit declarations of conits
  and concentrate only on the grouping of operations. The data to be replicated is
  collectively considered belonging together. By subsequently associating a write
  operation with a named conit, and likewise for a read operation, we tell the
  middleware layer when to start synchronizing the entire replica. Indeed, there may
  be a considerable amount of false sharing in such a case. If false sharing needs
  to be avoided, we would have to introduce a separate programming construct to
  explicitly declare conits.

7.3   Client-centric consistency models
Data-centric consistency models aim at providing a systemwide consistent
view on a data store. An important assumption is that concurrent processes
may be simultaneously updating the data store, and that it is necessary to
provide consistency in the face of such concurrency. For example, in the case
of object-based entry consistency, the data store guarantees that when an
object is called, the calling process is provided with a copy of the object that
reflects all changes to the object that have been made so far, possibly by other
processes. During the call, it is also guaranteed that no other process can
interfere, that is, mutual exclusive access is provided to the calling process.
    Being able to handle concurrent operations on shared data while maintain-
ing strong consistency is fundamental to distributed systems. For performance
reasons, strong consistency may be guaranteed only when processes use mech-
anisms such as transactions or synchronization variables. Along the same
lines, it may be impossible to guarantee strong consistency, and weaker forms
need to be accepted, such as causal consistency with eventual consistency.
    In this section, we take a look at a special class of distributed data stores.
The data stores we consider are characterized by the lack of simultaneous
updates, or when such updates happen, it is assumed that they can be
relatively easily resolved. Most operations involve reading data. These data
stores offer a weak consistency model, such as eventual consistency. By
introducing special client-centric consistency models, it turns out that many
inconsistencies can be hidden in a relatively cheap way.

Figure 7.17: The principle of a mobile user accessing different replicas of a
distributed database.

    Eventually consistent data stores generally work fine as long as clients
always access the same replica. However, problems arise when different
replicas are accessed over a short period of time. This is best illustrated
by considering a mobile user accessing a distributed database, as shown in
Figure 7.17.
    The mobile user, say, Alice, accesses the database by connecting to one
of the replicas in a transparent way. In other words, the application running
on Alice’s mobile device is unaware on which replica it is actually operating.
Assume Alice performs several update operations and then disconnects again.
Later, she accesses the database again, possibly after moving to a different
location or by using a different access device. At that point, she may be
connected to a different replica than before, as shown in Figure 7.17. However,
if the updates performed previously have not yet been propagated, Alice
will notice inconsistent behavior. In particular, she would expect to see all
previously made changes, but instead, it appears as if nothing at all has
happened.
    This example is typical for eventually consistent data stores and is caused
by the fact that users may sometimes operate on different replicas, while
updates have not been fully propagated. The problem can be alleviated by
introducing client-centric consistency. In essence, client-centric consistency
provides guarantees for a single client concerning the consistency of accesses
to a data store by that client. No guarantees are given concerning concurrent
accesses by different clients. If Bob modifies data that is shared with Alice
but which is stored at a different location, we may easily create write-write
conflicts. Moreover, if neither Alice nor Bob access the same location for some
time, such conflicts may take a long time before they are discovered.
    Client-centric consistency models originate from the work on Bayou and,
more general, from mobile-data systems (see, for example, Terry et al. [1994],
Terry et al. [1998], or Terry [2008]). Bayou is a database system developed
for mobile computing, where it is assumed that network connectivity is
unreliable and subject to various performance problems. Wireless networks
and networks that span large areas, such as the Internet, fall into this category.
    Bayou essentially distinguishes four different consistency models. To ex-
plain these models, we again consider a data store that is physically distributed
across multiple machines. When a process accesses the data store, it generally
connects to the locally (or nearest) available copy, although, in principle, any
copy will do just fine. All read and write operations are performed on that
local copy. Updates are eventually propagated to the other copies.
    Client-centric consistency models are described using the following no-
tations. Let xi denote the version of data item x. The version xi is the result
of a series of write operations that took place since initialization, its write
set WS(xi ). By appending write operations to that series we obtain another
version xj and say that xj follows from xi . We use the notation W(xi ; xj ) to

indicate that xj follows from xi . If we do not know if xj follows from xi , we
use the notation W(xi |xj ).

7.3.1     Monotonic reads
The first client-centric consistency model is that of monotonic reads. A
(distributed) data store is said to provide monotonic-read consistency if the
following condition holds:
        If a process reads the value of a data item x, any successive read operation
        on x by that process will always return that same value or a more recent
        value.
In other words, monotonic-read consistency guarantees that once a process
has seen a value of x, it will never see an older version of x.
    As an example where monotonic reads are useful, consider a distributed
e-mail database. In such a database, each user’s mailbox may be distributed
and replicated across multiple machines. Mail can be inserted in a mailbox
at any location. However, updates are propagated in a lazy (i.e., on demand)
fashion. Only when a copy needs certain data for consistency are those data
propagated to that copy. Suppose a user reads her mail in San Francisco.
Assume that only reading mail does not affect the mailbox, that is, messages
are not removed, stored in subdirectories, or even tagged as having already
been read, and so on. When the user later flies to New York and opens her
mailbox again, monotonic-read consistency guarantees that the messages that
were in the mailbox in San Francisco will also be in the mailbox when it is
opened in New York.
    Using a notation similar to that for data-centric consistency models,
monotonic-read consistency can be graphically represented as shown in Fig-
ure 7.18. Rather than showing processes along the vertical axis, we now show
local data stores, in our example L1 and L2 . A write or read operation is in-
dexed by the process that executed the operation, that is, W1 (x)a denotes that
process P1 wrote value a to x. As we are not interested in specific values
of shared data items, but rather their versions, we use the notation W1 (x2 )
to indicate that process P1 produces version x2 without knowing anything
about other versions. W2 (x1 ; x2 ) indicates that process P2 is responsible for
producing version x2 that follows from x1 . Likewise, W2 (x1 |x2 ) denotes that
process P2 producing version x2 concurrently to version x1 (and thus poten-
tially introducing a write-write conflict). R1 (x2 ) simply means that P1 reads
version x2 .
    In Figure 7.18(a) process P1 first performs a write operation on x at L1 ,
producing version x1 and later reads this version. At L2 process P2 first
produces version x2 , following from x1 . When process P1 moves to L2 and
reads x again, it finds a more recent value, but one that at least took its
previous write into account.

                   (a)                                            (b)

Figure 7.18: The read operations performed by a single process P at two
different local copies of the same data store. (a) A monotonic-read consistent
data store. (b) A data store that does not provide monotonic reads.

    Figure 7.18(b) shows a situation in which monotonic-read consistency is
violated. After process P1 has read x1 at L1 , it later performs the operation
R1 (x2 ) at L2 . However, the preceding write operation W2 (x1 |x2 ) by process
P2 at L2 is known to produce a version that does not follow from x1 . As a
consequence, P1 ’s read operation at L2 is known not to include the effect of
the write operations when it performed R1 (x1 ) at location L1 .

7.3.2      Monotonic writes
In many situations, it is important that write operations are propagated in
the correct order to all copies of the data store. This property is expressed
in monotonic-write consistency. In a monotonic-write consistent store, the
following condition holds:

        A write operation by a process on a data item x is completed before any
        successive write operation on x by the same process.

    More formally, if we have two successive operations Wk (xi ) and Wk (xj ) by
process Pk , then, regardless where Wk (xj ) takes place, we also have Wk (xi ; xj ).
Thus, completing a write operation means that the copy on which a successive
operation is performed reflects the effect of a previous write operation by
the same process, no matter where that operation was initiated. In other
words, a write operation on a copy of item x is performed only if that copy
has been brought up to date through any preceding write operation by that
same process, which may have taken place on other copies of x. If need be,
the new write must wait for old ones to finish.
    Note that monotonic-write consistency resembles data-centric FIFO consis-
tency. The essence of FIFO consistency is that write operations by the same
process are performed in the correct order everywhere. This ordering con-
straint also applies to monotonic writes, except that we are now considering
consistency only for a single process, instead of for a collection of processes.
    Bringing a copy of x up to date need not be necessary when each write
operation completely overwrites the present value of x. However, write opera-
tions are often performed on only part of the state of a data item. Consider, for

example, a software library. Often, updating such a library is done by replac-
ing one or more functions, leading to a next version. With monotonic-write
consistency, guarantees are given that if an update is performed on a copy of
the library, all preceding updates will be performed first. The resulting library
will then indeed become the most recent version and will include all updates
that have led to previous versions of the library.
     Monotonic-write consistency is shown in Figure 7.19. In Figure 7.19(a)
process P1 performs a write operation on x at L1 , presented as the operation
W1 (x1 ). Later, P1 performs another write operation on x, but this time at
L2 , shown as W1 (x2 ; x3 ). The version produced by P1 at L2 follows from an
update by process P2 , in turn based on version x1 . The latter is expressed
by the operation W2 (x1 ; x2 ). To ensure monotonic-write consistency, it is
necessary that the previous write operation at L1 has already been propagated
to L2 , and possibly updated.

                  (a)                                             (b)

                  (c)                                             (d)

Figure 7.19: The write operations performed at two different local copies
of the same data store. (a) A monotonic-write consistent data store. (b) A
data store that does not provide monotonic-write consistency. (c) Again, no
consistency as W2 (x1 |x2) and thus also W1 (x1 |x3 ). (d) Consistent as W1 (x1 ; x3 )
although x1 has apparently overwritten x2 .

   In contrast, Figure 7.19(b) shows a situation in which monotonic-write
consistency is not guaranteed. Compared to Figure 7.19(a), what is missing is
the propagation of x1 to L2 before another version of x is produced, expressed
by the operation W2 (x1 |x2 ). In this case, process P2 produced a concurrent
version to x1 , after which process P1 simply produces version x3 , but again
concurrently to x1 . Only slightly more subtle, but still violating monotonic-
write consistency, is the situation sketched in Figure 7.19(c). Process P1 now
produces version x3 which follows from x2 . However, because x2 does not
incorporate the write operations that led to x1 , that is, W2 (x1 |x2 ), we also have
W1 (x1 |x3 ).
   An interesting case is shown in Figure 7.19(d). The operation W2 (x1 |x2 )
produces version x2 concurrently to x1 . However, later, process P1 produces
version x3 , but apparently based on the fact that version x1 had become

available at L2 . How and when x1 was transferred to L2 is left unspecified,
but in any case a write-write conflict was created with version x2 and resolved
in favor of x1 . A consequence is that the situation shown in Figure 7.19(d)
follows the rules for monotonic-write consistency. Note, however, that any
subsequent write by process P2 at L2 (without having read version x1 ) will
immediately violate consistency again. How such a violation can be prevented
is left as an exercise to the reader.
    Note that, by the definition of monotonic-write consistency, write opera-
tions by the same process are performed in the same order as they are initiated.
A somewhat weaker form of monotonic writes is one in which the effects of a
write operation are seen only if all preceding writes have been carried out as
well, but perhaps not in the order in which they have been originally initiated.
This consistency is applicable in those cases in which write operations are
commutative, so that ordering is really not necessary. Details are found in
[Terry et al., 1994].

7.3.3      Read your writes
A data store is said to provide read-your-writes consistency, if the following
condition holds:
        The effect of a write operation by a process on data item x will always be
        seen by a successive read operation on x by the same process.
In other words, a write operation is always completed before a successive
read operation by the same process, no matter the location where that read
operation takes place.
    The absence of read-your-writes consistency is sometimes experienced
when updating Web documents and subsequently viewing the effects. Update
operations frequently take place through a standard editor or word processor,
perhaps embedded as part of a content management system, which then saves
the new version on a file system that is shared by the Web server. The user’s
Web browser accesses that same file, possibly after requesting it from the
local Web server. However, once the file has been fetched, either the server or
the browser often caches a local copy for subsequent accesses. Consequently,
when the Web page is updated, the user will not see the effects if the browser
or the server returns the cached copy instead of the original file. Read-your-
writes consistency can guarantee that if the editor and browser are integrated
into a single program, the cache is invalidated when the page is updated, so
that the updated file is fetched and displayed.
    Similar effects occur when updating passwords. For example, to enter a
digital library on the Web, it is often necessary to have an account with an
accompanying password. However, changing a password may take some time
to come into effect, with the result that the library may be inaccessible to the
user for a few minutes. The delay can be caused because a separate server

is used to manage passwords, and it may take some time to subsequently
propagate (encrypted) passwords to the various servers that constitute the
library.
    Figure 7.20(a) shows a data store that provides read-your-writes consis-
tency. Note that Figure 7.20(a) is very similar to Figure 7.18(a), except that
consistency is now determined by the last write operation by process P1 ,
instead of its last read.

                    (a)                                              (b)

Figure 7.20: (a) A data store that provides read-your-writes consistency. (b) A
data store that does not.

    In Figure 7.20(a) process P1 performed a write operation W1 (x1 ) and
later a read operation at a different local copy. Read-your-writes consistency
guarantees that the effects of the write operation can be seen by the succeeding
read operation. This is expressed by W2 (x1 ; x2 ), which states that a process P2
produced a new version of x, yet one based on x1 . In contrast, in Figure 7.20(b)
process P2 produces a version concurrently to x1 , expressed as W2 (x1 |x2 ).
This means that the effects of the previous write operation by process P1 have
not been propagated to L2 at the time x2 was produced. When P1 reads x2 , it
will not see the effects of its own write operation at L1 .

7.3.4     Writes follow reads
The last client-centric consistency model is one in which updates are propa-
gated as the result of previous read operations. A data store is said to provide
writes-follow-reads consistency, if the following holds.

        A write operation by a process on a data item x following a previous read
        operation on x by the same process is guaranteed to take place on the same
        or a more recent value of x that was read.

In other words, any successive write operation by a process on a data item
x will be performed on a copy of x that is up to date with the value most
recently read by that process.
    Writes-follow-reads consistency can be used to guarantee that users of a
network newsgroup see a posting of a reaction to an article only after they
have seen the original article [Terry et al., 1994]. To understand the problem,
assume that a user first reads an article A. Then, she reacts by posting a
response B. By requiring writes-follow-reads consistency, B will be written
to any copy of the newsgroup only after A has been written as well. Note

that users who only read articles need not require any specific client-centric
consistency model. The writes-follows-reads consistency assures that reactions
to articles are stored at a local copy only if the original is stored there as well.

                  (a)                                            (b)

Figure 7.21: (a) A writes-follow-reads consistent data store. (b) A data store
that does not provide writes-follow-reads consistency.

    This consistency model is shown in Figure 7.21. In Figure 7.21(a), process
P2 reads version x1 at local copy L1 . This version of x was previously pro-
duced at L1 by process P1 through the operation W1 (x1 ). That version was
subsequently propagated to L2 , and used by another process P3 to produce a
new version x2 , expressed as W3 (x1 ; x2 ). When process P2 later updates its
version of x after moving to L2 , it is known that it will operate on a version that
follows from x1 , expressed as W2 (x2 ; x3 ). Because we also have W3 (x1 ; x2 ), we
known that W1 (x1 ; x3 ).
    The situation shown in Figure 7.21(b) is different. Process P3 produces a
version x2 concurrently to that of x1 . As a consequence, when P2 updates x
after reading x1 , it will be updating a version it had not read before. Writes-
follow-reads consistency is then violated.

7.3.5      Example: client-centric consistency in ZooKeeper
An interesting example in which we see elements of data-centric and client-
centric consistency combined, is the model provided by ZooKeeper [Hunt
et al., 2010]. First, ZooKeeper guarantees that update operations are serializ-
able and keep precedence. What this means, is that the state of ZooKeeper can
always be explained by some linear ordering in the execution of all submitted
update operations, while preserving monotonic writes. In other words, while
multiple clients can concurrently update ZooKeeper’s state, the final result
can be understood by some interleaving of those updates while the ordering
of operations as submitted per client is preserved. In addition, ZooKeeper
guarantees monotonic reads. It does not, however, guarantee read-your-writes
or writes-follow-read consistency.
    A simple perspective is to consider ZooKeeper as a collection of servers,
while each client is connected to its own specific server. There is one, fixed
primary server to which all write operations are forwarded, and processed
in the order as submitted by their respective clients. Read operations are
executed by the server to which the client is connected (and in the order as
submitted by that client). Nothing, however, is said about when the primary

Figure 7.22: The consistency model of ZooKeeper explained through a naive
implementation.

server brings the other servers up to date. In other words, a client is left in
the dark concerning when it will see its own updates, or concurrent updates
from other clients. This model is sketched in Figure 7.22.
    Assume that P1 first submits the operation W(x)a and then W(x)b. Process
P2 submits the operation W(x)c. What is important is that monotonic writes
are supported. In our example, the primary server receives the three write
operations and decides to forward the operations W(x)a, W(x)c, and W(x)b
in that order to the other stores. We have not specified when these operations
are submitted or actually performed. Important is that this order needs to be
obeyed.
    If P1 submits read requests R(x), it may first read the initial value NIL,
and then subsequently R(x)a and later R(x)c (and eventually, it will be able to
read only R(x)b). Likewise, P2 may initially read NIL and later the final value
R(x)b. Note that both P1 and P2 may read NIL even after having submitted
their respective write operations. This demonstrates that ZooKeeper does
not provide read-your-writes consistency. Also, even if P1 had first read
NIL and then submitted W(x)a; W(x)b, it may still read R(x)c if its latest
write operation (R(x)b) had not yet been processed. This demonstrates that
ZooKeeper also does not provide writes-follow-reads consistency.

7.4   Replica management
A key issue for any distributed system that supports replication is to decide
where and when replicas should be placed, and subsequently which mech-
anisms to use for keeping the replicas consistent. The placement problem
itself should be split into two subproblems: that of placing replica servers, and
that of placing content. The difference is subtle and the two issues are often
not clearly separated. Replica-server placement is concerned with finding the
best locations to place a server that can host (part of) a data store. Content

placement deals with finding the best servers for placing content. Note that
this often means that we are looking for the optimal placement of only a single
data item. Obviously, before content placement can take place, replica servers
will have to be placed first.

7.4.1      Finding the best server location
Where perhaps over a decade ago one could be concerned about where to
place an individual server, matters have changed considerably with the advent
of the many large-scale data centers located across the Internet. Likewise, con-
nectivity continues to improve, making precisely locating servers less critical.
    There are various ways to compute the best placement of replica servers,
but virtually all boil down to an optimization problem in which the best K
out of N locations need to be selected (K < N). These problems are known
to be computationally complex and can be solved only through heuristics.
Important in this respect is to decide on the criteria to even judge on a “best”
solution. In an extensive overview, Sahoo et al. [2017] distinguish cost-related
criteria and network-related criteria. Typical network-related criteria are
latencies between a server and its clients, the available bandwidth, the (logical)
distance as discussed in Section 5.7.3, and hop count. Of course, combinations
are possible as well.
    By now, there are many (often theoretical) models for deciding on the
placement of replica servers. Sahoo et al. [2017] classify these models as shown
in Figure 7.23.

                   Main class          Subclass
                                       Optimized QoS
                   QoS Aware
                                       Bounded QoS
                                       Periodic update
                                       Aperiodic update
                   Consistency Aware
                                       Expiration-based update
                                       Cache-based update
                   Energy
                   Others

Figure 7.23: Taxonomy of replica-placement algorithms (adapted from [Sahoo
et al., 2017]).

    Let us take a closer look at these different classes. When considering
Quality of Service, that is QoS, server placement is decided by optimizing
for some or more QoS parameters. QoS is generally expressed in terms of
one or more of the network-related parameters. In the case of bounded QoS,
solutions are sought that guarantee a value of a certain QoS parameter, for
example, guaranteed bandwidth.

    As mentioned, QoS awareness requires solving a computationally difficult
problem, meaning in practice that we need to resort to heuristics, and thus
approximations of optimal values. This is generally not a problem, considering
that the QoS parameters itself may be rather imprecise. Consider, for example,
accurately measuring latency between a client (end user) and a replica server.
As discussed in Section 5.7.3, this is by itself not an easy problem to solve
when we cannot simply access that client. The best one can hope for, is
that an existing server is often enough connected to a client to get some idea
of latencies. The same problem occurs for other parameters, in particular,
bandwidth. As a consequence, we can try to accurately optimize on QoS, but
when the basic input values are already very difficult to measure accurately,
optimizations can quickly become quite theoretical. Quick-and-dirty heuristics
may be enough, yet we will need to take their results with a grain of salt.
    Consistency-aware algorithms take an entirely different approach. The
basic assumption is that there is an existing network for which we can decide
where to place replica servers. Placement of servers will then involve costs
for keeping replicated content up to date. Those costs can be expressed in
terms of when updates take place, as well as how. We return to these matters
later in Section 7.4.3 where we discuss replica management. The four different
subclasses deal with deciding on when updates are propagated to the replica
server (periodically, instantly, or only after some time), or from where (is a
replica server going to check the main server, or is it going to see whether a
nearby server has an update). Again, we see that many theoretical models
have been developed to optimize consistency-aware algorithms, yet in this
case, such optimizations rely heavily on knowledge concerning read and
update patterns. In practice, such knowledge is not readily available and may
even be hard to get, let alone when it comes to predicting future patterns.
    Energy-aware algorithms also assume an existing network to which clients
connect. Placement of a replica server is then decided based on energy
consumption. To keep it simple, placing a server at a specific node and
keeping it up and running when there are only few clients, may be costly
in terms of energy. The server in that case does not have enough work
to do, while its idle time does consume energy. Another criterion is to
decide on placement at nodes that support energy efficiency, for example,
by switching between different power modes. Finally, placement may also
be influenced by optimizing the distribution of work (measured in terms of
energy consumption) among more or less replica servers, given that we know
the various access patterns of a set of clients. As before, we see that much
needs to be known about those patterns, as well as the capacities and facilities
of the network, to make practically sensible decisions.
    Finally, there are other classes for deciding on replica-server placement.
Sahoo et al. have concentrated on server placement for CDNs. Such dis-
tributed systems are spread across many organizations (formally known as

Autonomous Systems, that is, an organization in charge of a separate network
within the Internet). Replica-server placement then also involves monetary
costs that need to be negotiated with those organizations. Likewise, placement
decisions can be based on the connectivity of clients to a specific autonomous
system, along with the costs in terms of QoS parameters or monetary costs.
Further details can be found in [Sahoo et al., 2017].

7.4.2      Content replication and placement
When it comes to content replication and placement, three different types of
replicas can be distinguished, logically organized as shown in Figure 7.24.

                                                          Server-initiated replication
                                                          Client-initiated replication

                        Permanent
                         replicas
                  Server-initiated replicas

                  Client-initiated replicas

                          Clients

Figure 7.24: The logical organization of different kinds of copies of a data
store into three concentric rings.

Permanent replicas
Permanent replicas can be considered as the initial set of replicas that con-
stitute a distributed data store. Often, the number of permanent replicas is
small. Consider, for example, a Website. Distribution of a Website generally
comes in one of two forms. The first kind of distribution is one in which the
files that constitute a site are replicated across a limited number of servers at
a single location. Whenever a request comes in, it is forwarded to one of the
servers, for instance, using a round-robin strategy.
    The second form of distributed Websites is what is called mirroring. In
this case, a Website is copied to a limited number of servers, called mirror
sites, which are geographically spread across the Internet. Often, clients
simply choose one of the various mirror sites from a list offered to them, or
are transparently forwarded to one of the mirrors. Mirrored Websites have in
common with cluster-based Websites that there are only a few replicas, which
are more or less statically configured.
    Similar static organizations also appear with distributed databases [Kemme
et al., 2010; Özsu and Valduriez, 2020]. Again, the database can be distributed

and replicated across a number of servers that together form a cluster of
servers, often referred to as a shared-nothing architecture, emphasizing that
neither disks nor main memory are shared by processors. Alternatively, a
database is distributed and possibly replicated across a number of geograph-
ically dispersed sites. This architecture is generally deployed in federated
databases [Sheth and Larson, 1990; Azevedo et al., 2020].

Server-initiated replicas
In contrast to permanent replicas, server-initiated replicas are copies of a
data store that exist to enhance performance, and created at the initiative of
the (owner of the) data store. Consider, for example, a Web server placed in
New York. Normally, this server can handle incoming requests effortlessly,
but it may happen that over a couple of days a sudden burst of requests
come in from an unexpected location far from the server. In that case, it may
be worthwhile to install a number of temporary replicas in regions where
requests are coming from.
    Web hosting has often been taken over by Content Delivery Networks, and
for good reasons. Most important is that Web pages are no longer just a simple
collection of static pages, but combine databases with static and dynamic
content. As a result, replication needs to be much more sophisticated than
just pushing pages to specific locations. We outlined the principal operation
of a CDN in Section 3.4.4. Important is that, in general, replication is on
demand. The CDN notices that requests are coming from a client, the client is
directed to a nearest replica server, and that server checks to see whether it
has the requested content cached locally. Obviously, there are many options
concerning decisions on where to redirect the client to, and also when and
which content to actually store. For our discussion here, despite that content
is replicated to a server because of a client request, because the CDN is in
control when it comes to the aforementioned decisions, it is still appropriate
to speak of server-initiated replication. That the initiative has been delegated
to a CDN is less important.

  Note 7.6 (More information: An example of dynamic Web-content placement)
  The problem of dynamically placing replicas has since long been addressed in
  Web hosting services (and by now in content delivery networks). Historically,
  these services offered an often relatively static collection of servers spread across
  the Internet that maintained and provided access to Web files belonging to third
  parties. To provide optimal facilities, such hosting services dynamically replicated
  files to servers where those files are needed to enhance performance, that is, close
  to demanding (groups of) clients.
       Given that the replica servers are already in place, deciding where to place
  content is not that difficult. An early case toward dynamic replication of files in
  the case of a Web hosting service is described by Rabinovich et al. [1999]. The

  algorithm is designed to support Web pages, for which reason it assumes that
  updates are relatively rare compared to read requests. Using files as the unit of
  data, the algorithm works as follows.
      The algorithm for dynamic replication takes two issues into account. First,
  replication can take place to reduce the load on a server. Second, specific files
  on a server can be migrated or replicated to servers placed in the proximity of
  clients that issue many requests for those files. In the following, we concentrate
  only on this second issue. We also omit a number of details, which can be found
  in [Rabinovich et al., 1999].

Figure 7.25: Counting access requests from different clients.

       Each server keeps track of access counts per file, and where access requests
  come from. In particular, when a client C enters the service, it does so through
  a server close to it. If client C1 and client C2 share the same closest server P, all
  access requests for file F at server Q from C1 and C2 are jointly registered at Q as
  a single access count cntQ (P, F). This situation is shown in Figure 7.25.
       When the number of requests for a specific file F at server S drops below a
  deletion threshold del(S, F), that file can be removed from S. As a consequence,
  the number of replicas of that file is reduced, possibly leading to higher work
  loads at other servers. Special measures are taken to ensure that at least one copy
  of each file continues to exist.
       A replication threshold rep(S, F), which is always chosen higher than the
  deletion threshold, indicates that the number of requests for a specific file is so
  high that it may be worthwhile replicating it on another server. If the number of
  requests lies somewhere between the deletion and replication threshold, the file
  is allowed to be only migrated. In other words, in that case, it is important to at
  least keep the number of replicas for that file the same.
       When a server Q decides to reevaluate the placement of the files it stores, it
  checks the access count for each file. If the total number of access requests for F
  at Q drops below the deletion threshold del(Q, F), it will delete F unless it is the
  last copy. Furthermore, if for some server P, cntQ (P, F) exceeds more than half of
  the total requests for F at Q, server P is requested to take over the copy of F. In
  other words, server Q will attempt to migrate F to P.
       Migration of file F to server P may not always succeed, for example because P
  is already heavily loaded or is out of disk space. In that case, Q will attempt to

  replicate F on other servers. Of course, replication can take place only if the total
  number of access requests for F at Q exceeds the replication threshold rep(Q, F).
  Server Q checks all other servers in the Web hosting service, starting with the one
  farthest away. If, for some server R, cntQ (R, F) exceeds a certain fraction of all
  requests for F at Q, an attempt is made to replicate F to R.
      What we have just described is an alternative to simply caching content at a
  replica server when a client request comes in, as we described for content delivery
  networks. There is no fundamental reason why the algorithm for copying and
  migration of content cannot be applied in CDNs as well.

Client-initiated replicas

An important kind of replica is the one initiated by a client. Client-initiated
replicas are more commonly known as client caches. In essence, a cache is a
local storage facility that is used by a client to temporarily store a copy of the
data it has just requested. In principle, managing the cache is left entirely to
the client. The data store from where the data had been fetched has nothing to
do with keeping cached data consistent. However, there are many occasions
in which the client can rely on participation from the data store to inform it
when cached data has become stale.
    Client caches are used only to improve access times to data. Normally,
when a client wants access to some data, it connects to the nearest copy of the
data store from where it fetches the data it wants to read, or to where it stores
the data it had just modified. When most operations involve only reading
data, performance can be improved by letting the client store requested data
in a nearby cache. Such a cache could be located on the client’s machine, or
on a separate machine in the same local-area network as the client. The next
time that same data needs to be read, the client can simply fetch it from this
local cache. This scheme works fine as long as the fetched data have not been
meanwhile modified.
    Data are generally kept in a cache for a limited amount of time, for example,
to prevent extremely stale data from being used, or simply to make room
for other data. Whenever requested data can be fetched from the local cache,
a cache hit is said to have occurred. To improve the number of cache hits,
caches can be shared between clients. The underlying assumption is that a
data request from client C1 may also be useful for a request from another
nearby client C2 .
    Whether this assumption is correct depends very much on the type of data
store. For example, in traditional file systems, data files are rarely shared at all
(see, e.g., Muntz and Honeyman [1992] and Blaze [1993]) rendering a shared
cache useless. Likewise, it turns out that using Web caches to share data
has been losing ground, partly also because of the improvement in network

and server performance. Instead, server-initiated replication schemes are
becoming more effective.
    Placement of client caches is relatively simple: a cache is normally placed
on the same machine as its client, or otherwise on a machine shared by clients
on the same local-area network. However, in some cases, extra levels of
caching are introduced by system administrators by placing a shared cache
between a number of departments or organizations, or even placing a shared
cache for an entire region such as a province or country.
    Yet another approach is to place (cache) servers at specific points in a
wide-area network and let a client locate the nearest server. When the server is
located, it can be requested to hold copies of the data the client was previously
fetching from somewhere else [Noble et al., 1999].

7.4.3      Content distribution
Replica management also deals with propagation of (updated) content to the
relevant replica servers. There are various trade-offs to make.

State versus operations
An important design issue concerns what is actually to be propagated. Basi-
cally, there are three possibilities:

   • Propagate only a notification of an update.
   • Transfer data from one copy to another.
   • Propagate the update operation to other copies.

Propagating a notification is what invalidation protocols do. In an invali-
dation protocol, other copies are informed that an update has taken place
and that the data they contain are no longer valid. The invalidation may
specify which part of the data store has been updated, so that only part of
a copy is actually invalidated. The important issue is that no more than a
notification is propagated. Whenever an operation on an invalidated copy is
requested, that copy generally needs to be updated first, depending on the
specific consistency model that is to be supported.
    The main advantage of invalidation protocols is that they use little network
bandwidth. The only information that needs to be transferred is a specification
of which data are no longer valid. Such protocols generally work best when
there are many update operations compared to read operations, that is, the
read-to-write ratio is relatively small.
    Consider, for example, a data store in which updates are propagated by
sending the modified data to all replicas. If the size of the modified data is
large, and updates occur frequently compared to read operations, we may
have the situation that two updates occur after one another without any read

operation being performed between them. Consequently, propagation of the
first update to all replicas is effectively useless, as it will be overwritten by
the second update. Instead, sending a notification that the data have been
modified would have been more efficient.
    Transferring the modified data among replicas is the second alternative,
and is useful when the read-to-write ratio is relatively high. In that case, the
probability that an update will be effective in the sense that the modified data
will be read before the next update takes place is high. Instead of propagating
modified data, it is also possible to log the changes and transfer only those
logs to save bandwidth. In addition, transfers are often aggregated in the
sense that multiple modifications are packed into a single message, thus
saving communication overhead.
    The third approach is not to transfer any data modifications at all, but
to tell each replica which update operation it should perform (and sending
only the parameter values that those operations need). This approach, also
referred to as active replication, assumes that each replica is represented
by a process capable of “actively” keeping its associated data up to date by
performing operations [Schneider, 1990]. The main benefit of active replication
is that updates can often be propagated at minimal bandwidth costs, provided
the size of the parameters associated with an operation are relatively small.
Moreover, the operations can be of arbitrary complexity, which may allow
further improvements in keeping replicas consistent. On the other hand, more
processing power may be required by each replica, especially in those cases
when operations are relatively complex.

Pull versus push protocols
Another design issue is whether updates are pulled or pushed. In a push-
based approach, also referred to as server-based protocols, updates are
propagated to other replicas without those replicas even asking for the updates.
Push-based approaches are often used between permanent and server-initiated
replicas, but can also be used to push updates to client caches. Server-based
protocols are generally applied when strong consistency is required.
     This need for strong consistency is related to the fact that permanent and
server-initiated replicas, as well as large shared caches, are often shared by
many clients, which, in turn, mainly perform read operations. Consequently,
the read-to-update ratio at each replica is relatively high. In these cases, push-
based protocols are efficient in the sense that every pushed update can be
expected to be of use for at least one, but perhaps more readers. In addition,
push-based protocols make consistent data immediately available when asked
for.
     In contrast, in a pull-based approach, a server or client requests another
server to send it any updates it has at that moment. Pull-based protocols, also
called client-based protocols, are often used by client caches. For example, a

common strategy applied to Web caches is first to check whether cached data
items are still up-to-date. When a cache receives a request for items that are
still locally available, the cache checks with the original Web server, whether
those data items have been modified since they were cached. In the case of
a modification, the modified data are first transferred to the cache, and then
returned to the requesting client. If no modifications took place, the cached
data are returned. In other words, the client polls the server to see whether
an update is needed. A similar approach is followed in content delivery
networks where a replica server caches content, yet checks with the origin
server whether updates are available before delivering its (cached) content to
the actual client (i.e., end user). Note that in this respect, the replica server
acts as a client to the origin server.
     A pull-based approach is efficient when the read-to-update ratio is rela-
tively low. This is often the case with (nonshared) client caches, which have
only one client. However, even when a cache is shared by many clients, a
pull-based approach may also be efficient when the cached data items are
rarely shared. The main drawback of a pull-based strategy in comparison to a
push-based approach is that the response time increases in the case of a cache
miss.
     When comparing push-based and pull-based solutions, there are a number
of trade-offs to be made, as shown in Figure 7.26. For simplicity, consider a
client-server system consisting of a single, nondistributed server, and a number
of client processes, each having their own cache. We make no distinction
between clients at end users (such as Web browsers), or clients within, for
example, a content delivery network (such as replica servers).

   Issue              Push-based                               Pull-based
   State at server    List of client replicas and caches       None
   Messages sent      Update (and possibly fetch update        Poll and update
                      later)
   Response time      Immediate (or fetch-update time)         Fetch-update
   at client                                                   time

Figure 7.26: A comparison between push-based and pull-based protocols in
the case of multiple-client, single-server systems.

    An important issue is that in push-based protocols, the server needs to
keep track of all client caches, be they at end users or replica servers. Apart
from the fact that stateful servers are often less fault tolerant, keeping track
of all such caches may introduce a considerable overhead at the server. For
example, in a push-based approach, a Web server may easily need to keep
track of tens of thousands of client caches. Each time a Web page is updated,
the server will have to go through its list of client caches holding a copy of that
page and subsequently propagate the update. Worse yet, if a client purges a

page due to lack of space, it has to inform the server, leading to even more
communication.
    The messages that need to be sent between a client and the server also
differ. In a push-based approach, the only communication is that the server
sends updates to each client. When updates are only invalidations, additional
communication is needed by a client to fetch the modified data. In a pull-
based approach, a client will have to poll the server, and, if necessary, fetch
the modified data.
    Finally, the response time at the client is also different. When a server
pushes modified data to the client caches, it is clear that the response time at
the client side is zero. When invalidations are pushed, the response time is
the same as in the pull-based approach, and is determined by the time it takes
to fetch the modified data from the server.
    These trade-offs have lead to a hybrid form of update propagation based
on leases. In the case of replica management, a lease is a promise by the
server that it will push updates to the client for a specified time. When a
lease expires, the client is forced to poll the server for updates and pull in the
modified data if necessary. An alternative is that a client requests a new lease
for pushing updates when the previous lease expires.
    Leases, originally introduced by Gray and Cheriton [1989], provide a
convenient mechanism for dynamically switching between a push-based
and pull-based strategy. Consider the following lease system that allows
the expiration time to be dynamically adapted depending on different lease
criteria, described in [Duvvuri et al., 2003]. We distinguish the following three
types of leases. (Note that in all cases, updates are pushed by the server as
long as the lease has not expired.)
    First, age-based leases are given out on data items depending on the last
time the item was modified. The underlying assumption is that data that
have not been modified for a long time can be expected to remain unmodified
for some time yet to come. This assumption has shown to be reasonable
in the case of, for example, Web-based data and regular files. By granting
long-lasting leases to data items that are expected to remain unmodified, the
number of update messages can be strongly reduced compared to the case
where all leases have the same expiration time.
    Another lease criterion is how often a specific client requests its cached
copy to be updated. With renewal-frequency-based leases, a server will hand
out a long-lasting lease to a client whose cache often needs to be refreshed.
On the other hand, a client that asks only occasionally for a specific data item
will be handed a short-term lease for that item. The effect of this strategy is
that the server essentially keeps track only of those clients where its data are
popular; moreover, those clients are offered a high degree of consistency.
    The last criterion is that of state-space overhead at the server. When
the server realizes that it is gradually becoming overloaded, it lowers the

expiration time of new leases it hands out to clients. The effect of this state-
based lease strategy is that the server needs to keep track of fewer clients as
leases expire more quickly. In other words, the server dynamically switches
to a more stateless mode of operation, thereby expecting to offload itself so
that it can handle requests more efficiently. The obvious drawback is that it
may need to do more work when the read-to-update ratio is high.

Unicasting versus multicasting
Related to pushing or pulling updates is deciding whether unicasting or
multicasting should be used. In unicast communication, when a server that is
part of the data store sends its update to N other servers, it does so by sending
N separate messages, one to each server. With multicasting, the underlying
network takes care of sending a message efficiently to multiple receivers.
    Often, it is cheaper to use available multicasting facilities. An extreme
situation is when all replicas are located in the same local-area network
and that hardware broadcasting is available. In that case, broadcasting or
multicasting a message is no more expensive than a single point-to-point
message. Unicasting updates would then be less efficient.
    Multicasting can often be efficiently combined with a push-based approach
to propagating updates. When the two are carefully integrated, a server that
decides to push its updates to a number of other servers simply uses a single
multicast group to send its updates. In contrast, with a pull-based approach, it
is generally only a single client or server that requests its copy to be updated.
In that case, unicasting may be the most efficient solution.

7.4.4      Managing replicated objects
As we mentioned, data-centric consistency for distributed objects comes
naturally in the form of entry consistency. Recall that in this case, the goal
is to group operations on shared data using synchronization variables (e.g.,
in the form of locks). As objects naturally combine data and the operations
on that data, locking objects during an invocation serializes access and keeps
them consistent.
    Although conceptually associating a lock with an object is simple, it does
not necessarily provide a proper solution when an object is replicated. There
are two issues that need to be solved for implementing entry consistency. The
first one is that we need a means to prevent concurrent execution of multiple
invocations on the same object. In other words, when any method of an
object is being executed, no other methods may be executed. This requirement
ensures that access to the internal data of an object is indeed serialized. Simply
using local locking mechanisms will ensure this serialization.
    The second issue is that in the case of a replicated object, we need to ensure
that all changes to the replicated state of the object are the same. In other

words, we need to make sure that no two independent method invocations
take place on different replicas at the same time. This requirement implies
that we need to order invocations such that each replica sees all invocations
in the same order. We describe a few general solutions in Section 7.5.
    Often, designing replicated objects is done by first designing a single object,
possibly protecting it against concurrent access through local locking, and
subsequently replicating it. The role of middleware is to ensure that if a client
invokes a replicated object, the invocation is passed to the replicas and handed
to the their respective object servers in the same order everywhere. However,
we also need to ensure that all threads in those servers process those requests
in the correct order as well. The problem is sketched in Figure 7.27.

  Computer 1                                           Computer 2

               Object                                             Replica

         1              1            Deterministic                          2
       T1 Threads T2                                         2
                                  thread scheduling         T1 Threads T2
  Thread
scheduler                            Totally ordered
                                        requests
  Middleware                                           Middleware

  Local OS                                             Local OS

                            Unordered requests              Unordered requests

Figure 7.27: Deterministic thread scheduling for replicated object servers.

    Multithreaded (object) servers simply pick up an incoming request, pass
it on to an available thread, and wait for the next request to come in. The
server’s thread scheduler subsequently allocates the CPU to runnable threads.
Of course, if the middleware has done its best to provide a total ordering
for request delivery, the thread schedulers should operate in a deterministic
fashion in order not to mix the ordering of method invocations on the same
object. In other words, If threads T11 and T21 from Figure 7.27 handle the
same incoming (replicated) invocation request, they should both be scheduled
before T12 and T22 , respectively.
    Simply scheduling all threads deterministically is not necessary. In prin-
ciple, if we already have totally ordered request delivery, we need only to
ensure that all requests for the same replicated object are handled in the order
they were delivered. Such an approach would allow invocations for different
objects to be processed concurrently, and without further restrictions from the
thread scheduler. Only few systems exist that support such concurrency.

    One approach, described by Basile et al. [2002], ensures that threads
sharing the same (local) lock are scheduled in the same order on every replica.
At the basics lies a primary-based scheme in which one of the replica servers
takes the lead in determining, for a specific lock, which thread goes first.
An improvement that avoids frequent communication between servers is
described in [Basile et al., 2003]. Note that threads that do not share a lock
can thus operate concurrently on each server.
    One drawback of this scheme is that it operates at the level of the under-
lying operating system, meaning that every lock needs to be managed. By
providing application-level information, a huge improvement in performance
can be made by identifying only those locks that are required for serializing
access to replicated objects (see Taiani et al. [2005]).

  Note 7.7 (Advanced: Replicated invocations)
  Another problem that needs to be solved is that of replicated invocations. Con-
  sider an object A calling another object B as shown in Figure 7.28. Object B is
  assumed to call yet another object C. If B is replicated, each replica of B will,
  in principle, call C independently. The problem is that C is now called multiple
  times instead of only once. If the called method on C results in the transfer of
  $100,000, then clearly, someone is, sooner or later, going to complain.

Figure 7.28: The problem of replicated object invocations.

       There are not many general-purpose solutions to solve the problem of repli-
  cated invocations. One solution is to simply forbid it [Maassen et al., 2001],
  which makes sense when performance is at stake. However, when replicating for
  fault tolerance, the following solution proposed by Mazouni et al. [1995] may be
  deployed. Their solution is independent of the replication policy, that is, the exact
  details of how replicas are kept consistent. The essence is to provide a replication-
  aware communication layer on top of which (replicated) objects execute. When
  a replicated object B invokes another replicated object C, the invocation request
  is first assigned the same, unique identifier by each replica of B. At that point, a
  coordinator of the replicas of B forwards its request to all the replicas of object C,

  while the other replicas of B hold back their copy of the invocation request, as
  shown in Figure 7.29. The result is that only a single request is forwarded to each
  replica of C.
      The same mechanism is used to ensure that only a single reply message is
  returned to the replicas of B. This situation is shown in Figure 7.29. A coordinator
  of the replicas of C notices it is dealing with a replicated reply message that has
  been generated by each replica of C. However, only the coordinator forwards that
  reply to the replicas of object B, while the other replicas of C hold back their copy
  of the reply message.

                     (a)                                            (b)

Figure 7.29: (a) Forwarding an invocation request from a replicated object
      to another replicated object. (b) Returning a reply from one replicated
      object to another.

  When a replica of B receives a reply message for an invocation request it had
  either forwarded to C or held back because it was not the coordinator, the reply is
  then handed to the actual object.
      In essence, the scheme just described is based on using multicast communica-
  tion, but preventing that the same message is multicast by different replicas. As
  such, it is essentially a sender-based scheme. An alternative solution is to let a
  receiving replica detect multiple copies of incoming messages belonging to the
  same invocation, and to pass only one copy to its associated object. Details of this
  scheme are left as an exercise.

7.5   Consistency protocols

We now concentrate on the actual implementation of consistency models
by taking a look at several consistency protocols. A consistency protocol
describes an implementation of a specific consistency model. We follow the
organization of our discussion on consistency models by first taking a look at
data-centric models, followed by protocols for client-centric models.

7.5.1      Sequential consistency: Primary-based protocols
In practice, we see that distributed applications generally follow consistency
models that are relatively easy to understand. These models include those for
bounding staleness deviations, and to a lesser extent also those for bounding
numerical deviations. When it comes to models that handle consistent order-
ing of operations, sequential consistency, notably those in which operations
can be grouped through locking or transactions, are popular.
    As soon as consistency models become slightly difficult to understand for
application developers, we see that they are ignored even if performance could
be improved. The bottom line is that if the semantics of a consistency model
are not intuitively clear, application developers will have a hard time building
correct applications. Simplicity is appreciated (and perhaps justifiably so).
    In the case of sequential consistency, it turns out that primary-based
protocols prevail. In these protocols, each data item x in the data store has an
associated primary, which is responsible for coordinating write operations on
x. A distinction can be made whether the primary is fixed at a remote server
or if write operations can be carried out locally after moving the primary to
the process where the write operation is initiated.

Remote-write protocols

The simplest primary-based protocol that supports replication is the one in
which all write operations need to be forwarded to a fixed single server.
Read operations can be carried out locally. Such schemes are also known
as primary-backup protocols [Budhiraja et al., 1993]. A primary-backup
protocol works as shown in Figure 7.30. A process wanting to perform a write
operation on data item x, forwards that operation to the primary server for
x. The primary performs the update on its local copy of x, and subsequently
forwards the update to the backup servers. Each backup server performs
the update as well, and sends an acknowledgment to the primary. When all
backups have updated their local copy, the primary sends an acknowledgment
to the initial process, which, in turn, informs the client.
    A potential performance problem with this scheme is that it may take a
relatively long time before the process that initiated the update is allowed to
continue. In effect, an update is implemented as a blocking operation. An
alternative is to use a nonblocking approach. As soon as the primary has
updated its local copy of x, it returns an acknowledgment. After that, it tells
the backup servers to perform the update as well. Nonblocking primary-
backup protocols are discussed in [Budhiraja and Marzullo, 1992].
    The main problem with nonblocking primary-backup protocols has to do
with fault tolerance. In a blocking scheme, the client process knows for sure
that the update operation is backed up by several other servers. This is not

Figure 7.30: The principle of a primary-backup protocol.

the case with a nonblocking solution. The advantage, of course, is that write
operations may speed up considerably.
    Primary-backup protocols provide a straightforward implementation of
sequential consistency, as the primary can order all incoming writes in a
globally unique order. Evidently, all processes see all write operations in
the same order, no matter which backup server they use to perform read
operations. Also, with blocking protocols, processes will always see the effects
of their most recent write operation (note that this cannot be guaranteed with
a nonblocking protocol without taking special measures).

Local-write protocols
A variant of primary-backup protocols is one in which the primary copy
migrates between processes that wish to perform a write operation. As
before, whenever a process wants to update a data item x, it locates the
primary copy of x, and subsequently moves it to its own location, as shown in
Figure 7.31. The main advantage of this approach is that multiple, successive
write operations can be carried out locally, while reading processes can still
access their local copy. However, such an improvement can be achieved only
if a nonblocking protocol is followed by which updates are propagated to the
replicas after the primary has finished with locally performing the updates.
    This primary-backup local-write protocol can also be applied to mobile
computers that can operate in disconnected mode. Before disconnecting, the
mobile computer becomes the primary server for each data item it expects to
update. While being disconnected, all update operations are carried out locally,
while other processes can still perform read operations (but no updates).

Figure 7.31: Primary-backup protocol in which the primary migrates to the
process wanting to perform an update.

Later, when connecting again, updates are propagated from the primary to
the backups, bringing the data store in a consistent state again.
    As a last variant of this scheme, nonblocking local-write primary-based
protocols are also used for distributed file systems in general. In this case, there
may be a fixed central server through which normally all write operations
take place, as in the case of remote-write primary backup. However, the server
temporarily allows one of the replicas to perform a series of local updates,
as this may considerably speed up performance. When the replica server is
done, the updates are propagated to the central server, from where they are
then distributed to the other replica servers.

7.5.2      Sequential consistency: Replicated-write protocols
In replicated-write protocols, write operations can be carried out at multiple
replicas instead of only one, as in the case of primary-based replicas. A
distinction can be made between active replication, in which an operation is
forwarded to all replicas, and consistency protocols based on majority voting.

Active replication
In active replication, each replica has an associated process that carries out
update operations. In contrast to other protocols, updates are generally
propagated through the write operation that causes the update. In other
words, the operation is sent to each replica. However, it is also possible to
send the update.

    One problem with active replication is that operations need to be carried
out in the same order everywhere. Consequently, what is needed is a totally
ordered multicast mechanism. A practical approach to accomplish total
ordering is by a central coordinator, also called a sequencer. One approach
is to first forward each operation to the sequencer, which assigns it a unique
sequence number and subsequently forwards the operation to all replicas.
Operations are carried out in the order of their sequence number.

  Note 7.8 (Advanced: Achieving scalability)
  Note that using a sequencer may easily introduce scalability problems. In fact, if
  totally ordered multicasting is needed, a combination of symmetric multicasting
  using Lamport timestamps [Lamport, 1978] and sequencers may be necessary.
  Such a solution is described by Rodrigues et al. [1996]. The essence of that solution
  is to have multiple sequencers multicast update operations to each other and
  order the updates using Lamport’s total-ordering mechanism, as described in
  Chapter 5. Nonsequencing processes are grouped such that each group uses
  a single sequencer. Any nonsequencing process sends update requests to its
  sequencer and waits until it receives an acknowledgment that its request has been
  processed (i.e., multicast to the other sequencers in a totally ordered fashion).
  Obviously, there is a trade-off between the number of processes that act as
  sequencer and those that do not, as well as the choice of processes to act as
  sequencer. As it turns out, this trade-off depends very much on the application
  and, in particular, the relative update rate at each process.

Quorum-based protocols
A different approach to supporting replicated writes is to use voting, as
originally proposed by Thomas [1979] and generalized by Gifford [1979].
The basic idea is to require clients to request and acquire the permission of
multiple servers before either reading or writing a replicated data item.
    As a simple example of how the algorithm works, consider a distributed
file system and suppose that a file is replicated on N servers. We could make
a rule stating that to update a file, a client must first contact at least half the
servers plus one (a majority) and get them to agree to do the update. Once
they have agreed, the file is changed and a new version number is associated
with the new file. The version number is used to identify the version of the
file and is the same for all the newly updated files.
    To read a replicated file, a client must also contact at least half the servers
plus one and ask them to send the version numbers associated with the file.
If all the version numbers are the same, this must be the most recent version
because an attempt to update only the remaining servers would fail because
there are not enough of them.
    For example, if there are five servers and a client determines that three of
them have version 8, it is impossible that the other two have version 9. After

all, any successful update from version 8 to version 9 requires getting three
servers to agree to it, not just two.
    When quorum-based replication was originally introduced, a somewhat
more general scheme was proposed. In it, to read a file of which N replicas
exist, a client needs to assemble a read quorum, an arbitrary collection of any
NR servers, or more. Similarly, to modify a file, a write quorum of at least
NW servers is required. The values of NR and NW are subject to the following
two constraints:

   1. NR + NW > N
   2. NW > N/2

    The first constraint is used to prevent read-write conflicts, whereas the
second prevents write-write conflicts. Only after the appropriate number of
servers has agreed to participate can a file be read or written.
    To see how this algorithm works, consider Figure 7.32(a) which has NR = 3
and NW = 10. Imagine that the most recent write quorum consisted of the
10 servers C through L. All of these get the new version and the new version
number. Any subsequent read quorum of three servers will have to contain at
least one member of this set. When the client looks at the version numbers, it
will know which is most recent and take that one.

               (a)                      (b)                       (c)

Figure 7.32: Three examples of the voting algorithm. The gray areas denote a
read quorum; the white ones a write quorum. Servers in the intersection are
denoted in boldface. (a) A correct choice of read and write set. (b) A choice
that may lead to write-write conflicts. (c) A correct choice, known as ROWA
(read one, write all).

    In Figure 7.32 we see two more examples. In Figure 7.32(b) a write-write
conflict may occur because NW ≤ N/2. In particular, if one client chooses
{A, B, C, E, F, G} as its write set and another client chooses {D, H, I, J, K, L} as
its write set, then clearly we will run into trouble, as the two updates will
both be accepted without detecting that they actually conflict.
    The situation shown in Figure 7.32(c) is especially interesting because it
sets NR to one, making it possible to read a replicated file by finding any copy
and using it. The price paid for this good read performance, however, is that

write updates need to acquire all copies. This scheme is generally referred to
as Read-One, Write-All, (ROWA).
    Quorum-based replication has been an active field of research and an
inspiration for various protocols. However, in practice, we often see primary-
based protocols at work (to which we return in Chapter 8). Jalote [1994]
provides a good overview of various quorum-based protocols. A more formal
introduction is given by Merideth and Reiter [2010], whereas many formal
details and analyses of different protocols are described in [Vukolić, 2012].

7.5.3   Cache-coherence protocols
Caches form a special case of replication, in the sense that they are generally
controlled by clients instead of servers. However, cache-coherence protocols,
which ensure that a cache is consistent with the server-initiated replicas are,
in principle, not very different from the consistency protocols discussed so far.
    There has been much research in the design and implementation of caches,
especially in the context of shared-memory multiprocessor systems. Many
solutions are based on support from the underlying hardware, for example,
by assuming that snooping or efficient broadcasting can be done. In the
context of middleware-based distributed systems that are built on top of
general-purpose operating systems, software-based solutions to caches are
more interesting. In this case, two separate criteria are often maintained to
classify caching protocols (see also Min and Baer [1992], Lilja [1993], or Tartalja
and Milutinovic [1997]).
    First, caching solutions may differ in their coherence detection strategy,
that is, when inconsistencies are actually detected. In static solutions, a
compiler is assumed to perform the necessary analysis before execution, and
to determine which data may actually lead to inconsistencies because they may
be cached. The compiler simply inserts instructions that avoid inconsistencies.
Dynamic solutions are typically applied in the distributed systems studied
in this book. In these solutions, inconsistencies are detected at runtime. For
example, a check is made with the server to see whether the cached data have
been modified since they were cached.
    In the case of distributed databases, dynamic detection-based protocols
can be further classified by considering exactly when, during a transaction,
the detection is done. Franklin et al. [1997] distinguish the following three
cases. First, when during a transaction a cached data item is accessed, the
client needs to verify whether that data item is still consistent with the version
stored at the (possibly replicated) server. The transaction cannot proceed to
use the cached version until its consistency has been definitively validated.
    A second, optimistic, approach is to let the transaction proceed while
verification is taking place. In this case, it is assumed that the cached data
were up-to-date when the transaction started. If that assumption later proves
to be false, the transaction will have to abort.

    The third approach is to verify whether the cached data are up-to-date only
when the transaction commits. In effect, the transaction just starts operating
on the cached data and hopes for the best. After all the work has been done,
accessed data are verified for consistency. When stale data were used, the
transaction is aborted.
    Another design issue for cache-coherence protocols is the coherence en-
forcement strategy, which determines how caches are kept consistent with the
copies stored at servers. The simplest solution is to disallow shared data to be
cached at all. Instead, shared data are kept only at the servers, which maintain
consistency using one of the primary-based or replication-write protocols
discussed above. Clients are allowed to cache only private data. Obviously,
this solution can offer only limited performance improvements.
    When shared data can be cached, there are two approaches to enforce
cache coherence. The first is to let a server send an invalidation to all caches
whenever a data item is modified. The second is to simply propagate the
update. Most caching systems use one of these two schemes. Dynamically
choosing between sending invalidations or updates is sometimes supported
in client-server databases.
    Finally, we also need to consider what happens when a process modifies
cached data. When read-only caches are used, update operations can be
performed only by servers, which subsequently follow some distribution
protocol to ensure that updates are propagated to caches. Often, a pull-based
approach is followed. In this case, a client detects that its cache is stale, and
requests a server for an update.
    An alternative approach is to allow clients to directly modify the cached
data, and forward the update to the servers. This approach is followed
in write-through caches, which are often used in distributed file systems.
In effect, write-through caching is similar to a primary-based local-write
protocol in which the client’s cache has become a temporary primary. To
guarantee (sequential) consistency, it is necessary that the client has been
granted exclusive write permissions, or otherwise write-write conflicts may
occur.
    Write-through caches potentially offer improved performance over other
schemes, as all operations can be carried out locally. Further enhancements
can be made if we delay the propagation of updates by allowing multiple
writes to take place before informing the servers. This leads to what is known
as a write-back cache, which is, again, mainly applied in distributed file
systems.

  Note 7.9 (Example: Client-side caching in NFS)
  As a practical example, consider the general caching model in NFS as shown in
Figure 7.33. Each client can have a memory cache that contains data previously

  read from the server. In addition, there may also be a disk cache that is added as
  an extension to the memory cache, using the same consistency parameters.

Figure 7.33: Client-side caching in NFS.

      Typically, clients cache file data, attributes, file handles, and directories. Dif-
  ferent strategies exist to handle consistency of the cached data, cached attributes,
  and so on. Let us first take a look at caching file data.
      NFSv4 supports two different approaches for caching file data. The simplest
  approach is when a client opens a file and caches the data it obtains from the
  server as the result of various read operations. In addition, write operations can
  be carried out in the cache as well. When the client closes the file, NFS requires
  that if modifications have taken place, the cached data must be flushed back
  to the server. This approach corresponds to implementing session semantics as
  discussed earlier.
      Once (part of) a file has been cached, a client can keep its data in the cache
  even after closing the file. Also, several clients on the same machine can share a
  single cache. NFS requires that whenever a client opens a previously closed file
  that has been (partly) cached, the client must immediately revalidate the cached
  data. Revalidation takes place by checking when the file was last modified and
  invalidating the cache in case it contains stale data.
      In NFSv4 a server may delegate some of its rights to a client when a file is
  opened. Open delegation takes place when the client machine is allowed to
  locally handle open and close operations from other clients on the same machine.
  Normally, the server is in charge of checking whether opening a file should
  succeed, for example because share reservations need to be considered. With
  open delegation, the client machine is sometimes allowed to make such decisions,
  avoiding the need to contact the server.
      For example, if a server has delegated the opening of a file to a client that
  requested write permissions, file locking requests from other clients on the same
  machine can also be handled locally. The server will still handle locking requests
  from clients on other machines, by simply denying those clients access to the file.
  Note that this scheme does not work in the case of delegating a file to a client that
  requested only read permissions. In that case, whenever another local client wants
  to have write permissions, it will have to contact the server; it is not possible to
  handle the request locally.
      An important consequence of delegating a file to a client is that the server

  needs to be able to recall the delegation, for example, when another client on a
  different machine needs to obtain access rights to the file. Recalling a delegation
  requires that the server can do a callback to the client, as illustrated in Figure 7.34.

Figure 7.34: Using the NFSv4 callback mechanism to recall file delegation.

       A callback is implemented in NFS using its underlying RPC mechanisms.
  Note, however, that callbacks require that the server keeps track of clients to which
  it has delegated a file. Here, we see another example where an NFS server cannot
  be implemented in a stateless manner. Note, however, that the combination of
  delegation and stateful servers may lead to various problems in the presence of
  client and server failures. For example, what should a server do when it had
  delegated a file to a now unresponsive client?
       Clients can also cache attribute values, but are largely left on their own when
  it comes to keeping cached values consistent. In particular, attribute values of the
  same file cached by two different clients may be different unless the clients keep
  these attributes mutually consistent. Modifications to an attribute value should
  be immediately forwarded to the server, thus following a write-through cache
  coherence policy.
       A similar approach is followed for caching file handles (or rather, the name-
  to-file handle mapping) and directories. To mitigate the effects of inconsistencies,
  NFS uses leases on cached attributes, file handles, and directories. After some
  time has elapsed, cache entries are thus automatically invalidated and revalidation
  is needed before they are used again.

7.5.4      Implementing continuous consistency
As part of their work on continuous consistency, Yu and Vahdat [2000] have
developed a number of protocols to tackle the three forms of continuous
consistency. In the following, we briefly consider a number of solutions,
omitting details for clarity.

Bounding numerical deviation
We first concentrate on one solution for keeping the numerical deviation
within bounds. Again, our purpose is not to go into all the details for each
protocol, but rather to give the general idea. Details for bounding numerical
deviation can be found in [Yu and Vahdat, 2000].

    We concentrate on writes to a single data item x. Each write W(x) has an
associated value that represents the numerical value by which x is updated,
denoted as val(W(x)), or simply val(W). For simplicity, we assume that
val(W) > 0. Each write W is initially submitted to one out of the N available
replica servers, in which case that server becomes the write’s origin, denoted
as origin(W). If we consider the system at a specific moment we will see
several submitted writes that still need to be propagated to all servers. To this
end, each server Si will keep track of a log Li of writes that it has performed
on its own local copy of x.
    Let TW [i, j] be the effect of performing the writes executed by server Si
that originated from server Sj :
              TW [i, j] = ∑{val(W)|origin(W) = Sj and W ∈ Li }
Note that TW [i, i ] represents the aggregated writes submitted to Si . Our
goal is for any time t, to let the current value vi of x at server Si deviate
within bounds from the actual value v of x. This actual value is completely
determined by all submitted writes. That is, if v0 is the initial value of x, then
                                         N
                              v = v0 + ∑ TW [k, k]
                                        k =1
and
                                         N
                              vi = v0 + ∑ TW [i, k]
                                        k =1
Note that vi ≤ v. Let us concentrate only on absolute deviations. In particular,
for every server Si , we associate an upper bound δi such that we need to
enforce:
                                  v − vi ≤ δi
Writes submitted to a server Si will need to be propagated to all other servers.
There are different ways in which this can be done, but typically an epidemic
protocol will allow rapid dissemination of updates. In any case, when a server
Si propagates a write originating from Sj to Sk , the latter will be able to learn
about the value TW [i, j] at the time the write was sent. In other words, Sk can
maintain a view TWk [i, j] of what it believes Si will have as value for TW [i, j].
Obviously,
                      0 ≤ TWk [i, j] ≤ TW [i, j] ≤ TW [ j, j]
The whole idea is that when a server Sk notices that Si has not been staying in
the right pace with the updates that have been submitted to Sk , it forwards
writes from its log to Si . This forwarding effectively advances the view
TWk [i, k ] that Sk has of TW [i, k], making the deviation TW [i, k] − TWk [i, k]
smaller. In particular, Sk advances its view on TW [i, k ] when an application
submits a new write that would increase TW [k, k] − TWk [i, k] beyond δi /( N −
1). We leave it as an exercise to the reader to show that advancement always
ensures that v − vi ≤ δi .

Bounding staleness deviations
There are many ways to keep the staleness of replicas within specified bounds.
One simple approach is to let the server Sk keep a real-time vector clock
RVCk where RVCk [i ] = ti means that Sk has seen all writes that have been
submitted to Si up to time ti . In this case, we assume that each submitted
write is timestamped by its origin server, with ti denoting the time local to Si .
    If the clocks between the replica servers are loosely synchronized, then an
acceptable protocol for bounding staleness would be the following. Whenever
the server Sk notes that tk − RVCk [i ] is about to exceed a specified limit, it
simply starts pulling in writes that originated from Si with a timestamp later
than RVCk [i ].
    Note that in this case, a replica server is responsible for keeping its copy
of x up to date regarding writes that have been issued elsewhere. In contrast,
when maintaining numerical bounds, we followed a push approach by letting
an origin server keep replicas up to date by forwarding writes. The problem
with pushing writes in the case of staleness is that no guarantees can be given
for consistency when it is unknown in advance what the maximal propagation
time will be. This situation is somewhat improved by pulling in updates, as
multiple servers can help to keep a server’s copy of x up to date.

Bounding ordering deviations
Recall that ordering deviations in continuous consistency are caused by the
fact that a replica server tentatively applies updates that have been submitted
to it. As a result, each server will have a local queue of tentative writes for
which the actual order in which they are to be applied to the local copy of
x still needs to be determined. The deviation is bounded by specifying the
maximal length of the queue of tentative writes.
    As a consequence, detecting when ordering consistency needs to be en-
forced is simple: when the length of this local queue exceeds a specified
maximal length. At that point, a server will no longer accept any newly
submitted writes, but will instead attempt to commit tentative writes by nego-
tiating with other servers in which order its writes should be executed. We
thus have to enforce a globally consistent ordering of tentative writes.

7.5.5      Implementing client-centric consistency
For our last topic on consistency protocols, let us draw our attention to imple-
menting client-centric consistency. Implementing client-centric consistency is
relatively straightforward if performance issues are ignored.
    In a naive implementation of client-centric consistency, each write opera-
tion W is assigned a globally unique identifier. Such an identifier is assigned
by the server to which the write had been submitted. We refer to this server
as the origin of W. Then, for each client, we keep track of two sets of writes.

The read set for a client consists of the writes relevant for the read operations
performed by a client. Likewise, the write set consists of the (identifiers of
the) writes performed by the client.
    Monotonic-read consistency is implemented as follows. When a client
wants to perform a read operation at a server, that server is handed the client’s
read set to check whether all the identified writes have taken place locally.
If not, it contacts the other servers to ensure that it is brought up to date
before carrying out the read operation. Alternatively, the read operation is
forwarded to a server where the write operations have already taken place.
After the read operation is performed, the write operations that have taken
place at the selected server and which are relevant for the read operation are
added to the client’s read set.
    Note that it should be possible to determine exactly where the write
operations identified in the read set have taken place. For example, the write
identifier could include the identifier of the server to which the operation was
submitted. That server is required to, for example, log the write operation so
that it can be replayed at another server. In addition, write operations should
be performed in the order they were submitted. Ordering can be achieved by
letting the client generate a globally unique sequence number that is included
in the write identifier. If each data item can be modified only by its owner,
the latter can supply the sequence number.
    Monotonic-write consistency is implemented analogous to monotonic
reads. Whenever a client initiates a new write operation at a server, the
server is handed over the client’s write set. (Again, the size of the set may be
prohibitively large in the face of performance requirements. An alternative
solution is discussed below.) It then ensures that the identified write opera-
tions are performed first and in the correct order. After performing the new
operation, that operation’s write identifier is added to the write set. Note
that bringing the current server up to date with the client’s write set may
introduce a considerable increase in the client’s response time, since the client
then waits for the operation to fully complete.
    Likewise, read-your-writes consistency requires that the server where the
read operation is to be performed has seen all the write operations in the
client’s write set. The writes can simply be fetched from other servers before
the read operation is actually executed, although this may lead to a poor
response time. Alternatively, the client-side software can search for a server
where the identified write operations in the client’s write set have already
been performed.
    Finally, writes-follow-reads consistency can be implemented by first bring-
ing the selected server up to date with the write operations in the client’s read
set, and then later adding the identifier of the write operation to the write set,
along with the identifiers in the read set (which have now become relevant
for the write operation just performed).

  Note 7.10 (Advanced: Improving efficiency)
  It is easy to see that the read set and write set associated with each client can
  become very large. To keep these sets manageable, a client’s read and write
  operations are grouped into sessions. A session is typically associated with an
  application: it is opened when the application starts and is closed when it exits.
  However, sessions may also be associated with applications that are temporarily
  exited, such as user agents for e-mail. Whenever a client closes a session, the sets
  are simply cleared. Of course, if a client opens a session that it never closes, the
  associated read and write sets can still become very large.
       The main problem with a naive implementation lies in the representation of
  the read and write sets. Each set consists of a number of identifiers for write
  operations. Whenever a client forwards a read or write request to a server, a set
  of identifiers is handed to the server as well to see whether all write operations
  relevant to the request have been carried out by that server.
       This information can be more efficiently represented by vector timestamps
  as follows. First, whenever a server accepts a new write operation W, it assigns
  that operation a globally unique identifier along with a timestamp ts(W). A
  subsequent write operation submitted to that server is assigned a higher-valued
  timestamp. Each server Si maintains a vector timestamp WVCi , where WVCi [ j] is
  equal to the timestamp of the most recent write operation originating from Sj that
  has been processed by Si .
       For clarity, assume that for each server, writes from Sj are processed in the
  order that they were submitted. Whenever a client issues a request to perform
  a read or write operation O at a specific server, that server returns its current
  timestamp along with the results of O. Read and write sets are subsequently
  represented by vector timestamps. More specifically, for each session A, we
  construct a vector timestamp SVCA with SVCA [i ] set equal to the maximum
  timestamp of all write operations in A that originate from server Si :

                 SVCA [ j] = max{ts(W)|W ∈ A and origin(W) = Sj }

  In other words, the timestamp of a session always represents the latest write
  operations that have been seen by the applications that are being executed as part
  of that session. The compactness is obtained by representing all observed write
  operations originating from the same server through a single timestamp.
      As an example, suppose a client, as part of session A, logs in at server Si . To
  that end, it passes SVCA to Si . Assume that SVCA [ j] > WVCi [ j]. What this means
  is that Si has not yet seen all the writes originating from Sj that the client has
  seen. Depending on the required consistency, server Si may now have to fetch
  these writes before being able to consistently report back to the client. Once the
  operation has been performed, server Si will return its current timestamp WVCi .
  At that point, SVCA is adjusted to:

                         SVCA [ j] ← max{SVCA [ j], WVCi [ j]}

  Again, we see how vector timestamps can provide an elegant and compact way of
  representing history in a distributed system.

7.6   Example: Caching and replication in the Web
The Web is arguably the largest distributed system ever built. Originating from
a relatively simple client-server architecture, it is now a sophisticated system
consisting of many techniques to ensure stringent performance and availability
requirements. These requirements have led to numerous proposals for caching
and replicating Web content. Where the original schemes (which are still
largely deployed) have been targeted toward supporting static content, much
effort has also been put into supporting dynamic content, that is, supporting
documents that are generated on-the-spot as the result of a request, as well as
those containing scripts and such. An overview of traditional Web caching
and replication is provided by Rabinovich and Spastscheck [2002].
    Client-side caching in the Web generally occurs at two places. In the first
place, most browsers are equipped with a relatively simple caching facility.
Whenever a document is fetched, it is stored in the browser’s cache, from
where it is loaded the next time. In the second place, a client’s site often runs a
Web proxy. A Web proxy accepts requests from local clients and passes these
to Web servers. When a response comes in, the result is passed to the client.
The advantage of this approach is that the proxy can cache the result and
return that result to another client, if necessary. In other words, a Web proxy
can implement a shared cache. With so many documents being generated
on the fly, the server generally provides the document in pieces, instructing
the client to cache only those parts that are not likely to change when the
document is requested a next time.
    In addition to caching at browsers and proxies, ISPs generally also place
caches in their networks. Such schemes are mainly used to reduce network
traffic (which is good for the ISP) and to improve performance (which is
good for end users). However, with multiple caches along the request path
from client to server, there is a risk of increased latencies when caches do not
contain the requested information.

  Note 7.11 (Advanced: Cooperative caching)
  As an alternative to building hierarchical caches, one can also organize caches
  for cooperative deployment, as shown in Figure 7.35. In cooperative caching or
  distributed caching, whenever a cache miss occurs at a Web proxy, the proxy
  first checks a number of neighboring proxies to see if one of them contains the
  requested document. If such a check fails, the proxy forwards the request to the
  Web server responsible for the document. In more traditional settings, this scheme
  is primarily deployed with Web caches belonging to the same organization or
  institution.
       A study by Wolman et al. [1999] shows that cooperative caching may be effec-
  tive for only relatively small groups of clients (in the order of tens of thousands
  of users). However, such groups can also be serviced by using a single proxy
  cache, which is much cheaper in terms of communication and resource usage.

  However, in a study from a decade later, Wendell and Freedman [2011] show that
  in a highly decentralized system, cooperative caching actually turned out to be
  highly effective. These studies do not necessarily contradict each other: in both
  cases, the conclusion is that the effect of cooperative caching depends highly on
  the demands from clients.
      A comparison between hierarchical and cooperative caching by Rodriguez
  et al. [2001] makes clear that there are various trade-offs to make. For example,
  because cooperative caches are generally connected through high-speed links,
  the transmission time needed to fetch a document is much lower than for a
  hierarchical cache. Also, as is to be expected, storage requirements are less strict
  for cooperative caches than hierarchical ones.

                                                   Web
                                                  server
                     3. Forward request
                        to Web server

   1. Look in
      local cache

                    Web             2. Ask neighboring proxy caches             Web
      Cache         proxy                                                       proxy   Cache

            Client Client Client                                        Client Client Client
                                                  Web
      HTTP Get request                            proxy     Cache

                                           Client Client Client

Figure 7.35: The principle of cooperative caching.

    Different cache-consistency protocols have been deployed in the Web.
To guarantee that a document returned from the cache is consistent, some
Web proxies first send a conditional HTTP get request to the server with an
additional If-Modified-Since request header, specifying the last modification
time associated with the cached document. Only if the document has been
changed since that time, will the server return the entire document. Otherwise,
the Web proxy can simply return its cached version to the requesting local
client, which corresponds to a pull-based protocol.
    Unfortunately, this strategy requires that the proxy contacts a server for
each request. To improve performance at the cost of weaker consistency, the
widely used Squid Web proxy [Wessels, 2004] assigns an expiration time Texpire
that depends on how long ago the document was last modified when it is
cached. In particular, if Tlast_modified is the last modification time of a document
(as recorded by its owner), and Tcached is the time it was cached, then

                            Texpire = α( Tcached − Tlast_modified ) + Tcached

with α = 0.2 (this value has been derived from practical experience). Until
Texpire , the document is considered valid, and the proxy will not contact the
server. After the expiration time, the proxy requests the server to send a fresh
copy, unless it had not been modified. We note that Squid also allows the
expiration time to be bounded by a minimum and a maximum time.
    As an alternative to a pull-based protocol is that the server notifies proxies
that a document has been modified by sending an invalidation. The problem
with this approach for Web proxies is that the server may need to keep track
of many proxies, inevitably leading to a scalability problem. However, by
combining leases and invalidations, the state to be maintained at the server
can be kept within acceptable bounds. Note that this state is largely dictated
by the expiration times set for leases: the lower, the less caches a server needs
to keep track of. Nevertheless, invalidation protocols for Web proxy caches are
hardly ever applied. A comparison of Web caching consistency policies can
be found in [Cao and Ozsu, 2002]. Their conclusion is that letting the server
send invalidations can outperform any other method in terms of bandwidth
and perceived client latency, while maintaining cached documents consistent
with those at the origin server.
    Finally, we should also mention that much research has been conducted to
find out what the best cache replacement strategies are. Numerous proposals
exist, but by-and-large, simple replacement strategies such as evicting the
least recently used object work well enough. An in-depth survey of replace-
ment strategies is presented by Podling and Boszormenyi [2003]; Ali et al.
[2011] provide a more recent overview, which also includes Web prefetching
techniques.
    As the importance of the Web continues to increase as a vehicle for organi-
zations to present themselves and to directly interact with end users, we see
a shift between maintaining the content of a Web site and making sure that
the site is easily and continuously accessible. This distinction has paved the
way for Content Delivery Networks (CDN). The main idea underlying these
CDNs is that they act as a Web hosting service, providing an infrastructure
for distributing and replicating the Web documents of multiple sites across
the Internet. The size of the infrastructure can be impressive. As mentioned
before, as of 2022, Akamai is reported to have over 400,000 servers worldwide.
    The sheer size of a CDN requires that hosted documents are automatically
distributed and replicated. In most cases, a large-scale CDN is organized
similar to a feedback-control loop, as shown in Figure 7.36 and which is
described extensively in [Sivasubramanian et al., 2004b].
    There are essentially three different kinds of aspects related to replication
in Web hosting systems: metric estimation, adaptation triggering, and taking
appropriate measures. The latter can be subdivided into replica placement de-
cisions, consistency enforcement, and client-request routing. In the following,
we briefly pay attention to each of these.

Figure 7.36: The general organization of a CDN as a feedback-control system.

    An interesting aspect of CDNs is that they need to make a trade-off between
many aspects when it comes to hosting replicated content. For example, access
times for a document may be optimal if a document is massively replicated,
but at the same time this incurs a financial cost, as well as a cost in terms of
bandwidth usage for disseminating updates. By and large, there are many
proposals for estimating how well a CDN is performing. These proposals can
be grouped into several classes.
    First, there are latency metrics, by which the time is measured for an action,
for example, fetching a document, to take place. Trivial as this may seem,
estimating latencies becomes difficult when, for example, a process deciding
on the placement of replicas needs to know the delay between a client and
some remote server. Typically, an algorithm for globally positioning nodes as
discussed in Section 5.7.3 will need to be deployed.
    Instead of estimating latency, it may be more important to measure the
available bandwidth between two nodes. This information is particularly
important when large documents have to be transferred, as in that case, the
responsiveness of the system is largely dictated by the time that a document
can be transferred. There are various tools for measuring available bandwidth,
but in all cases it turns out that accurate measurements can be difficult to
attain (see also Strauss et al. [2003], Shriram and Kaur [2007], Chaudhari and
Biradar [2015], and Atxutegi et al. [2016]).
    Another class consists of spatial metrics, which mainly consist of measuring
the distance between nodes in terms of the number of network-level routing
hops, or hops between autonomous systems. Again, determining the number
of hops between two arbitrary nodes can be very difficult, and may also not
even correlate with latency [Huffaker et al., 2002]. Moreover, simply looking
at routing tables is not going to work when low-level techniques such as
Multi-Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) are deployed. MPLS circumvents

network-level routing by using virtual-circuit techniques to immediately and
efficiently forward packets to their destination (see also Guichard et al. [2005]).
Packets may thus follow entirely different routes than advertised in the tables
of network-level routers.
    A third class is formed by network usage metrics, which most often entails
consumed bandwidth. Computing consumed bandwidth in terms of the
number of bytes to transfer is generally easy. However, to do this correctly,
we need to consider how often the document is read, how often it is updated,
and how often it is replicated.
    Consistency metrics tell us to what extent a replica is deviating from its mas-
ter copy. We already discussed extensively how consistency can be measured
in the context of continuous consistency [Yu and Vahdat, 2002].
    Finally, financial metrics form another class for measuring how well a CDN
is doing. Although not technical at all, considering that most CDN operate
on a commercial basis, it is clear that often financial metrics will be decisive.
Moreover, the financial metrics are closely related to the actual infrastructure of
the Internet. For example, most commercial CDNs place servers at the edge of
the Internet, meaning that they hire capacity from ISPs directly servicing end
users. At this point, business models become intertwined with technological
issues, an area that is not at all well understood. There is only few material
available on the relation between financial performance and technological
issues [Janiga et al., 2001].
    From these examples, it should become clear that simply measuring the
performance of a CDN, or even estimating its performance, may by itself be
an extremely complex task. In practice, for commercial CDNs the issue that
really counts is whether they can meet the service-level agreements that have
been made with customers. These agreements are often formulated simply in
terms of how quickly customers are to be serviced. It is then up to the CDN
to make sure that these agreements are met.
    Another question that needs to be addressed is when and how adaptations
are to be triggered. A simple model is to periodically estimate metrics and
subsequently take measures as needed. This approach is often seen in practice.
Special processes located at the servers collect information and periodically
check for changes.
    An interesting aspect of this scheme is the simplicity by which consistency
of documents can be enforced. Clearly, whenever a main document is changed,
a client will always be able to fetch it from the origin server. In the case of
embedded documents, a different approach needs to be followed as these
documents are, in principle, fetched from a nearby replica server. To this end,
a URL for an embedded document not only refers to a special host name that
eventually leads to a CDN DNS server, but also contains a unique identifier
that is changed every time the embedded document changes. In effect, this
identifier changes the name of the embedded document. As a consequence,

              Edge-server side                                          Origin-server side

   Client                                      query
                Server                                                             Server

                                             response

   cache                         copy
                                        full/partial data replication

            cache                            query templates                          database
                     Schema                                              Schema

Figure 7.37: Alternatives for caching and replication with Web applications.

when the client is redirected to a specific CDN server, that server will not find
the named document in its cache and will thus fetch it from the origin server.
The old document will eventually be evicted from the server’s cache as it is
no longer referenced.
    Up to this point, we have mainly concentrated on caching and replicating
static Web content. In practice, we see that the Web is increasingly offering
more dynamically generated content, but that it is also expanding toward
offering services that can be called by remote applications. Also in these situa-
tions we see that caching and replication can help considerably in improving
the overall performance, although the methods to reach such improvements
are more subtle than what we discussed so far (see also Conti et al. [2005]).
    When considering improving performance of Web applications through
caching and replication, matters are complicated by the fact that several so-
lutions can be deployed, with no single one standing out as the best. Let us
consider the edge-server situation as sketched in Figure 7.37 (see also Sivasub-
ramanian et al. [2007]). In this case, we assume a CDN in which each hosted
site has an origin server that acts as the authoritative site for all read and
update operations. An edge server is used to handle client requests, and has
the ability to store (partial) information as also kept at an origin server.
    Recall that in an edge-server architecture, Web clients request data through
an edge server, which, in turn, gets its information from the origin server
associated with the specific Website referred to by the client. As also shown in
Figure 7.37 we assume that the origin server consists of a database from which
responses are dynamically created. Although we have shown only a single
Web server, it is common to organize each server according to a multitiered
architecture, as we discussed before. An edge server can now be roughly
organized along the following lines.

    First, to improve performance, we can decide to apply full replication of
the data stored at the origin server. This scheme works well whenever the
update ratio is low and when queries require an extensive database search.
As mentioned above, we assume that all updates are carried out at the origin
server, which takes responsibility for keeping the replicas and the edge servers
in a consistent state. Read operations can thus take place at the edge servers.
Here, we see that replicating for performance will fail when the update ratio
is high, as each update will incur communication over a wide-area network to
bring the replicas into a consistent state. As shown by Sivasubramanian et al.
[2004a], the read-to-update ratio is the determining factor to what extent the
origin database in a wide-area setting should be replicated.
    Another case for full replication is when queries are generally complex. In
the case of a relational database, this means that a query requires that multiple
tables need to be searched and processed, as is generally the case with a join
operation. Opposed to complex queries are simple ones that generally require
access to only a single table to produce a response. In the latter case, partial
replication by which only a subset of the data is stored at the edge server may
suffice.
    An alternative to partial replication is to make use of content-aware caches.
The basic idea in this case is that an edge server maintains a local database
that is now tailored to the type of queries that can be handled at the origin
server. To explain, in a full-fledged database system a query will operate
on a database in which the data has been organized into tables such that,
for example, redundancy is minimized. Such databases are also said to be
normalized.
    In such databases, any query that adheres to the data schema can, in
principle, be processed, although perhaps at considerable costs. With content-
aware caches, an edge server maintains a database that is organized according
to the structure of queries. What this means is that queries are assumed to
adhere to a limited number of templates, effectively meaning that the different
kinds of queries that can be processed is restricted. In these cases, whenever
a query is received, the edge server matches the query against the available
templates, and subsequently looks in its local database to compose a response,
if possible. If the requested data is not available, the query is forwarded to
the origin server, after which the response is cached before returning it to the
client.
    In effect, what the edge server is doing is checking whether a query can be
answered with the data that is stored locally. This is also referred to as a query
containment check. Note that such data was stored locally as responses to
previously issued queries. This approach works best when queries tend to be
repeated.
    Part of the complexity of content-aware caching comes from the fact
that the data at the edge server needs to be kept consistent. To this end,

the origin server needs to know which records are associated with which
templates, so that any update of a record, or any update of a table, can be
properly addressed by, for example, sending an invalidation message to the
appropriate edge servers. Another source of complexity comes from the fact
that queries still need to be processed at edge servers. In other words, there is
nonnegligible computational power needed to handle queries. Considering
that databases often form a performance bottleneck in Web servers, alternative
solutions may be needed. Finally, caching results from queries that span
multiple tables (i.e., when queries are complex) such that a query containment
check can be carried out effectively is not trivial. The reason is that the
organization of the results may be very different from the organization of the
tables on which the query operated.
    These observations lead us to a third solution, namely content-blind
caching. The idea of content-blind caching is simple: when a client submits
a query to an edge server, the server first computes a unique hash value for
that query. Using this hash value, it subsequently looks in its cache whether it
has processed this query before. If not, the query is forwarded to the origin
and the result is cached before returning it to the client. If the query had been
processed before, the previously cached result is returned to the client.
    The main advantage of this scheme is the reduced computational effort
that is required from an edge server in comparison to the database approaches
described above. However, content-blind caching can be wasteful in terms of
storage, as the caches may contain much more redundant data in comparison
to content-aware caching or database replication. Note that such redundancy
also complicates the process of keeping the cache up-to-date, as the origin
server may need to keep an accurate account of which updates can potentially
affect cached query results. These problems can be alleviated when assuming
that queries can match only a limited set of predefined templates, as we
discussed above.

7.7    Summary
There are primarily two reasons for replicating data: improving the reliability
of a distributed system and improving performance. Replication introduces
a consistency problem: whenever a replica is updated, that replica becomes
different from the others. To keep replicas consistent, we need to propagate
updates in such a way that temporary inconsistencies are not noticed. Unfor-
tunately, doing so may severely degrade performance, especially in large-scale
distributed systems.
    The only solution to this problem is to relax consistency somewhat. Dif-
ferent consistency models exist. For continuous consistency, the goal is to
set bounds to numerical deviation between replicas, staleness deviation, and
deviations in the ordering of operations.

    Numerical deviation refers to the value by which replicas may be different.
This type of deviation is highly application dependent, but can, for example,
be used in replication of stocks. Staleness deviation refers to the time by
which a replica is still considered to be consistent, despite that updates may
have taken place some time ago. Staleness deviation is often used for Web
caches. Finally, ordering deviation refers to the maximum number of tentative
writes that may be outstanding at any server without having synchronized
with the other replica servers.
    Consistent ordering of operations has since long formed the basis for
many consistency models. Many variations exist, but only a few seem to
prevail among application developers. Sequential consistency essentially
provides the semantics that programmers expect in concurrent programming:
all write operations are seen by everyone in the same order. Less used,
but still relevant, is causal consistency, which reflects that operations that
are potentially dependent on each other are carried out in the order of that
dependency.
    Weaker consistency models consider series of read and write operations.
In particular, they assume that each series is appropriately “bracketed” by ac-
companying operations on synchronization variables, such as locks. Although
this requires explicit effort from programmers, these models are generally
easier to implement efficiently than, for example, pure sequential consistency.
    As opposed to these data-centric models, researchers in the field of dis-
tributed databases for mobile users have defined a number of client-centric
consistency models. Such models do not consider the fact that data may be
shared by several users, but instead, concentrate on the consistency that an
individual client should be offered. The underlying assumption is that a client
connects to different replicas in the course of time, but that such differences
should be made transparent. In essence, client-centric consistency models
ensure that whenever a client connects to a new replica, that replica is brought
up to date with the data that had been manipulated by that client before, and
which may reside at other replica sites.
    To propagate updates, different techniques can be applied. A distinction
needs to be made concerning what is exactly propagated, to where updates are
propagated, and by whom propagation is initiated. We can decide to propagate
notifications, operations, or state. Likewise, not every replica always needs to
be updated immediately. Which replica is updated at which time depends
on the distribution protocol. Finally, a choice can be made whether updates
are pushed to other replicas, or that a replica pulls in updates from another
replica.
    Consistency protocols describe specific implementations of consistency
models. Regarding sequential consistency and its variants, a distinction can
be made between primary-based protocols and replicated-write protocols. In
primary-based protocols, all update operations are forwarded to a primary

copy that subsequently ensures the update is properly ordered and forwarded.
In replicated-write protocols, an update is forwarded to several replicas at the
same time. In that case, correctly ordering operations often becomes more
difficult.
    We pay separate attention to caching and replication in the Web and,
related, content delivery networks. As it turns out, using existing servers and
services, much of the techniques discussed before can be readily implemented
using appropriate redirection techniques. Particularly challenging is caching
content when databases are involved, as in those cases, much of what a
Web server returns is dynamically generated. However, even in those cases,
by carefully administrating what has already been cached at the edge, it is
possible to invent highly efficient and effective caching schemes.

