   08

  FAULT
TOLERANCE

    A characteristic feature of distributed systems that distinguishes them from
single-machine systems is the notion of partial failure: part of the system is
failing while the remaining part continues to operate, and seemingly correctly.
An important goal in distributed-systems design is to construct the system
in such a way that it can automatically recover from partial failures without
seriously affecting the overall performance. In particular, whenever a failure
occurs, the system should continue to operate in an acceptable way while
repairs are being made. In other words, a distributed system is expected to be
fault tolerant.
    In this chapter, we take a closer look at techniques to achieve fault toler-
ance. After providing some general background, we will first look at process
resilience through process groups. In this case, multiple identical processes
cooperate, providing the appearance of a single logical process, to ensure that
one or more of them can fail without a client noticing. A specifically difficult
point in process groups is reaching consensus among the group members
on which a client-requested operation is to perform. By now, Paxos is a
commonly adopted, yet relatively intricate algorithm. We take two approaches
in explaining Paxos. One that builds on how the protocol can be logically
viewed as it is now, and one that gradually builds it up from scratch. The latter
may help to understand many of its design decisions. We also pay extensive
attention to the case in which servers may not just crash, but actually produce
faulty results that cannot be immediately recognized as being faulty.
    Achieving fault tolerance and reliable communication are strongly related.
Next to reliable client-server communication, we pay attention to reliable
group communication and notably atomic multicasting. In the latter case,
a message is delivered to all nonfaulty processes in a group, or to none.
Having atomic multicasting makes development of fault-tolerant solutions
much easier.
    Atomicity is a property that is important in many applications. In this
chapter, we look into what are known as distributed commit protocols by
which a group of processes is conducted to either jointly commit their local
work, or collectively abort and return to a previous system state.
    Finally, we will examine how to recover from a failure. In particular, we
consider when and how the state of a distributed system should be saved to
allow recovery to that state later on.

8.1    Introduction to fault tolerance

Fault tolerance has been subject to much research in computer science. In
this section, we start with presenting the basic concepts related to processing
failures, followed by a discussion of failure models. The key technique for
handling failures is redundancy, which is also discussed. For more general

information on fault tolerance in distributed systems, see, for example Jalote
[1994]; Shooman [2002] or Koren and Krishna [2007].

8.1.1   Basic concepts
To understand the role of fault tolerance in distributed systems, we first need
to take a closer look at what it actually means for a distributed system to
tolerate faults. Being fault tolerant is strongly related to what are called
dependable systems. Dependability is a term that covers a number of useful
requirements for distributed systems, including the following [Kopetz and
Verissimo, 1993]:

   • Availability
   • Reliability
   • Safety
   • Maintainability

    Availability is defined as the property that a system is ready to be used
immediately. In general, it refers to the probability that the system is operating
correctly at any given moment, and is available to perform its functions on
behalf of its users. In other words, a highly available system is one that will
most likely be working at a given instant in time.
    Reliability refers to the property that a system can run continuously without
failure. In contrast to availability, reliability is defined in terms of a time
interval, instead of an instant in time. A highly reliable system is one that will
most likely continue to work without interruption during a relatively long
period of time. This is a subtle but important difference when compared to
availability. If a system goes down on average for one, seemingly random
millisecond every hour, it has an availability of more than 99.9999 percent,
but is still unreliable. Similarly, a system that never crashes but is shut down
for two specific weeks every August, has high reliability but only 96 percent
availability. The two are not the same.
    Safety refers to the situation that when a system temporarily fails to
operate correctly, no catastrophic event happens. For example, many process-
control systems, such as those used for controlling nuclear power plants or
sending people into space, are required to provide a high degree of safety. If
such control systems temporarily fail for only a very brief moment, the effects
could be disastrous. Many examples from the past (and probably many more
yet to come) show how hard it is to build safe systems.
    Finally, maintainability refers to how easily a failed system can be repaired.
A highly maintainable system may also show a high degree of availability,
especially if failures can be detected and repaired automatically. However,
as we shall see later in this chapter, automatically recovering from failures is
easier said than done.

  Note 8.1 (More information: Traditional metrics)
  We can be a bit more precise when it comes to describing availability and reliability.
  Formally, the availability A(t) of a component in the time interval [0, t) is defined
  as the average fraction of time that the component has been functioning correctly
  during that interval. The long-term availability A of a component is defined as
  A ( ∞ ).
      Likewise, the reliability R(t) of a component in the time interval [0, t) is
  formally defined as the conditional probability that it has been functioning cor-
  rectly during that interval, given that it was functioning correctly at time T = 0.
  Following Pradhan [1996], to establish R(t) we consider a system of N identical
  components. Let N0 (t) denote the number of correctly operating components at
  time t and N1 (t) the number of failed components. Then, clearly,

                              N0 (t)     N (t)        N0 (t)
                     R(t) =          = 1− 1    =
                               N          N      N0 (t) + N1 (t)

  The rate at which components are failing can be expressed as the derivative
  dN1 (t)/dt. Dividing this by the number of correctly operating components at
  time t gives us the failure rate function z(t):

                                            1 dN1 (t)
                                  z(t) =
                                           N0 (t) dt

  From
                                  dR(t)    1 dN1 (t)
                                        =−
                                   dt      N dt
  it follows that

                          1 dN1 (t)     N dR(t)      1 dR(t)
                z(t) =              =−           =−
                         N0 (t) dt     N0 (t) dt    R(t) dt

  If we make the simplifying assumption that a component does not age (and thus
  essentially has no wear-out phase), its failure rate will be constant, i.e., z(t) = z,
  implying that
                                    dR(t)
                                          = −zR(t)
                                     dt
  Because R(0) = 1, we obtain
                                      R(t) = e−zt

  In other words, if we ignore aging of a component, we see that a constant failure
  rate leads to a reliability following an exponential distribution, having the form
  shown in Figure 8.1.

Figure 8.1: The reliability of a component having a constant failure rate.

  Traditionally, fault-tolerance has been related to the following three metrics:
     • Mean Time To Failure (MTTF): The average time until a component fails.
     • Mean Time To Repair (MTTR): The average time needed to repair a
       component.
     • Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF): Simply MTTF + MTTR.
  Note that
                                MTTF              MTTF
                           A=           =
                                MTBF        MTTF + MTTR
  Also, these metrics make sense only if we have an accurate notion of what a failure
  actually is. As we will encounter later, identifying the occurrence of a failure may
  actually not be so obvious.

    Often, dependable systems are also required to provide a high degree of
security, especially when it comes to issues such as integrity. We will discuss
security extensively in the next chapter.
    A system is said to fail when it does not meet its promises. In particular,
if a distributed system is designed to provide its users with a number of
services, the system has failed when one or more of those services cannot be
(completely) provided. An error is a part of a system’s state that may lead
to a failure. For example, when transmitting packets across a network, it is
to be expected that some packets have been damaged when they arrive at
the receiver. Damaged in this context means that the receiver may incorrectly
sense a bit value (e.g., reading a 1 instead of a 0), or may even be unable to
detect that something has arrived.
    The cause of an error is called a fault. Clearly, finding out what caused an
error is important. For example, a wrong or bad transmission medium may
easily cause packets to be damaged. In this case, it is relatively easy to remove
the fault. However, transmission errors may also be caused by bad weather
conditions, such as in wireless networks. Changing the weather to reduce or
prevent errors is a bit trickier.
    As another example, a crashed program is clearly a failure, which may
have happened because the program entered a branch of code containing
a programming bug (i.e., a programming error). The cause of that bug is

typically a programmer. In other words, the programmer is the cause of the
error (programming bug), in turn leading to a failure (a crashed program).
    Building dependable systems closely relates to controlling faults. As
explained by Avizienis et al. [2004], a distinction can be made between pre-
venting, tolerating, removing, and forecasting faults. For our purposes, the
most important issue is fault tolerance, meaning that a system can provide
its services even in the presence of faults. For example, by applying error-
correcting codes for transmitting packets, it is possible to tolerate, to a certain
extent, relatively poor transmission lines and reducing the probability that an
error (a damaged packet) may lead to a failure.
    Faults are generally classified as transient, intermittent, or permanent.
Transient faults occur once and then disappear. If the operation is repeated,
the fault goes away. A bird flying through the beam of a microwave transmitter
may cause lost bits on some network. If the transmission times out and is
retried, it will probably work the second time.
    An intermittent fault occurs, then vanishes of its own accord, then reap-
pears, and so on. A loose contact on a connector will often cause an inter-
mittent fault. Intermittent faults cause a great deal of aggravation because
they are difficult to diagnose. Typically, when the fault doctor shows up, the
system works fine.
    A permanent fault is one that continues to exist until the faulty compo-
nent is replaced. Burnt-out chips, software bugs, and disk-head crashes are
examples of permanent faults.

8.1.2      Failure models
A system that fails is not adequately providing the services it was designed for.
If we consider a distributed system as a collection of servers that communicate
with one another and with their clients, not adequately providing services
means that servers, communication channels, or possibly both, are not doing
what they are supposed to do. However, a malfunctioning server itself may
not always be the fault we are looking for. If such a server depends on other
servers to adequately provide its services, the cause of an error may need to
be searched for somewhere else.
    Such dependency relations appear in abundance in distributed systems. A
failing disk may make life difficult for a file server that is designed to provide
a highly available file system. If such a file server is part of a distributed
database, the proper working of the entire database may be at stake, as only
part of its data may be accessible.
    To get a better grasp on how serious a failure actually is, several classifica-
tion schemes have been developed. One such scheme is shown in Figure 8.2,
and is based on schemes described by Cristian [1991] and Hadzilacos and
Toueg [1993].

   Type of failure               Description of server’s behavior
   Crash failure                 Halts, but is working correctly until it halts
   Omission failure              Fails to respond to incoming requests
      Receive omission           Fails to receive incoming messages
      Send omission              Fails to send messages
   Timing failure                Response lies outside a specified time interval
   Response failure              Response is incorrect
      Value failure              The value of the response is wrong
      State-transition failure   Deviates from the correct flow of control
   Arbitrary failure             May produce arbitrary responses at arbitrary times

Figure 8.2: Different types of failures.

    A crash failure occurs when a server prematurely halts, but was working
correctly until it stopped. An important aspect of crash failures is that once
the server has halted, nothing is heard from it anymore. A typical example of
a crash failure is an operating system that comes to a grinding halt, and for
which there is only one solution: reboot it. Many personal computer systems
(be they desktop computers or laptops) suffer from crash failures so often that
people have come to expect them to be normal. Consequently, moving the
reset button, for example, from the back of a cabinet to the front was done
for good reason. Perhaps one day it can be moved to the back again, or even
removed altogether.
    An omission failure occurs when a server fails to respond to a request.
Several things might go wrong. In the case of a receive-omission failure,
possibly the server never got the request in the first place. Note that it may
well be the case that the connection between a client and a server has been
correctly established, but that there was no thread listening for incoming
requests. Also, a receive-omission failure will generally not affect the current
state of the server, as the server is unaware of any message sent to it.
    Likewise, a send-omission failure happens when the server has done its
work, but somehow fails in sending a response. Such a failure may happen,
for example, when a send buffer overflows while the server was not prepared
for such a situation. Note that, in contrast to a receive-omission failure, the
server may now be in a state reflecting that it has just completed a service for
the client. As a consequence, if the sending of its response fails, the server has
to be prepared for the client to reissue its previous request.
    Other types of omission failures not related to communication may be
caused by software errors such as infinite loops or improper memory manage-
ment, by which the server is said to “hang.”
    Another class of failures is related to timing. Timing failures occur when
the response lies outside a specified real-time interval. For example, in the
case of streaming videos, providing data too soon may easily cause trouble for
a recipient if there is not enough buffer space to hold all the incoming data.

More common, however, is that a server responds too late, in which case a
performance failure is said to occur.
    A serious type of failure is a response failure, by which the server’s
response is simply incorrect. Two kinds of response failures may happen.
In the case of a value failure, a server simply provides the wrong reply to a
request. For example, a search engine that systematically returns Web pages
not related to any of the search terms used, has failed.
    The other type of response failure is known as a state-transition failure.
This kind of failure happens when the server reacts unexpectedly to an
incoming request. For example, if a server receives a message it cannot
recognize, a state-transition failure happens if no measures have been taken
to handle such messages. In particular, a faulty server may incorrectly take
default actions it should never have initiated.
    The most serious are arbitrary failures, also known as Byzantine failures.
In effect, when arbitrary failures occur, clients should be prepared for the
worst. In particular, a server may be producing output it should never have
produced, but which cannot be detected as being incorrect. Byzantine failures
were first analyzed by Pease et al. [1980] and Lamport et al. [1982]. We return
to such failures below.

  Note 8.2 (More information: Omission and commission failures)
  It has become somewhat of a habit to associate the occurrence of Byzantine
  failures with maliciously operating processes. The term “Byzantine” refers to the
  Byzantine Empire, a time (330–1453) and place (the Balkans and modern Turkey)
  in which endless conspiracies, intrigue, and untruthfulness were alleged to be
  common in ruling circles.
      However, it may not be possible to detect whether an act was actually benign or
  malicious. Is a networked computer running a poorly engineered operating system
  that adversely affects the performance of other computers acting maliciously? In
  this sense, it is better to make the following distinction, which effectively excludes
  judgment:
      • An omission failure occurs when a component fails to take an action that
        it should have taken.
      • A commission failure occurs when a component takes an action that it
        should not have taken.
  This difference, introduced by Mohan et al. [1983], also illustrates that a separation
  between dependability and security may at times be pretty difficult to make.

   Many of the aforementioned cases deal with the situation that a process
P no longer perceives any actions from another process Q. However, can P
conclude that Q has indeed come to a halt? To answer this question, we need
to make a distinction between two types of distributed systems:

   • In an asynchronous system, no assumptions about process execution
     speeds or message delivery times are made. The consequence is that
     when process P no longer perceives any actions from Q, it cannot
     conclude that Q crashed. Instead, it may just be slow, or its messages
     may have been lost.
   • In a synchronous system, process execution speeds and message-delivery
     times are bounded. This also means that when Q shows no more activity
     when it is expected to do so, process P can rightfully conclude that Q
     has crashed.

Unfortunately, pure synchronous systems exist only in theory. On the other
hand, simply stating that every distributed system is asynchronous also does
not do justice to what we see in practice, and we would be overly pessimistic in
designing distributed systems under the assumption that they are necessarily
asynchronous. Instead, it is more realistic to assume that a distributed system
is partially synchronous: most of the time it behaves as a synchronous system,
yet there is no bound on the time that it behaves in an asynchronous fashion.
In other words, asynchronous behavior is an exception, meaning that we can
normally use timeouts to conclude that a process has indeed crashed, but that
occasionally such a conclusion is false. In practice, this means that we will
have to design fault-tolerant solutions that can withstand incorrectly detecting
that a process halted.
    In this context, halting failures can be classified as follows, from the least
to the most severe (see also Cachin et al. [2011]). We let process P attempt to
detect that process Q has failed.

   • Fail-stop failures refer to crash failures that can be reliably detected.
     This may occur when assuming nonfaulty communication links and
     when the failure-detecting process P can place a worst-case delay on
     responses from Q.
   • Fail-noisy failures are like fail-stop failures, except that P will only
     eventually come to the correct conclusion that Q has crashed. This means
     that there may be some a priori unknown time in which P’s detections
     of the behavior of Q are unreliable.
   • When dealing with fail-silent failures, we assume that communication
     links are nonfaulty, but that process P cannot distinguish crash failures
     from omission failures.
   • Fail-safe failures cover the case of dealing with arbitrary failures by
     process Q, yet these failures are benign: they cannot do any harm.
   • Finally, when dealing with fail-arbitrary failures, Q may fail in any
     possible way; failures may be unobservable in addition to being harmful
     to the otherwise correct behavior of other processes.

Clearly, having to deal with fail-arbitrary failures is the worst that can happen.
As we shall discuss shortly, we can design distributed systems in such a way
that they can even tolerate these types of failures.

8.1.3      Failure masking by redundancy
If a system is to be fault tolerant, the best it can do is to try to hide the
occurrence of failures from other processes. The key technique for masking
faults is to use redundancy. Three kinds are possible: information redundancy,
time redundancy, and physical redundancy (see also Johnson [1995]). With
information redundancy, extra bits are added to allow recovery from garbled
bits. For example, a Hamming code can be added to transmitted data to
recover from noise on the transmission line.
    With time redundancy, an action is performed, and then, if need be, it is
performed again. Transactions use this approach. If a transaction aborts, it
can be redone with no harm because nothing has yet been finalized. Another
well-known example is retransmitting a request to a server when lacking an
expected response. Time redundancy is especially helpful when the faults are
transient or intermittent.
    With physical redundancy, extra equipment or processes are added to
make it possible for the system as a whole to tolerate the loss or malfunction-
ing of some components. Physical redundancy can thus be done either in
hardware or in software. For example, extra processes can be added to the
system, so that if a few of them crash, the system can still function correctly. In
other words, by replicating processes, a high degree of fault tolerance may be
achieved. We return to this type of software redundancy later in this chapter.

  Note 8.3 (More information: Triple modular redundancy)
  It is illustrative to see how redundancy has been applied in the design of electronic
  devices. Consider, for example, the circuit of Figure 8.3(a). Here signals pass
  through devices A, B, and C, in sequence. If one of them is faulty, the final result
  will probably be incorrect.
       In Figure 8.3(b), each device is replicated three times. Following each stage
  in the circuit is a triplicated voter. Each voter is a circuit that has three inputs
  and one output. If two or three of the inputs are the same, the output is equal to
  that input. If all three inputs are different, the output is undefined. This kind of
  design is known as triple modular redundancy (TMR).
       Suppose that element A2 fails. Each of the voters, V1, V2, and V3 gets two
  good (identical) inputs and one rogue input, and each of them outputs the correct
  value to the second stage. In essence, the effect of A2 failing is completely masked
  so that the inputs to B1, B2, and B3 are the same as they would have been had no
  fault occurred.

                                           (a)

                                           (b)

Figure 8.3: Triple modular redundancy.

       Now consider what happens if B3 and C1 are also faulty, in addition to A2.
  These effects are also masked, so the three final outputs are still correct.
       At first, it may not be obvious why three voters are needed at each stage.
  After all, one voter could also detect and pass the majority view. However, a
  voter is also a component and can be faulty. Suppose, for example, that voter
  V1 malfunctions. The input to B1 will then be wrong, but as long as everything
  else works, B2 and B3 will produce the same output and V4, V5, and V6 will all
  produce the correct result into stage three. A fault in V1 is effectively no different
  from a fault in B1. In both cases B1 produces incorrect output, but in both cases,
  it is voted down later, and the final result is still correct.
       Although not all fault-tolerant distributed systems use TMR, the technique is
  very general, and should give a clear feeling for what a fault-tolerant system is, as
  opposed to a system whose individual components are highly reliable but whose
  organization cannot tolerate faults (i.e., operate correctly even in the presence of
  faulty components). Of course, TMR can be applied recursively, for example, to
  make a chip highly reliable by using TMR inside it, unknown to the designers
  who use the chip, possibly in their own circuit containing multiple copies of the
  chips along with voters.

8.2   Process resilience
Now that the basic issues of fault tolerance have been discussed, let us
concentrate on how fault tolerance can actually be achieved in distributed
systems. The first topic we discuss is protection against process failures,
which is achieved by replicating processes into groups. In the following pages,
we consider the general design issues of process groups and discuss what
a fault-tolerant group actually is. Also, we look at how to reach consensus
within a process group when one or more of its members cannot be trusted to
give correct answers.

8.2.1      Resilience by process groups
The key approach to tolerating a faulty process is to organize several identical
processes into a group. The key property that all groups have is that when a
message is sent to the group itself, all members of the group receive it. In this
way, if one process in a group fails, hopefully some other process can take
over for it [Guerraoui and Schiper, 1997].
    Process groups may be dynamic. New groups can be created, and old
groups can be destroyed. A process can join a group or leave one during
system operation. A process can be a member of several groups at the same
time. Consequently, mechanisms are required for managing groups and group
membership.
    The purpose of introducing groups is to allow a process to deal with
collections of other processes as a single abstraction. Thus, a process P can
send a message to a group Q = {Q1 , . . . , QN } of servers without having to
know who they are, how many there are, or where they are, which may
change from one call to the next. To P, the group Q appears to be a single,
logical process.

Group organization
An important distinction between different groups has to do with their internal
structure. In some groups, all processes are equal, i.e., we have a flat group.
There is no distinctive leader and all decisions are made collectively. Typically,
many peer-to-peer systems operate in this way. An alternative organization
is that of a hierarchical group. For example, one process is the coordinator
and all the others are workers. In this model, when a request for work is
generated, either by an external client or by one of the workers, it is sent to
the coordinator. The coordinator then decides which worker is best suited to
carry it out, and forwards it there. More complex hierarchies are also possible,
of course. The Domain Name System can be argued to operate as a (indeed,
quite complex) hierarchical group. Simpler organizations include primary-
based backup schemes, as we discussed in Section 7.5.1. These communication
patterns within groups are illustrated in Figure 8.4.
    Each of these organizations has its own advantages and disadvantages.
The flat group is symmetrical and has no single point of failure. If one of
the processes crashes, the group simply becomes smaller, but can otherwise
continue. A disadvantage is that decision-making may be more complicated.
For example, to decide anything, a vote often has to be taken, incurring some
delay and overhead.
    The hierarchical group has the opposite properties. Loss of the coordinator
brings the entire group to a grinding halt, but as long as it is running, it
can make decisions without bothering everyone else. In practice, when the
coordinator in a hierarchical group fails, its role will need to be taken over and

               (a)                                     (b)

Figure 8.4: Communication in a (a) flat group and in a (b) hierarchical group.

one of the workers is elected as new coordinator. We discussed leader-election
algorithms in Section 5.4.

Membership management
When group communication is present, some method is required for creating
and deleting groups, as well as for allowing processes to join and leave groups.
One possible approach is to have a group server to which all these requests
can be sent. The group server can then maintain a complete database of all the
groups and their exact membership. This method is straightforward, efficient,
and fairly easy to implement. Unfortunately, it shares a major disadvantage
with many (physically) centralized solutions: a single point of failure. If the
group server crashes, group management ceases to exist. Probably most or
all groups will have to be reconstructed from scratch, possibly terminating
whatever work was going on.
    The opposite approach is to manage group membership in a distributed
way. For example, if (reliable) multicasting is available, an outsider can send a
message to all group members announcing its wish to join the group.
    Ideally, to leave a group, a member just sends a goodbye message to
everyone. In the context of fault tolerance, assuming fail-stop failure semantics,
is generally not appropriate. The trouble is, there is no polite announcement
that a process crashes, as there is when a process leaves voluntarily. The other
members have to discover this experimentally by noticing that the crashed
member no longer responds to anything. Once it is certain that the crashed
member is really down (and not just slow), it can be removed from the group.
    Another knotty issue is that leaving and joining have to be synchronous
with data messages being sent. In other words, starting at the instant that a
process has joined a group, it must receive all messages sent to that group.

Similarly, as soon as a process has left a group, it must not receive any more
messages from the group, and the other members must not receive any more
messages from it. One way of making sure that a join or leave is integrated
into the message stream at the right place is to convert this operation into a
sequence of messages sent to the whole group.
    One final issue relating to group membership is what to do if so many
processes go down that the group can no longer function at all. Some protocol
is needed to rebuild the group. Invariably, some process will have to take the
initiative to start the ball rolling, but what happens if two or three try at the
same time? The protocol must be able to withstand this. Again, coordination
through, for example, a leader-election algorithm may be needed.

8.2.2      Failure masking and replication
Process groups are part of the solution for building fault-tolerant systems.
In particular, having a group of identical processes allows us to mask one
or more faulty processes in that group. In other words, we can replicate
processes and organize them into a group to replace a single (vulnerable)
process with a (fault tolerant) group. As discussed in the previous chapter,
there are two ways to approach such replication: by means of primary-based
protocols, or through replicated-write protocols.
    Primary-based replication in the case of fault tolerance generally appears
in the form of a primary-backup protocol. In this case, a group of processes
is organized in a hierarchical fashion, in which a primary coordinates all write
operations. In practice, the primary is fixed, although its role can be taken
over by one of the backups if need be. In effect, when the primary crashes,
the backups execute some election algorithm to choose a new primary.
    Replicated-write protocols are used in the form of active replication, as
well as by quorum-based protocols. These solutions correspond to organizing
a collection of identical processes into a flat group. The main advantage is
that such groups have no single point of failure, at the cost of distributed
coordination.
    An important issue with using process groups to tolerate faults is how
much replication is needed. To simplify our discussion, let us consider
only replicated-write systems. A system is said to be k-fault tolerant if it
can survive faults in k components and still meet its specifications. If the
components, say processes, fail silently, then having k + 1 of them is enough
to provide k-fault tolerance. If k of them simply stop, then the answer from
the other one can be used.
    On the other hand, if processes exhibit arbitrary failures, continuing to
run when faulty and sending out erroneous or random replies, a minimum of
2k + 1 processes is needed to achieve k-fault tolerance. In the worst case, the k
failing processes could accidentally (or even intentionally) generate the same

reply. However, the remaining k + 1 will also produce the same answer, so
the client or voter can just believe the majority.
    Now suppose that in a k-fault tolerant group, a single process fails. The
group as a whole is still living up to its specifications, namely that it can
tolerate the failure of up to k of its members (of which one has just failed). But
what happens if more than k members fail? In that case, all bets are off and
whatever the group does, its results, if any, cannot be trusted. Another way of
looking at this is that the process group, in its appearance of mimicking the
behavior of a single, robust process, has failed.

8.2.3    Consensus in faulty systems with crash failures
As mentioned, in terms of clients and servers, we have adopted a model in
which a potentially considerable collection of clients now send commands to
a group of processes that jointly behave as a single, highly robust process. To make
this work, we need to make an important assumption:

        In a fault-tolerant process group, each nonfaulty process executes the
        same commands, in the same order, as every other nonfaulty process.

Formally, this means that the group members need to reach consensus on
which command to execute. If failures cannot happen, reaching consensus
is easy. For example, we can use Lamport’s totally ordered multicasting, as
described in Section 5.2.1. Or, to keep it simple, using a centralized sequencer
that hands out a sequence number to each command that needs to be executed
will do the job as well. Unfortunately, life is not without failures, and reaching
consensus among a group of processes under more realistic assumptions turns
out to be tricky.

Flooding-based consensus
To illustrate the problem at hand, let us assume we have a group of processes
P = {P1 , . . . , Pn } operating under fail-stop failure semantics. In other words,
we assume that crash failures can be reliably detected among the group
members. Typically, a client contacts a group member requesting it to execute
a command. Every group member maintains a list of proposed commands:
some which it received directly from clients; others which it received from its
fellow group members. We can reach consensus using the following approach,
adopted from Cachin et al. [2011], and referred to as flooding consensus.
    Conceptually, the algorithm operates in rounds. In each round, a process Pi
sends its list of proposed commands it has seen so far to every other process
in P. At the end of a round, each process merges all received proposed
commands into a new list, from which it then will deterministically select the
command to execute, if possible. It is important to realize that the selection
algorithm is the same for all processes. In other words, if all process have the

same list, they will all select the same command to execute (and remove that
command from their list).
    It is not difficult to see that this approach works as long as processes do
not fail. Problems start when a process Pi detects, during round r, that, say,
process Pk has crashed. To make this concrete, assume we have a process
group of four processes {P1 , . . . , P4 } and that P1 crashes during round r.
Also, assume that P2 receives the list of proposed commands from P1 before
it crashes, but that P3 and P4 do not (in other words, P1 crashes before it got
a chance to send its list to P3 and P4 ). This situation is sketched in Figure 8.5.

Figure 8.5: Reaching consensus through flooding in the presence of crash
failures. Adopted from Cachin et al. [2011].

     Assuming that all processes knew who was a group member at the begin-
ning of round r, P2 is ready to decide on which command to execute when
it receives the respective lists of the other members: it has all commands
proposed so far. Not so for P3 and P4 . For example, P3 may detect that P1
crashed, but it does not know if either P2 or P4 had already received P1 ’s
list. From P3 ’s perspective, if there is another process that did receive P1 ’s
proposed commands, that process may then make a different decision than
itself. As a consequence, the best that P3 can do is postpone its decision
until the next round. The same holds for P4 in this example. A process will
decide to move to a next round when it has received a message from every
nonfaulty process. This assumes that each process can reliably detect the
crashing of another process, for otherwise it would not be able to decide who
the nonfaulty processes are.
     Because process P2 received all commands, it can indeed decide and can
subsequently broadcast that decision to the others. Then, during the next
round r + 1, processes P3 and P4 will also be able to decide: they will decide
to execute the same command selected by P2 .
     To understand why this algorithm is correct, it is important to realize that
a process will move to a next round without having made a decision, only
when it detects that another process has failed. In the end, this means that in
the worst case at most one nonfaulty process remains, and this process can

simply decide whatever proposed command to execute. Again, note that we
are assuming reliable failure detection.
    But then, what happens when the decision by process P2 that it sent to P3
was lost? In that case, P3 can still not make a decision. Worse, we need to
make sure that it makes the same decision as P2 and P4 . If P2 did not crash,
we can assume that a retransmission of its decision will save the day. If P2 did
crash, this will also be detected by P4 who will then subsequently rebroadcast
its decision. Meanwhile, P3 has moved to a next round, and after receiving
the decision by P4 , will terminate its execution of the algorithm.

A more realistic approach: Raft
Let us now take a look at a consensus protocol that operates under crash-
failure semantics, or actually, a fail-noisy failure model: a process will even-
tually correctly conclude that another process has crashed. Raft, described
by Ongaro and Ousterhout [2014] was developed in reaction to the inherent
intricacies of a famous consensus protocol, Paxos (which we discuss further
below). In this section, we will stick to the essence of Raft, thereby even
simplifying a few matters to focus entirely on understanding how and why it
works.
     In Raft, we typically have a group of some five replicated servers. We
assume the set of servers is fixed (although Raft allows servers to join and
leave the group). Each server maintains a log of operations, some of which
have already been executed (i.e., committed), as well as pending operations.
Consensus is expressed in terms of these logs: committed operations have
the same position in each of the respective server’s logs. One of the servers
operates as a leader and decides on the order in which pending operations
are to be committed. In essence, Raft is a primary-backup protocol, with the
primary acting as leader and the backups as followers. We discussed Raft’s
leader-election algorithm in Section 5.4.4.
     A client always sends an operation request to the leader (possibly after
having been redirected by one of the followers). That means that the leader
is fully aware of all pending requests. Each client request for executing
an operation o is appended to the leader’s log, in the form of a tuple ⟨o,
t, k⟩ in which t is the term under which the current leader serves, and k
the index of o in the leader’s log. To recall, after electing a next leader,
the term for new operations will be t + 1. Let c be the index of the most
recently committed operation. Raft guarantees that operations that have been
registered as committed, have been performed by a majority of the servers,
and that the result has been returned to the original client.
     Assume the leader has a log of length n, is operating in term t, and receives
a request for executing operation o. In that case, it appends ⟨o, t, n + 1⟩ and
conceptually sends its entire log to all the other servers, along with the current
value of c. Again conceptually, each following server copies the entire log, and

returns an acknowledgement to the leader, while ensuring that all operations
up to and including index c have been executed. Note that operation o cannot
yet be committed by a follower.
    As soon as the leader receives a majority of acknowledgements, it executes
o, returns the result (if any, but at least an acknowledgement) to the client,
and sets c to n + 1. The next time it communicates with the other servers,
it also sends c so that each of them can commit operations, in particular,
o. It is important to note that in this scheme, the leader is indeed in full
control: its state (as expressed by its log), is to be seen as the collective
state of the server group. Of course, in reality, the leader will send only the
tuple ⟨o, t, n + 1⟩, where it will be appended to the local log of the respective
followers. In this sense, the protocol essentially follows the one described in
Section 7.5.1 (except that clients always send a request to the primary, and
not through a follower). More important, however, is that by stating that the
leader, conceptually speaking, sends the entire log, it overwrites the log of its
followers. If the leader receives no acknowledgement from one of its followers,
it will simply repeat sending the log until acknowledged.
    Suppose the leader crashes. In that case, a new one is elected as described
in Section 5.4.4, and this new leader’s log is the collective state of the server
group. There is only one problem: if that log misses committed operations,
then it is not representative for what the majority of servers has decided on.
For this reason, during an election, a server S will not vote for a candidate
server S′ if it turns out that S’s log is more up to date, than that of S′ .
Oversimplifying matters somewhat, a log is more up to date when it contains
more committed operations (meaning that S′ has missed several commits
already done by a majority of other servers), or when it contains operations
from more recent terms (meaning that S′ has missed elections). Assuming
that the new leader will have executed all the committed operations, its state
will therefore be the same as that of the previous leader before it crashed.
However, do note that the new leader may not necessarily have received all
pending requests. From a consensus point of view, this is not a problem. To
avoid missing any client requests, Raft does assume that when a client does
not receive a response from the server, it will resubmit its original request.
    What if the leader crashed after executing o1 (because there was a majority
of servers), yet did not have a chance to inform (all of) the other servers?
First, note that the new leader will have a log that is at least a subset of the
logs of a majority of the remaining servers, in terms of committed operations
(otherwise it would have never been elected as new leader). When handling a
new operation o2 , broadcasting its log to the other servers, and receiving an
acknowledgement from a majority, it can not only commit o2 , but now also o1 .
This situation is shown in Figure 8.6. First, note that server S5 will be brought
up to date about operation o1 as soon as the new leader tells about o2 . After
receiving enough acknowledgements, the leader can go ahead and commit o1

     ⟨o1 ⟩
C1

                                 ⟨ ACK, o1 ⟩                                      ⟨ ACK, o2 ⟩
S1
                                                                                                           o1
S2           ⟨ APP, o1 , 1, 1⟩
 L EADER                                       o1
                                                                            ⟨ ACK, o2 ⟩
S3
                           ⟨ ACK, o1 ⟩                                                                     o1
S4                                                            ⟨ APP, o2 , 2, 2⟩                     ⟨ HB, 2⟩
                                 ⟨ ACK, o1 ⟩        L EADER                                 o1 o2
S5
                                                                                  ⟨ ACK, o2 ⟩              o1
C2
                                                      ⟨o2 ⟩

Figure 8.6: The situation when a leader crashes after executing an operation
but before being able to tell other servers that the operation has been commit-
ted.

(as well as o2 ). All other servers can commit o1 as soon as they know that the
leader did so as well.
    We have skipped a number of details, notably details related to the fact
that the leader does not send entire logs, but only operation requests. For
one, this means that after an election, servers may be missing operations, or
could have extraneous operations, or both. Bringing the logs of followers into
a consistent state with the new leader requires some attention, which can be
ignored by assuming that entire logs are sent. These, and other details, are
found in Ongaro and Ousterhout [2014] and Ongaro [2014].

8.2.4        Example: Paxos
Discussing consensus in the presence of crash failures cannot be decently done
without discussing Paxos. It was originally published in 1989 as a technical
report by Leslie Lamport, but it took about a decade before someone decided
that it may not be such a bad idea to disseminate it through a regular scientific
channel [Lamport, 1998]. The original publication is not easy to understand,
exemplified by other publications that aim at explaining it [Lampson, 1996;
Prisco et al., 1997; Lamport, 2001; van Renesse and Altinbuken, 2015]. In
fact, it is generally agreed that Paxos is not only quite difficult to explain and
understand, but that these intricacies have led to implementations that actually
differ from the original protocol. These intricacies formed an important
motivation for developing Raft, which we explained above.

Essential Paxos
The assumptions under which Paxos operates are rather weak:

   • The distributed system is partially synchronous (in fact, it may even be
     asynchronous).
   • Communication between processes may be unreliable, meaning that
     messages may be lost, duplicated, or reordered.
   • Messages that are corrupted can be detected as such (and thus subse-
     quently ignored).
   • All operations are deterministic: once an execution is started, it is known
     exactly what it will do.
   • Processes may exhibit crash failures, but not arbitrary failures, nor do
     processes collude.

By-and-large, these are realistic assumptions for many practical distributed
systems.
    We first roughly follow the explanation given by Lamport [2001] and Kirsch
and Amir [2008]. The algorithm operates as a network of logical processes, of
which there are different types. First, there are clients that request a specific
operation to be executed. At the server side, each client is represented by a
single proposer, which attempts to have a client’s request accepted. Normally,
a single proposer has been designated as being the leader, and drives the
protocol toward reaching consensus.
    What we need to establish is that a proposed operation is accepted by an
acceptor. If a majority of acceptors accepts the same proposal, the proposal is
said to be chosen. However, what is chosen still needs to be learned. To this
end, we will have a number of learner processes, each of which will execute a
chosen proposal once it has been informed by a majority of acceptors.
    It is important to note that a single proposer, acceptor, and learner form a
single physical process, running on a single machine that the client commu-
nicates with, as shown in Figure 8.7. We thus assume that if, for example, a
proposer crashes, then the physical process that it is part of will have crashed.
By replicating this server, we aim at obtaining fault tolerance in the presence
of crash failures.
    The basic model is that the leading proposer receives requests from clients,
one at a time. A nonleading proposer forwards any client request to the leader.
The leading proposer sends its proposal to all acceptors, telling each to accept
the requested operation. Each acceptor will subsequently broadcast a learn
message. If a learner receives the same learn message from a majority of
acceptors, it knows that consensus has been reached on which operation to
execute, and will execute it.

Figure 8.7: The organization of Paxos into different logical processes.

    There are at least two specific issues that need further attention. First, not
only do the servers need to reach consensus on which operation to execute,
we also need to make sure that each of them actually executes it. In other
words, how do we know for sure that a majority of the nonfaulty servers will
carry out the operation? There is essentially only one way out: have learn
messages be retransmitted. However, to make this work, an acceptor will have
to log its decisions (in turn requiring a mechanism for purging logs). Because
we are assuming globally ordered proposal timestamps (as explained shortly),
missing messages can be easily detected, and also accepted operations will
always be executed in the same order by all learners.
    As a general rule, the server hosting the leading proposer will also inform
the client when its requested operation has been executed. If another process
had taken over the lead, then it will also handle the response to the client.
    This brings us to the second important issue: a failing leader. Life would
be easy if the failure of a leader would be reliably detected, after which a
new leader would be elected, and later, the recovering leader would instantly
notice that the world around it had changed. Unfortunately, life is not so easy.
Paxos has been designed to tolerate proposers who still believe they are in the
lead. The effect is that proposals may be sent out concurrently by different
proposers (each believing to be the leader). We therefore need to make sure
that these proposals can be distinguished from one another to ensure that the
acceptors handle only the proposals from the current leader.
    Note that relying on a leading proposer implies that any practical im-
plementation of Paxos will need to be accompanied by a leader-election
algorithm. In principle, that algorithm can operate independently of Paxos,
but is normally part of it.

    To distinguish concurrent proposals from different proposers, each pro-
posal p has a uniquely associated (logical) timestamp ts(p). How uniqueness
is achieved is left to an implementation, but we will describe some of the
details shortly. Let oper(p) denote the operation associated with proposal p.
The trick is to allow multiple proposals to be accepted, but that each of these
accepted proposals has the same associated operation. This can be achieved
by guaranteeing that if a proposal p is chosen, then any proposal with a higher
timestamp will also have the same associated operation. In other words, we
require that

       p is chosen ⇒ for all p′ with ts(p′ ) > ts(p) : oper(p′ ) = oper(p)

Of course, for p to be chosen, it needs to be accepted. That means that we
can guarantee our requirement when guaranteeing that if p is chosen, then
any higher-timestamped proposal accepted by any acceptor, has the same
associated operation as p. However, this is not sufficient, for suppose that
at a certain moment, a proposer simply sends a new proposal p′ , with the
highest timestamp so far, to an acceptor A that had not received any proposal
before. Note that this may indeed happen according to our assumptions
concerning message loss and multiple proposers, each believing to be in the
lead. In absence of any other proposals, A will simply accept p′ . To prevent
this situation from happening, we thus need to guarantee that

      If proposal p is chosen, then any higher-timestamped proposal issued by a
      proposer, has the same associated operation as p.

When explaining the Paxos algorithm below, we will indeed see that a pro-
poser may need to adopt an operation coming from acceptors in favor of its
own. This will happen after a leading proposer had failed, but its proposed
operation had already made it to a majority of the acceptors.
    The processes collectively formally ensure safety, in the sense that only
proposed operations will be learned, and that at most one operation will be
learned at a time. In general, a safety property asserts that nothing bad will
happen. Furthermore, Paxos ensures conditional liveness in the sense that if
enough processes remain up-and-running, then a proposed operation will
eventually be learned (and thus executed). Liveness, which tells us that
eventually something good will happen, is not guaranteed in Paxos, unless
some adaptations are made. We return to liveness in Note 8.4.
    There are now two phases, each, in turn, consisting of two subphases.
During the first phase, the leading proposer interacts with acceptors to get
a requested operation accepted for execution. The first phase is needed to
rule out any trouble caused by different proposers, each believing they are
the leader. The best that can happen is that an individual acceptor promises
to consider the proposer’s operation and ignore other requests. The worst is
that the proposer was too late and that it will be asked to adopt some other

proposer’s request instead. Apparently, a leadership change had taken place
and there may be former requests that need to be handled first.
    In the second phase, the acceptors will have informed proposers about the
promises they have made. The leading proposer essentially takes up a slightly
different role by promoting a single operation to the one to be executed, and
subsequently telling the acceptors.

Phase 1a (prepare): The goal of this phase is that a proposer P who believes
     it is the leader and is proposing operation o, tries to get its proposal
     timestamp anchored, in the sense that any lower timestamp failed, or that
     o had also been previously proposed (i.e., with some lower proposal
     timestamp). To this end, P broadcasts its proposal to the acceptors.
     For the operation o, the proposer selects a proposal number m higher
     than any of its previously selected numbers. This leads to a proposal
     timestamp t = (m, i ) where i is the (numerical) process identifier of P.
     Note that

                   (m, i ) < (n, j) ⇔ (m < n) or (m = n and i < j)

     This timestamp for a proposal p is an implementation of the previously
     mentioned timestamp ts(p). Proposer P sends prepare(t) to all accep-
     tors (but note that messages may be lost). In doing so, it is (1) asking the
     acceptors to promise not to accept any proposals with a lower proposal
     timestamp, and (2) to inform it about an accepted proposal, if any, with
     the highest timestamp less than t. If such a proposal exists, the proposer
     will adopt it.

Phase 1b (promise): An acceptor A may receive multiple proposals. Assume
     it receives prepare(t) from P. There are three cases to consider:

       (1) t is the highest proposal timestamp received from any proposer so
           far. In that case, A will return promise(t) to P stating that A will
           ignore any future proposals with a lower timestamp.
       (2) If t is the highest timestamp so far, but another proposal (t′ , o′ ) had
           already been accepted, A also returns (t′ , o′ ) to P. This will allow P
           to decide on the final operation that needs to be accepted.
       (3) In all other cases, do nothing: there is apparently another proposal
           with a higher timestamp that is being processed.

Once the first phase has been completed, the leading proposer P knows what
the acceptors have promised. Essentially, the leading proposer knows that all
acceptors have agreed on the same operation. This will put P into a position
to tell the acceptors that they can go ahead. This is needed because although
the leading proposer knows on which operation consensus has been reached,
this consensus is not known to the others. Again, we assume that P received

a response from a majority of acceptors (whose respective responses may be
different).

Phase 2a (accept): There are two cases to consider:

       (1) If P does not receive any accepted operation from any of the ac-
           ceptors, it will forward its own proposal for acceptance by sending
           accept(t, o) to all acceptors.
       (2) Otherwise, it was informed about another operation o′ , which it will
           adopt and forward for acceptance. It does so by sending accept(t,
           o′ ), where t is P’s proposal timestamp and o′ is the operation with
           proposal timestamp highest among all accepted operations that
           were returned by the acceptors in Phase 1b.

Phase 2b (learn): Finally, if an acceptor receives accept(t, o′ ), but did not
     previously send a promise with a higher proposal timestamp, it will ac-
     cept operation o′ , and tell all learners to execute o′ by sending learn(o′ ).
     At that point, the acceptor can forget about o′ . A learner L receiving
     learn(o′ ) from a majority of acceptors, will execute the operation o′ .
     We now also know that a majority of learners share the same idea on
     which operation to execute.

It is important to realize that this description of Paxos indeed captures only its
essence: using a leading proposer to drive the acceptors toward the execution
of the same operation. When it comes to practical implementations, much
more needs to be done (and more than we are willing to describe here). An
excellent description of what it means to realize Paxos has been written by
Kirsch and Amir [2008]. Another write-up on its practical implications can be
found in [Chandra et al., 2007].

Understanding Paxos
To properly understand Paxos, but also many other consensus algorithms, it
is useful to see how its design could have evolved. We say “could have,” as
the evolution of the algorithm has never been documented. The following
description is largely based on work described by Meling and Jehl [2013]1 . As
our starting point, we consider a server that we wish to make more robust. By
now, we know that this can be achieved through replication and making sure
that all commands submitted by clients are executed by all servers in the same
order. The simplest situation is to add one server, thus creating a group of two
processes, say S1 and S2 . Also, to make sure that all commands are executed
in the same order, we appoint one process to be a sequencer, which increments
and associates a unique timestamp with every submitted command. Servers
   1 Special credits go to Hein Meling for helping us better understand what Paxos is all about.

are required to execute commands according to their timestamp. In Paxos,
such a server is referred to as the leader. We can also consider it to be a
primary server, with the other acting as a backup server.
    We assume that a client broadcasts its requested command to all servers.
If a server notices it is missing a command, it can rely on the other server
to forward it when necessary. We will not describe how this happens, but
silently assume that all commands are stored at the servers and that we merely
need to make sure that the servers agree on which command to execute next.
As a consequence, all remaining communication between servers consists of
control messages. To make this point clear, consider the situation sketched in
Figure 8.8. (In what follows, we use subscripts to designate processes, and
superscripts to designate operations and states.)

Figure 8.8: Two clients communicating with a 2-server process group.

    In this example, server S1 is the leader and as such will hand out time-
stamps to submitted requests. Client C1 has submitted command o1 while C2
submitted o2 . S1 instructs S2 to execute operation o2 with timestamp 1, and
later operation o1 with timestamp 2. After processing a command, a server
will return the result to the associated client. We designate this using the
             j
notation ⟨σi ⟩, where i is the index of the reporting server, and j the state it
was in, expressed as the sequence of operations it has carried out. In our
example, client C1 will thus see the results ⟨σ121 ⟩ and ⟨σ221 ⟩, meaning that each
server has executed o1 after executing o2 .
    In Paxos, when a leader associates a timestamp with an operation, it does
so by sending an accept message to the other server(s). As we assume that
messages may be lost, a server accepting an operation o does so by telling
the leader it has learned the operation by returning a learn(o) message.
When the leader does not notice that operation o has been learned, it simply
retransmits an accept(o, t) message, with t being the original timestamp. Note
that in our description, we are skipping the phase of coming to agreement on
the operation to be carried out: we assume the leader has decided and now
needs to reach consensus on executing that operation.

    Compensating for a lost message is relatively easy, but what happens when
also a server crashes? Let us first assume that a crash can be reliably detected.
Consider the situation sketched in Figure 8.9(a). The issue, of course, is that
server S2 will never have learned (about) operation o1 . This situation can be
prevented by demanding that a server may execute an operation only if it
knows that the other server has learned the operation as well, as illustrated in
Figure 8.9(b).

                                          (a)

                                          (b)

Figure 8.9: (a) What may happen when the leader crashes in combination
with a lost accept, and (b) the solution, namely demanding that the other
server has learned the operation as well before executing it.

    It is not difficult to see that with a larger process group, we can get into the
same situation as in Figure 8.9(a). Simply consider a group of three servers
{S1 , S2 , S3 } with S1 being the leader. If its accept(o1 , t) message to S3 is lost,
yet it knows that S2 has learned o1 , then it should still not execute o1 until
it has also received a learn(o1 ) message from S3 . This situation is shown in
Figure 8.10.
    Let us consider the three-server case and imagine what would happen
if learn(o1 ) returned by S2 would not make it to S1 . Of course, S1 would

Figure 8.10: The situation when dealing with three servers, of which two
crash. In this case, S1 should have waited with executing operation o1 until it
had received learn(o1 ) from S3 , but also S2 should wait until it knows that
S3 has learned about o1 .

not execute o1 , but otherwise we would still be in trouble: S2 will execute o1
while S3 would take over leadership and execute o2 without ever knowing
that o1 had already been processed. In other words, also S2 must wait with
the execution of o1 until it knows that S3 has learned that operation. This
brings us to the following:

      In Paxos, a server S cannot execute an operation o until it has received a
      learn(o) from all other nonfaulty servers.

    Up to this point, we have assumed that a process can reliably detect that
another process has crashed. In practice, this is not the case. As we will
discuss more extensively shortly, a standard approach toward failure detection
is to set a timeout on expected messages. For example, each server is required
to send a message declaring it is still alive, and at the same time the other
servers set timeouts on the expected receipt of such messages. If a timeout
expires, the sender is suspected to have failed. In a partially synchronous or
fully asynchronous system, there is essentially no other solution. However,
the consequence is that a failure may be falsely detected, as the delivery of
such “I’m alive” messages may have simply been delayed or lost.
    Let us assume that Paxos has realized a failure detection mechanism, but
that the two servers falsely conclude that the other has failed, as shown in
Figure 8.11. The problem is clear: each may now independently decide to
execute their operation of choice, leading to divergent behavior. It is at this
point that we need to introduce an extra server, and demand that a server
can execute an operation only if it is certain that a majority will execute that
operation. Note, that in the three-server case, execution of operation o by

server S can take place as soon as S has received at least one (other) learn(o)
message. Together with the sender of that message, S will form a majority.

Figure 8.11: The situation in the case of false failure detections.

    We have now come to a point where it should be clear that Paxos requires
at least three replicated servers {S1 , S2 , S3 } to operate correctly. Let us concen-
trate on the situation that one of these servers crashes. We make the following
assumptions.

   • Initially, S1 is the leader.
   • A server can reliably detect it has missed a message. The latter can
     be realized, for example, through timestamps in the form of strictly
     increasing sequence numbers. Whenever a server notices it has missed
     a message, it can then simply request a retransmission and catch up
     before continuing.
   • When a new leader needs to be elected, the remaining servers follow a
     strictly deterministic algorithm. For example, we can safely assume that
     if S1 crashes, then S2 will become leader. Likewise, if S2 crashes, S3 will
     take over, and so on.
   • Clients may receive duplicate responses, but besides being required to
     recognize duplicates, form no further part of the Paxos protocol. In
     other words, a client cannot be asked to help the servers to resolve a
     situation.

Under these circumstances, no matter when one of S2 or S3 crashes, Paxos
will behave correctly. Of course, we are still demanding that execution of an
operation can take place only if a server knows that a majority will execute
that operation.
   Suppose now that S1 in its role as leader, crashes after the execution of
operation o1 . The worst that can happen in this case is that S3 is completely
ignorant of the situation until the new leader, S2 tells it to accept operation o2 .
Note that this is announced through an accept(o2 , 2) message such that the

timestamp t = 2 will alert S3 that it missed a previous accept message. S3 will
tell so to S2 , who can then retransmit accept(o1 , 1), allowing S3 to catch up.
    Likewise, if S2 missed accept(o1 , 1), but did detect that S1 crashed, it
will eventually either send accept(o1 , 1) or accept(o2 , 1) to S3 (i.e., in both
cases using timestamp t = 1, which was previously used by S1 ). Again, S3
has enough information to get S2 on the right track again. If S2 had sent
accept(o1 , 1), S3 can simply tell S2 that it already learned o1 . In the other
case, when S2 sends accept(o2 , 1), S3 will inform S2 that it apparently missed
operation o1 . We conclude that when S1 crashes after executing an operation,
Paxos behaves correctly.
    So, what can happen if S1 crashes immediately after having sent accept(o1 ,
1) to the other two servers? Suppose again that S3 is completely ignorant of
the situation because messages are lost, until S2 has taken over leadership
and announces that o2 should be accepted. Like before, S3 can tell S2 that
it (i.e., S3 ) missed operation o1 , so that S2 can help S3 to catch up. If S2
misses messages, but does detect that S1 crashed, then as soon as it takes over
leadership and proposes an operation, it will be using a stale timestamp. This
will trigger S3 to inform S2 that it missed operation o1 , which saves the day.
Again, Paxos is seen to behave correctly.

           ⟨o1 ⟩
C1

S1                 ⟨ ACC, o1 , 1⟩
 L EADER                                                          drop leadership

S2                                       ⟨ ACC, o2 , 2⟩
                                    L EADER

S3
                                                    ⟨ LRN, o2 ⟩     o2              confusion

C2
     ⟨o2 ⟩                                                               ⟨σ32 ⟩

Figure 8.12: Why incorporating the ID of the current leader is needed: S2
falsely concludes that S1 has crashed.

    Problems may arise with false detections of crashes. Consider the sit-
uation sketched in Figure 8.12. We see that the accept messages from S1
are considerably delayed and that S2 falsely detects S1 having crashed. S2
takes over leadership and sends accept(o2 , 1), i.e., with a timestamp t = 1.
However, when finally accept(o1 , 1) arrives, S3 cannot do anything: this is
not a message it is expecting. Note that, in principle, S3 does not check who
is the current leader. The only thing it knows is that it is itself not the leader.

Precisely for this reason, it does not expect an accept message with the same
timestamp as before. Things change, however, if it does know who the current
leader is, in combination with a deterministic leader election. In that case,
it could safely reject accept(o1 , 1), knowing that by now S2 has taken over,
and even perhaps retransmit learn(o2 ) to S1 . A (perhaps previously sent)
learn(o2 ) message received by S1 will allow S1 to conclude that leadership
had been taken over. We conclude that the leader should include its ID in an
accept message.
     We have covered almost all cases and have thus far shown that Paxos
behaves correctly. Unfortunately, although being correct, the algorithm can
still come to a grinding halt. Consider the situation illustrated in Figure 8.13.
What we are seeing here is that because the learn messages returned by S3
are lost, neither S1 nor S2 will ever be able to know what S3 actually executed:
did it learn (and execute) accept(o1 , 1) before or after learning accept(o2 ,
1), or perhaps it learned neither operation? A solution to this problem is
discussed in Note 8.4.

           ⟨o1 ⟩                                        ⟨σ31 ⟩
C1

 S1                     ⟨ ACC, S1 , o1 , 1⟩
 L EADER

 S2                                                     ⟨ ACC, S2 , o2 , 1⟩
                                              L EADER

 S3
                                     ⟨ LRN, o1 ⟩ o1                  ⟨ LRN, o2 ⟩ o2

C2
      ⟨o2 ⟩                                                                           ⟨σ312 ⟩

Figure 8.13: When Paxos can make no further progress.

  Note 8.4 (Advanced: Making progress in Paxos)
  Up to this point, we have discussed the development of Paxos such that safety is
  ensured. Safety essentially means that nothing bad will happen, or, put differently,
  that the behavior of the algorithm is correct. To also ensure that eventually
  something good will happen, generally referred to as liveness of an algorithm, we
  need to do a bit more. In particular, we need to get out of the situation sketched
  in Figure 8.13.
      The real problem with this situation is that the servers have no consensus on
  whom the leader is. Once S2 decides it should take over leadership, it needs to
  ensure that any outstanding operations initiated by S1 have been properly dealt
  with. In other words, it has to ensure that its own leadership is not hindered

 by operations that have not yet been completed by all nonfaulty processes. If
 leadership is taken over too quickly and a new operation is proposed, a previous
 operation that has been executed by at least one server may not get a chance to be
 executed by all servers first.
      To this end, Paxos enforces an explicit leadership takeover, and this is where
 the role of proposers come from. When a server crashes, the next one in line
 will need to take over (recall that Paxos assumes a deterministic leader-election
 algorithm), but also ensure that any outstanding operations are dealt with. This ex-
 plicit takeover is implemented by broadcasting a proposal message: propose(Si ),
 where Si is the next server to be leader. When server Sj receives this message,
 it replies with a promise(oj , t j ) message, containing the most recently executed
 operation oj and its corresponding timestamp t j . Note that Si is particularly
 interested in the most recent operation o∗ executed by a majority of servers. By
 “adopting” this operation from the (apparently crashed) server S∗ that had origi-
 nally proposed its acceptance, Si can effectively complete what S∗ could not due
 to its failure.
      There are two obvious optimizations to this procedure. The first one is not
 that servers return the most recently executed operation, but the most recently
 learned operation that is still waiting to be executed, if any. Furthermore, because
 it may be that the collection of servers has no more pending operations, Si can
 also suggest a next operation oi when initially proposing to take over leadership,
 giving rise to a propose(Si , oi ) message. In essence, this is the situation we
 described earlier, yet now it should be clear where the idea of proposals actually
 comes from.
      When Si receives a majority of promises for operation o∗ , and the highest
 returned timestamp is t∗ , it broadcasts accept(Si , o∗ , t∗ ), which is essentially a
 retransmission of the last operation proposed before Si took over leadership. If no
 such o∗ exists, Si will propose to accept its own operation oi .

8.2.5   Consensus in faulty systems with arbitrary failures
So far, we assumed that replicas were subject to only crash failures, in which
case a process group needs to consist of 2k + 1 servers to survive k crashed
members. An important assumption in these cases, is that a process does
not collude with another process, or, more specifically, is consistent in its
messages to others. The situations shown in Figure 8.14 should not happen.
In the first case, we see that process P2 is forwarding a different value or
operation than it is supposed to. Referring to Paxos, this could mean that a
primary tells the backups that not operation o had been accepted, but instead
propagates a different operation o′ . In the second case, P1 is telling different
things to different processes, such as having a leader sending operation o to
some backups, and at the same time operation o′ to others. Again, we note
that this need not be malicious actions, but simply omission or commission
failures.

                        (a)                         (b)

Figure 8.14: A process in a replicated group acting inconsistently: (a) not
forwarding properly, and (b) telling different things to different processes.

     In this section, we take a look at reaching consensus in a fault-tolerant
process group in which k members can fail, assuming arbitrary failures.
In particular, we will show that we need at least 3k + 1 members to reach
consensus under these failure assumptions.
     Consider a process group consisting of n members, of which one has been
designated to be the primary, P, and the remaining n − 1 to be the backups
B1 , . . . , Bn−1 . We make the following assumptions:

   • A client sends a value v ∈ {T, F} to the primary, where v stands for
     either true or false.
   • Messages may be lost, but this can be detected.
   • Messages cannot be corrupted without that being detected (and thus
     subsequently ignored).
   • A receiver of a message can reliably detect its sender.

To achieve what is known as Byzantine agreement, we need to satisfy the
following two requirements:

BA1: Every nonfaulty backup process stores the same value.
BA2: If the primary is nonfaulty, then every nonfaulty backup process stores
     exactly what the primary had sent.

Note that if the primary is faulty, BA1 tells us that the backups may store
the same, but different (and thus wrong) value than the one initially sent by
the client. Furthermore, it should be clear that if the primary is not faulty,
satisfying BA2 implies that BA1 is also satisfied.

Why having 3k processes is not enough
To see why having only 3k processes is not enough to reach consensus, let
us consider the situation in which we want to tolerate the failure of a single
process, that is, k = 1. Consider Figure 8.15, which is essentially an extension
of Figure 8.14.

                    (a)                                                       (b)

Figure 8.15: Impossibility to reach consensus with 3 processes and trying to
tolerate a single arbitrarily failing process.

In Figure 8.15(a), we see that the faulty primary P is sending two different
values to the backups B1 and B2 , respectively. To reach consensus, both
backup processes forward the received value to the other, leading to a second
round of message exchanges. At that point, B1 and B2 each have received the
set of values {T, F}, from which it is impossible to draw a conclusion.
    Likewise, we cannot reach consensus when wrong values are forwarded.
In Figure 8.15(b), the primary P and backup B2 operate correctly, but B1 is
not. Instead of forwarding the value T to process B2 , it sends the incorrect
value F. The result is that B2 will now have seen the set of values {T, F}
from which it cannot draw any conclusions. In other words, P and B2 cannot
reach consensus. More specifically, B2 can not decide what to store so that we
cannot satisfy requirement BA2.

  Note 8.5 (Advanced: The case where k > 1 and n ≤ 3k)
  Generalizing this situation to other values of k is not that difficult. As explained
  by Kshemkalyani and Singhal [2008], we can use a simple reduction scheme.
  Assume that there is a solution for the case where k ≥ 1 and n ≤ 3k. Partition the
  n processes Q1 , . . . , Qn into three disjoint sets S1 , S2 , and S3 , together containing
  all processes. Moreover, let each set Sk have less or equal than n/3 members.
  Formally, this means that
      • S1 ∩ S2 = S1 ∩ S3 = S2 ∩ S3 = ∅
      • S1 ∪ S2 ∪ S3 = {Q1 , . . . , Qn }
      • for each Si , |Si | ≤ n/3
  Now consider a situation in which three processes Q1∗ , Q2∗ , and Q3∗ simulate the
  actions that take place in and between the processes of S1 , S2 , and S3 , respectively.
  In other words, if a process in S1 sends a message to another process in S2 , then
  Q1∗ will send a same message to Q2 . The same holds for process communication
  within a group. Assume that Q1∗ is faulty, yet Q2∗ and Q3∗ are not. All processes
  simulated by Q1∗ are now assumed to be faulty, and will thus lead to incorrect

                                 (a)

                                 (b)

Figure 8.16: Reaching consensus with four processes, of which one may fail
arbitrarily.

  messages being sent to Q2∗ and Q3∗ , respectively. Not so for Q2∗ (and Q3∗ ): all
  messages coming from processes in S2 (and S3 , respectively) are assumed to be
  correct. Because n ≤ 3k and for each set Si we have that |Si | ≤ n/3, at most n/3
  of the simulated processes Q1 , . . . , Qn are faulty. In other words, we are satisfying
  the condition for which we assumed that there would be a general solution.
      We can now come to a contradiction, for if there would exist a solution for
  the general case, then the processes Q1∗ , Q2∗ , and Q3∗ could simulate this solution,
  which would then also be a solution for the special case that n = 3 and k = 1. Yet,
  we just proved that this cannot be so, leading to a contradiction. We conclude that
  our assumption that there is a general solution for k ≥ 1 and n ≤ 3k is false.

Why having 3k + 1 processes is enough
Let us now focus on the case in which we have a group of 3k + 1 processes.
Our goal is to show that we can establish a solution in which k group members
may suffer from fail-arbitrary failures, yet the remaining nonfaulty processes
will still reach consensus. Again, we first concentrate on the case n = 4, k = 1.
Consider Figure 8.16, which shows a situation with one primary P and three
backup processes B1 , B2 , and B3 .
    In Figure 8.16(a) we have sketched the situation in which the primary P is

faulty and is providing inconsistent information to its backups. In our solution,
the processes will forward what they receive to the others. During the first
round, P sends T to B1 , F to B2 , and T to B3 , respectively. Each of the backups
then sends what they have to the others. With only the primary failing, this
means that after two rounds, each of the backups will have received the set of
values {T, T, F}, meaning that they can reach consensus on the value T.
    When we consider the case that one of the backups fails, we get the
situation sketched in Figure 8.16(b). Assume that the (nonfaulty) primary
sends T to all the backups, yet B2 is faulty. Where B1 and B3 will send out T
to the other backups in a second round, the worst that B2 may do is send out
F, as shown in the figure. Despite this failure, B1 and B3 will come to the same
conclusion, namely that P had sent out T, thereby meeting our requirement
BA2 as stated before.

  Note 8.6 (Advanced: The case where k > 1 and n = 3k + 1)
  As a sketch toward a general solution, consider the more intricate case in which
  n = 7 and k = 2. We let the primary P send out a value v0 . Using a similar
  notation as found in [Kshemkalyani and Singhal, 2008], we proceed as follows.
  Note that we effectively use the index 0 to denote the primary P (think of P being
  equal to a special backup process B0 ).
     1. We let P send v0 to the six backups. Backup Bi stores the received value
        as vi,0 ⟨ ⟩. This notation indicates that the value was received by process Bi ,
        that it was sent by P = B0 , and that the value of v0 was directly sent to Bi
        and not through another process (using the notation ⟨ ⟩). So, for example,
        B4 will store v0 in v4,0 ⟨ ⟩.
     2. Each backup Bi , in turn, will send vi,0 ⟨ ⟩ to every one of the other five
        backups, which is stored by Bj as v j,i ⟨0⟩. This notation indicates that the
        value is stored at Bj , was sent by Bi , but that it originated from P = B0
        (through the notation ⟨0⟩). Looking at B4 again, it will receive values from
        B1 , B2 , B3 , B5 , and B6 . For example, B2 will send v2,0 ⟨ ⟩, which is then
        stored as v4,2 ⟨0⟩ by B4 . Likewise, B4 will also store v4,1 ⟨0⟩, v4,3 ⟨0⟩, v4,5 ⟨0⟩,
        and v4,6 ⟨0⟩.
     3. Suppose that Bi now has the value vi,j ⟨0⟩. Again, it will send out this value
        to all processes except P = B0 , Bj , and Bi (i.e., itself). If Bk receives vi,j ⟨0⟩
        from Bi , it stores this received value in vk,i ⟨ j, 0⟩. Indeed, by then v0 will
        have traveled the path P → Bj → Bi → Bk . For example, in the previous
        round, B2 will have stored v2,1 ⟨0⟩, which it eventually sends to B4 , who, in
        turn, will store it as v4,2 ⟨1, 0⟩. Note at this point, that B4 can send out this
        value only to processes B3 , B5 , and B6 . There is no use in sending it out to
        other processes.
     4. Continuing this line of thought, assume that Bi has value vi,j ⟨k, 0⟩, which
        it sends out to the three remaining processes not equal to P = B0 , Bk , Bj ,
        and Bi (itself). Returning to B4 , eventually, B4 will also receive a similar
        message from, say, B3 , such as v3,2 ⟨5, 0⟩: the value v0 initially sent to B5 ,

           which then forwarded it to B2 , who, in turn, sent it to B3 . B4 will store that
           value as v4,3 ⟨2, 5, 0⟩. That value can be sent only to B1 and B6 , after which
           only a single round is left.

  Once all these messages have been sent, each backup can start moving out of the
  recursion again. Note that in the above scheme we have effectively constructed a
  tree, rooted at value v0 with six child nodes (representing the six backups). Each
  of these nodes, in turn, will have five children of its own, and so on. In total, there
  will be 6! = 720 leaf nodes. Each path from the root to a leaf node is encoded by
  the value stored at that leaf node, such as v4,1 ⟨6, 5, 3, 2, 0⟩. This leaf node will have
  a single parent (namely B1 storing v1,6 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩), in turn with a single sibling (B4
  storing v4,6 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩).

Figure 8.17: Rounds of broadcasting v0 to the backups, by P and the
      backups B1 , . . . , B6 .

      We can now let each backup start computing estimates of v0 , that is, a value
  that it believes v0 should be. To this end, we assume that each (nonfaulty) process
  executes the same procedure majority() that selects a unique value from a given
  set of inputs. In practice, this will be the majority among the input set. If there
  is no majority, a default value is chosen. To give a few examples, also shown in
  Figure 8.17:

                w4,1 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩   ←   majority(v4,1 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩, v6,4 ⟨1, 5, 3, 2, 0⟩)
                w6,1 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩   ←   majority(v6,1 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩, v4,6 ⟨1, 5, 3, 2, 0⟩)
                w1,4 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩   ←   majority(v1,4 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩, v6,1 ⟨4, 5, 3, 2, 0⟩)
                w6,4 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩   ←   majority(v6,4 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩, v1,6 ⟨4, 5, 3, 2, 0⟩)
                w1,6 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩   ←   majority(v1,6 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩, v4,1 ⟨6, 5, 3, 2, 0⟩)
                w4,6 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩   ←   majority(v4,6 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩, v1,4 ⟨6, 5, 3, 2, 0⟩)

      In turn, B1 , B4 , and B6 can compute estimates like:

           w1,5 ⟨3, 2, 0⟩   ←    majority(v1,5 ⟨3, 2, 0⟩, w4,1 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩, w6,1 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩
           w4,5 ⟨3, 2, 0⟩   ←    majority(v4,5 ⟨3, 2, 0⟩, w1,4 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩, w6,4 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩
           w6,5 ⟨3, 2, 0⟩   ←    majority(v6,5 ⟨3, 2, 0⟩, w1,6 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩, w4,6 ⟨5, 3, 2, 0⟩

  And from there, B5 can continue, for example, with:

        w5,3 ⟨2, 0⟩   ←     majority(v5,3 ⟨2, 0⟩, w1,5 ⟨3, 2, 0⟩, w4,5 ⟨3, 2, 0⟩, w6,5 ⟨3, 2, 0⟩)

  This process continues until, eventually, B2 from Figure 8.17 will be able to execute

           w2,0 ⟨ ⟩ ← majority(v2,0 ⟨ ⟩, w1,2 ⟨0⟩, w3,2 ⟨0⟩, w4,2 ⟨0⟩, w5,2 ⟨0⟩, w6,2 ⟨0⟩)

  and reach the final outcome.
      Let us now see why this scheme actually works. We denote by BAP(n,k)
  the above sketched protocol to reach consensus. BAP(n,k) starts by having the
  primary send out its value v0 to the n − 1 backups. In the case the primary
  operates correctly, each of the backups will indeed receive v0 . If the primary is
  faulty, some backups receive v0 while others receive v0 (i.e., the opposite of v0 ).
      Because we assume a backup Bi cannot know whether the primary is working
  correctly, it will have to check with the other backups. We therefore let Bi
  run the protocol again, but in this case, with value vi,0 ⟨ ⟩ and with a smaller
  process group, namely {B1 , . . . , Bi−1 , Bi+1 , . . . , Bn }. In other words, Bi executes
  BAP(n-1,k-1) with a total of n − 2 other processes. Note that at this point there
  are n − 1 instances of BAP(n-1,k-1) being executed in parallel.
      In the end, we see that these executions result in each backup Bi taking the
  majority of n − 1 values:
      • One value comes from the primary: vi,0 ⟨ ⟩
      • n − 2 values come from the other backups, in particular, Bi is dealing with
        the values vi,1 ⟨ ⟩, . . . , vi,i−1 ⟨ ⟩, vi,i+1 ⟨ ⟩, . . . , vi,n−1 ⟨ ⟩.
  However, because Bi cannot trust a received value vi,j ⟨ ⟩, it will have to check that
  value with the other n − 2 backups: B1 , . . . , Bi−1 , Bi+1 , . . . , Bj−1 , Bj+1 , . . . , Bn−1 .
  This leads to the execution of BAP(n-2,k-2), of which a total of n − 2 instances
  will be running in parallel. This story continues, and eventually, a backup process
  will need to run BAP(n-k,0), which simply returns the value sent by the primary,
  after which we can move up the recursion as described above.
      With this general scheme, we can now see why the protocol is correct. Fol-
  lowing Koren and Krishna [2007], we use induction on k to prove that BAP(n,k)
  meets the requirements BA1 and BA2 for n ≥ 3k + 1 and for all k ≥ 0.
      First, consider the case k = 0. In other words, we assume that there are no
  faulty processes. In that case, whatever the primary sends to the backups, that
  value will be consistently propagated throughout the system, and no other value
  will ever pop up. In other words, for any n, BAP(n,0) is correct. Now consider
  the case k > 0.
      First, consider the case that the primary is operating correctly. Without loss of
  generality, we can assume the primary sends out T. All the backups receive the

  same value, namely T. Each backup will then run BAP(n-1,k-1). By induction,
  we know that each of these instances will be executed correctly. This means that
  for any nonfaulty backup B, all the other nonfaulty backups will store the value
  that was sent by B, namely T. Each nonfaulty backup receives, in total, n − 1
  values, of which n − 2 come from other backups. Of those n − 2, at most k values
  may be wrong (i.e., F). With k ≤ (n − 1)/3, this means that every nonfaulty
  backup receives at least 1 + (n − 2) − (n − 1)/3 = (2n − 2)/3 values T. Because
  (2n − 2)/3 > n/3 for all n > 2, this means that every nonfaulty backup can take
  a correct majority vote on the total number of received values, thus satisfying
  requirement BA2.
       Let us now consider the case that the primary is faulty, meaning that at most
  k − 1 backups may operate incorrectly as well. The primary is assumed to send
  out any value it likes. There are a total of n − 1 backups, of which at most k − 1
  are faulty. Each backup runs BAP(n-1,k-1) and by, induction, each one of these
  instances is executed correctly. In particular, for every nonfaulty backup B, all
  the other nonfaulty backups will vote for the value sent by B. This means that
  all nonfaulty backups will have the same vector of n − 2 results from their fellow
  backups. Any difference between two nonfaulty backups can be caused only by
  the fact that the primary sent something else to each of them. As a result, when
  applying majority() to those complete vectors, the result for each backup will be
  the same, so that requirement BA1 is met.

Example: Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance

Byzantine fault tolerance was for long more or less an exotic topic, partly
because it turned out that combining safety, liveness, and practical performance
was difficult to achieve. It was around 2000 that Barbara Liskov and Miguel
Castro managed to come up with a practical implementation of a protocol
for replicating servers that could handle arbitrary failures. Let us briefly take
a look at their solution, which has been coined Practical Byzantine Fault
Tolerance, or simply PBFT [Castro and Liskov, 2002]. To better understand
how the protocol works, it may help to also consult Liskov [2010].
    Like Paxos, PBFT makes only a few assumptions about its environment. It
makes no assumptions about the behavior of replica servers: a faulty server
is assumed to exhibit arbitrary behavior. Likewise, messages may be lost,
delayed, and received out of order. However, a message’s sender is assumed
to be identifiable (which is achieved by having messages signed, as we discuss
in Section 9.2.3). Under these assumptions, and as long as no more than k
servers fail, it can be proven that PBFT is safe, meaning that a client will always
receive a correct answer. If we can additionally assume synchrony, meaning
that message delays and response times are bounded, it also provides liveness.
In practice, this means that PBFT assumes a partially synchronous model, in
which unbounded delays are an exception, for example, caused by an attack.

    To understand the algorithm, let us take a step back and partly review
what we have discussed so far on establishing a k-fault-tolerant process group.
An essential issue is that such a group behaves as a single, central server. As
a consequence, under the assumption of having only crash failures, when a
client sends a request, it should expect k + 1 identical answers. If a server had
crashed, fewer responses would be returned, but they would be the same.
    The first problem that we need to solve is that concurrent requests are all
handled in the same order. To this end, PBFT adopts a primary-backup model
with a total of 3k + 1 replica servers. To keep matters simple, let us assume for
now that the primary is nonfaulty. In that case, a client C sends a request to
execute operation o to the primary (denoted as P in Figure 8.18). The primary
has a notion of the current collection of nonfaulty replica servers, expressed in
terms of a view v, which is simply a number. The primary assigns a timestamp
t to o, which is then incremented to be used for a subsequent request. The
primary subsequently sends a (signed) pre-prepare message pre-prepare(t, v,
o) to the backups (denoted as Bi in Figure 8.18). We assume that backup B2 is
faulty, indicated by the dashed line used for its messages.

Figure 8.18: The different phases in PBFT. C is the client, P is the primary, and
B1 , B2 , B3 are the backups. We assume that B2 is faulty.

    A (nonfaulty) backup will accept to pre-prepare if it is in v and has never
accepted an operation with timestamp t in v before. Each backup that accepts
to pre-prepare sends an (again signed) message prepare(t, v, o) to the others,
including the primary. A key observation is that when a nonfaulty replica
server S has logged 2k messages prepare(t, v, o) (including its own) that all
match the pre-prepare message S itself received by the primary (i.e., all have
the same value for t, v, and o, respectively), there is consensus among the
nonfaulty servers on the order of which operation goes first. To see why,
let a prepare certificate PC(t, v, o) denote a certificate that is based on such
a set of 2k + 1 messages. Let PC(t, v, o′ ) be another prepare certificate with

the same values for t and v respectively, but with a different operation o′ .
Because each prepare certificate is based on 2k + 1 values from a total of 3k + 1
replica servers, the intersection of two certificates will necessarily be based on
messages from a subset of at least k + 1 servers. Of this subset, we know that
there is at least one nonfaulty server, which will have sent the same prepare
message. Hence, o = o′ .
   In Figure 8.18, notice that, regardless what B2 sends (or does not send),
the two other nonfaulty backups, namely B1 and B3 , will each have logged
three (2k + 1, with k = 1) messages for the tuple ⟨t, v, o⟩: the original message
from P, their own message, and the same message from the other backup. At
that point, there is consensus to execute o, and not some other operation. We
can then move on to the next phase.
    The next phase for a replica server starts when it has a prepare certificate: it
commits to the operation by broadcasting commit(t, v, o) to the other members
in v. Each server S, in turn, collects 2k of such commit messages from other
servers, leading to a commit certificate to execute operation o. At that point, it
executes o and sends a response to the client. Again, with its own message and
the 2k other messages, S knows that there is consensus among the nonfaulty
servers on which operation to actually execute now. In Figure 8.18, we see
that for the primary, as well as the backups B1 and B3 , there are indeed again
three messages that state the same: we can execute o. Each server knows that
there are at least two other servers besides itself that will indeed execute o,
and it is therefore good to go. What B2 had sent is not relevant: it will not
affect the decision of the others.
    The client collects all the results and takes as the answer the response that
is returned by at least k + 1 replicas, of which it knows that there is at least
one nonfaulty replica server contributing to that answer. Again notice that
in Figure 8.18, regardless what B2 tells the client about which operation B2
had executed, the client can safely assume that its requested operation was
executed by a majority of the servers.
    So far, so good. However, we also need to deal with the situation that
the primary fails. If a backup detects that the primary fails, it broadcasts
a view-change message for view v + 1. What we wish to establish is that a
request that was still being processed at the time the primary failed, will
eventually get executed once and only once by all nonfaulty servers. To this end,
we first need to ensure that there are no two commit certificates with the same
timestamp that have different associated operations, regardless the view that
each of them is associated with. This situation can be prevented by having
a quorum of 2k + 1 commit certificates just as before, but this time based on
prepare certificates. In other words, we want to regenerate commit certificates,
but now for the new view, and only to make sure that a nonfaulty server is
not missing any operation. In this respect, note that we may be generating a
certificate for an operation that a server S had already executed (which can be

observed by looking at timestamps), but that certificate will be ignored by S
as long as it keeps an account of its execution history.
    A backup server will broadcast a (signed) message view-change(v + 1, P),
with P being the set of its prepare certificates. (Note that we ignore garbage
collecting issues.) PBFT includes a deterministic function primary(w) known
to all backups that returns who the next primary will be given a view w.
This new primary will wait until it has a total of 2k + 1 view-change messages,
leading to a view-change certificate X of prepare certificates. The new primary
then broadcasts new-view(v + 1, X, O), where O consists of new pre-prepare
messages constructed according to one of the following situations:

   • pre-prepare(t, v + 1, o) ∈ O if the prepare certificate PC (t, v′ , o) ∈ X
     such that there is no prepare certificate PC (t, v′′ , o′ ) with v′′ > v′ ,
   • pre-prepare(t, v + 1, none) ∈ O if there is no prepare certificate
     PC (t, v′ , o′ ) ∈ X.

What happens is that any outstanding, pre-prepared operation from a previous
view is moved to the new view, but considering only the most recent view
that led to the installment of the current new view. In this sense, the new
primary effectively sends out appropriate new pre-prepare messages, based
on what the other backups had already committed to in their prepare phase.
Simplifying matters a bit, each backup will check O and X to make sure
that all operations are indeed authentic and broadcast prepare messages for
all pre-prepare messages in O. We are then back into the situation shown in
Figure 8.18, but now with one of the backups operating as primary, all the
other original backups operating as nonfaulty servers, and the old primary
operating as a faulty backup.
    We have skipped many elements of PBFT that deal with its correctness
and above all its efficiency. For example, we did not touch upon garbage
collecting logs or efficient ways of authenticating messages. Such details
can be found in [Castro and Liskov, 2002]. A description of a wrapper
that will allow the incorporation of Byzantine fault tolerance with legacy
applications is described in [Castro et al., 2003]. Notably the performance
of Byzantine fault tolerance has been subject to much research, leading to
many new protocols (see, for example, Zyzzyva [Kotla et al., 2009] and
Abstract [Guerraoui et al., 2010]), yet even these new proposals often rely on
the original PBFT implementation. That there is still room for improvement
when actually using PBFT for developing robust applications is discussed by
Chondros et al. [2012]. For example, PBFT assumes static membership (i.e.,
clients and servers are known to each other in advance), but also assumes that
a replica server’s memory acts as a stable, persistent storage.
    These and other shortcomings along with the inherent complexity of
Byzantine fault tolerance have formed a hurdle for widespread use of PBFT.
Interestingly, attention for PBFT returned in the advent of permissioned

blockhains, being one of the few alternatives that could offer a consenus
protocol in a public network. New research was initiated to address short-
comings, notably the relatively small number of participants that PBFT can
maximally handle. An important development has been HotStuff [Yin et al.,
2019], which effectively provides a much more efficient view change than in
PBFT, significantly contributing to the scalability of the protocol.

8.2.6      Consensus in blockchain systems
Coming to this point, let us return to the much debated blockchain systems.
In particular, let us zoom in a bit into what consensus entails in these systems.
Following the approach presented by Xiao et al. [2020], we can distinguish
four requirements for blockchain consensus:

   1. Agreement: All nonfaulty nodes agree on the acceptance of a block of
      transactions and its position in the blockchain, or agree that it should be
      discarded.
   2. Integrity: Each nonfaulty node sees the same blocks of accepted trans-
      actions, and the same positions of these blocks in the blockchain.
   3. Termination: Every nonfaulty node either discards or accepts a transac-
      tion, as contained within a block, to be part of the blockchain.
   4. Validity: If every node receives the same validated block, it should be
      accepted for the blockchain.

The first two requirements are at the core of safety: the blockchain does what
it is supposed to do (i.e., nothing bad happens). The last two can be argued
to deal with liveness: eventually everything turns out to be good. For our
present discussion, reaching agreement is crucial.
     For permissionless blockchains, we see that leader election is important:
once a leader has been elected, we can essentially ensure agreement by letting
the leader decide on the block that is to be appended to the blockchain.
As we discuss in Section 9.4.3, guaranteeing the integrity of a blockchain
can be established using well-known cryptographic techniques. The only
problem with leader elections happens if two or more leaders are elected,
which may happen when the declaration of a winner does not reach its
competitor in time. In such a case, two processes will start to append blocks
to a chain, effectively leading to two branches. A common solution is that
once a participant discovers it is reading from the smallest branch, it ignores
that branch completely and makes sure that it gets the blocks from the longer
branch.
     For permissioned blockchains, a common solution is to adopt PBFT. In
other words, the decision to append blocks to an existing chain is handled
by a relatively small fault-tolerant group of processes (who need not trust

each other). Because PBFT is a relatively costly and nonscalable solution,
alternatives have been designed, with HotStuff [Yin et al., 2019] playing a
prominent role as experiments showed that the number of replica servers
could go up beyond 100.
    Xiao et al. [2020] provides an excellent overview of the various consensus
protocols for blockchains, along with a discussion on the many trade-offs to
be made.

8.2.7   Some limitations on realizing fault tolerance
Organizing replicated processes into a group helps to increase fault tolerance.
However, what should have become clear by now is that there is a price to
pay, namely a potential loss of performance. In the solutions discussed so far,
processes in a fault-tolerant group may need to exchange numerous messages
before reaching a decision. The Byzantine agreement protocol is an excellent
illustration of how tightly coupled processes may be. The question that comes
to mind is whether realizing specific forms of fault tolerance, like being able
to withstand arbitrary failures, is always possible.

On reaching consensus
As we mentioned, if a client can base its decisions through a voting mechanism,
we can tolerate that k out of 2k + 1 processes are lying about their result. The
assumption we are making, however, is that processes do not team up to
produce a wrong result. In general, matters become more intricate if we
demand that a process group reaches consensus, which is needed in many
cases. There are three requirements for reaching consensus [Fischer et al.,
1985]:

   • Processes produce the same output value
   • Every output value must be valid
   • Every process must eventually provide output

Some examples where reaching consensus is necessary include electing a
coordinator, deciding whether to commit a transaction, and dividing up tasks
among workers. When the communication and processes are all perfect,
reaching consensus is often straightforward, but when they are not, problems
arise.
    The general goal of distributed consensus algorithms is to have all the
nonfaulty processes reach consensus on some issue, and to establish that
consensus within a finite number of steps. The problem is complicated by the
fact that different assumptions about the underlying system require different
solutions, assuming solutions even exist. Turek and Shasha [1992] distinguish
the following cases:

   1. Synchronous versus asynchronous systems. Rephrasing our description
      somewhat, a system is synchronous if and only if the processes are
      known to operate in a lock-step mode. Formally, this means that there
      should be some constant c ≥ 1, such that if any process has taken c + 1
      steps, every other process has taken at least 1 step.
   2. Communication delay is bounded or not. Delay is bounded if and
      only if we know that every message is delivered with a globally and
      predetermined maximum time.
   3. Message delivery is ordered (in real time) or not. In other words, we
      distinguish the situation where messages from the different senders are
      delivered in the order that they were sent in real global time, from the
      situation in which we do not have such guarantees.
   4. Message transmission is done through unicasting or multicasting.

   As it turns out, reaching consensus is possible only for the situations
shown in Figure 8.19. In all other cases, it can be shown that no solution exists.
Note that most distributed systems in practice assume that processes behave
asynchronously, message transmission is unicast, and communication delays
are unbounded. As a consequence, we need to make use of ordered (reliable)
message delivery, such as provided by TCP. And again, in practical situations
we assume synchronous behavior to be the default, but take into account that
there may be unbounded delays as well. Figure 8.19 illustrates the nontrivial
nature of distributed consensus when processes may fail.

      Process behavior                     Message ordering                     Commun. delay
                                      Unordered            Ordered
                              z          }|       {z         }|             {
                          (
                                  ✓          ✓         ✓           ✓            Bounded
           Synchronous
                          (                            ✓           ✓            Unbounded
                                                                   ✓            Bounded
           Asynchronous
                                                                   ✓            UnBounded
                              Unicast     Multicast Unicast     Multicast
                                         Message transmission

Figure 8.19: Circumstances under which distributed consensus can be reached.

    Reaching consensus may not be possible. Fischer et al. [1985] proved that
if messages cannot be guaranteed to be delivered within a known, finite time,
no consensus is possible if even one process is faulty (albeit if that one process
fails silently). The problem with such systems is that arbitrarily slow processes
are indistinguishable from crashed ones (i.e., you cannot tell the dead from
the living). These and other theoretical results are surveyed by Barborak et al.
[1993] and Turek and Shasha [1992].

    It should also be noted that the schemes described so far assume that nodes
are either Byzantine, or collaborative. The latter cannot always be simply
assumed when processes are from different administrative domains. In that
case, they will more likely exhibit rational behavior, for example, by reporting
timeouts when doing so is cheaper than executing an update operation. How
to deal with these cases is not trivial. A first step toward a solution is captured
in the form of BAR fault tolerance, which stands for Byzantine, Altruism,
and Rationality. BAR fault tolerance is described in Aiyer et al. [2005] and
Clement et al. [2008].

Consistency, availability, and partitioning
Strongly related to the conditions under which consensus can (not) be reached,
is when consistency can be reached. Consistency in this case means that when
we have a process group to which a client is sending requests, that the
responses returned to that client are correct. We are dealing with a safety
property: a property that asserts that nothing bad will happen. For our
purposes, the types of operations we consider are those that seem to be
executed in a clearly defined order by a single, centralized server. By now, we
know better: these operations are executed by a process group to withstand
the failures of k group members.
    We introduced process groups to improve fault tolerance, and, more
specifically, to improve availability. Availability is typically a liveness property:
eventually, something good will happen. In terms of our process groups, we
aim to eventually get a (correct) response to every request issued by a client.
Being consistent in responses while also being highly available is not an
unreasonable requirement for services that are part of a distributed system.
Unfortunately, we may be asking too much.
    In practical situations, our underlying assumption that the processes in a
group can indeed communicate with each other may be false. Messages may
be lost; a group may be partitioned due to a faulty network. In 2000, Eric
Brewer posed an important theorem which was later proven to be correct by
Gilbert and Lynch [2002]:

      CAP Theorem: Any networked system providing shared data can provide
      only two of the following three properties:
         • C: consistency, by which a shared and replicated data item appears
           as a single, up-to-date copy
         • A: availability, by which updates will always be eventually executed
         • P: Tolerant to the partitioning of process group (e.g., because of a
           failing network).

In other words, in a network subject to communication failures, it is impossible
to realize an atomic read/write shared memory that guarantees a response to
every request [Gilbert and Lynch, 2012].

    This has now become known as the CAP theorem, first published as [Fox
and Brewer, 1999]. As explained by Brewer [2012], one way of understanding
the theorem is to think of two processes unable to communicate because of a
failing network. Allowing one process to accept updates leads to inconsistency,
so that we can only have properties { A, P}. If the illusion of consistency is
to be provided while the two processes cannot communicate, then one of the
two processes will have to pretend to be unavailable, implying having only
{C, P}. However, only if the two processes can communicate, is it possible to
maintain both consistency and high availability, meaning that we have only
{C, A}, but no longer property P.
    Note also the relationship with reaching consensus; in fact, where con-
sensus requires proving that processes produce the same output, providing
consistency is weaker. This also means that if achieving CAP is impossible,
then so is consensus.
    For some time, many people thought that the CAP theorem actually told
us we were dealing with a practical horrendous situation. However, the CAP
theorem is all about reaching a trade-off between safety and liveness, based on
the observation that obtaining both in an inherently unreliable system cannot
be achieved. Practical distributed systems are inherently unreliable. What
Brewer and his colleagues observed is that in practical distributed systems,
one simply has to make a choice to proceed, although another process cannot
be reached. In other words, we need to do something when a partition
manifests itself through high latency. What this means, is that we need to
look at the distributed application at hand to see how we can salvage the
seemingly impossibility implications of the CAP theorem.
    The bottom line when it seems that partitioning is taking place, is to
proceed (tolerating partitions in favor of either consistency or availability),
while simultaneously starting a recovery procedure that can mitigate the
effects of potential inconsistencies. Exactly deciding on how to proceed is
application-dependent: in many cases having duplicate keys in a database
can easily be fixed (implying that we should tolerate an inconsistency), while
duplicate transfers of large sums of money may not (meaning that we should
decide to tolerate lower availability). One can argue that the CAP theorem
essentially moves designers of distributed systems from theoretical solutions
to engineering solutions. The interested reader is referred to [Brewer, 2012] to
see how such a move can be made.

8.2.8      Failure detection
It may have become clear from our discussions so far that to properly mask
failures, we generally need to detect them as well. Failure detection is one
of the cornerstones of fault tolerance in distributed systems. What it all boils
down to is that for a group of processes, nonfaulty members should be able

to decide who is still a member, and who is not. In other words, we need to
be able to detect when a member has failed.
    When it comes to detecting process failures, there are essentially only two
mechanisms. Either processes actively send “are you alive?” messages to each
other (for which they obviously expect an answer), or passively wait until
messages come in from different processes. The latter approach makes sense
only when it can be guaranteed that there is enough communication.
    There is a huge body of theoretical work on failure detectors. What it,
in the end, all boils down to is that a timeout mechanism is used to check
whether a process has failed. If a process P probes another process Q to see if
it has failed, P is said to suspect Q to have crashed if Q has not responded
within some time.

  Note 8.7 (More information: On perfect failure detectors)
  It should be clear that in a synchronous distributed system, a suspected crash
  corresponds to a known crash. In practice, however, we will be dealing with
  partially synchronous systems. In that case, it makes more sense to assume
  eventually perfect failure detectors. In this case, a process P will suspect another
  process Q to have crashed after t time units have elapsed and still Q did not
  respond to P’s probe. However, if Q later does send a message that is (also)
  received by P, P will (1) stop suspecting Q, and (2) increase the timeout value t.
  Note that if Q does crash (and does not recover), P will continue to suspect Q.

    In real settings, there are problems with using probes and timeouts. For
example, due to unreliable networks, simply stating that a process has failed
because it does not return an answer to a probe message may be wrong. In
other words, it is easy to generate false positives. If a false positive has the
effect that a perfectly healthy process is removed from a membership list,
then clearly we are doing something wrong. Another serious problem is that
timeouts are just plain crude. As noticed by Birman [2012], there is hardly
any work on building proper failure detection subsystems that take more into
account than only the lack of a reply to a single message. This statement is
even more evident when looking at industry-deployed distributed systems.
    There are various issues that need to be considered when designing a
failure-detection subsystem (see also Zhuang et al. [2005]). For example, fail-
ure detection can take place through gossiping in which each node regularly
announces to its neighbors that it is still up and running. As we mentioned,
an alternative is to let nodes actively probe each other.
    Failure detection can also be done as a side effect of regularly exchanging
information with neighbors, as is the case with gossip-based information dis-
semination (which we discussed in Chapter 4). This approach was essentially
also adopted in Obduro [Vogels, 2003]: processes periodically gossip their
service availability. This information is gradually disseminated through the

network. Eventually, every process will know about every other process, but
more importantly, will have enough information locally available to decide
whether a process has failed or not. A member for which the availability
information is old, will presumably have failed.
     Another important issue is that a failure detection subsystem should
ideally be able to distinguish network failures from node failures. One way of
dealing with this problem is not to let a single node decide whether one of its
neighbors has crashed. Instead, when noticing a timeout on a probe message,
a node requests other neighbors to see whether they can reach the presumed
failing node. Of course, positive information can also be shared: if a node is
still alive, that information can be forwarded to other interested parties (who
may be detecting a link failure to the suspected node).
     This brings us to another key issue: when a member failure is detected,
how should other nonfaulty processes be informed? One simple, and some-
what radical approach is the following. In FUSE [Dunagan et al., 2004],
processes can be joined in a group that spans a wide-area network. The group
members create a spanning tree that is used for monitoring member failures.
Members send ping messages to their neighbors. When a neighbor does not
respond, the pinging node immediately switches to a state in which it will
also no longer respond to pings from other nodes. By recursion, it is seen that
a single node failure is rapidly promoted to a group failure notification.

8.3     Reliable client-server communication
Often, fault tolerance in distributed systems concentrates on faulty processes.
However, we also need to consider communication failures. Most of the
failure models discussed previously apply equally well to communication
channels. In particular, a communication channel may exhibit crash, omission,
timing, and arbitrary failures. In practice, when building reliable communica-
tion channels, the focus is on masking crash and omission failures. Arbitrary
failures may occur in the form of duplicate messages, resulting from the fact
that in a computer network messages may be buffered for a relatively long
time, and are reinjected into the network after the original sender has already
issued a retransmission (see, for example, Tanenbaum et al. [2021]).

8.3.1      Point-to-point communication
In many distributed systems, reliable point-to-point communication is es-
tablished by making use of a reliable transport protocol, such as TCP. TCP
masks omission failures, which occur in the form of lost messages, by using
acknowledgments and retransmissions. Such failures are completely hidden
from a TCP client.
   However, crash failures of connections are not masked. A crash failure
may occur when (for whatever reason) a TCP connection is abruptly broken so

that no more messages can be transmitted through the channel. In most cases,
the client is informed that the channel has crashed by raising an exception.
The only way to mask such failures is to let the distributed system attempt
to automatically set up a new connection, by simply resending a connection
request. The underlying assumption is that the other side is still, or again,
responsive to such requests.

8.3.2   RPC semantics in the presence of failures
Let us now take a closer look at client-server communication when using
high-level communication facilities such as remote procedure calls (RPCs).
The goal of RPC is to hide communication by making remote procedure calls
look just like local ones. With a few exceptions, so far we have come fairly
close. Indeed, as long as both client and server are functioning perfectly, RPC
does its job well. The problem comes about when errors occur. It is then that
the differences between local and remote calls are not always easy to mask.
    To structure our discussion, let us distinguish between five different classes
of failures that can occur in RPC systems, as follows:

   1. The client is unable to locate the server.
   2. The request message from the client to the server is lost.
   3. The server crashes after receiving a request.
   4. The reply message from the server to the client is lost.
   5. The client crashes after sending a request.

Each of these categories poses different problems and requires different solu-
tions.

Client cannot locate the server
To start with, it can happen that the client cannot locate a suitable server. All
servers might be down, for example. Alternatively, suppose that the client is
compiled using a particular version of the client stub, and the binary is not
used for a considerable period of time. Meanwhile, the server evolves and a
new version of the interface is installed; new stubs are generated and put into
use. When the client is eventually run, the binder will be unable to match
it up with a server and will report failure. While this mechanism is used to
protect the client from accidentally trying to talk to a server that may not
agree with it in terms of what parameters are required or what it is supposed
to do, the problem remains of how should this failure be dealt with.
    One possible solution is to have the error raise an exception. In some
languages, (e.g., Java), programmers can write special procedures that are
invoked upon specific errors, such as division by zero. In C, signal handlers

can be used for this purpose. In other words, we could define a new signal
type SIGNOSERVER, and allow it to be handled in the same way as other
signals.
    This approach, too, has drawbacks. To start with, not every language has
exceptions or signals. Another point is that having to write an exception
or signal handler destroys the transparency we have been trying to achieve.
Suppose that you are a programmer, and you are requested to write the append
procedure. You smile and tell her it will be written, tested, and documented
in five minutes. Then she mentions that you also have to write an exception
handler as well, just in case the procedure is not there today. At this point, it
is pretty hard to maintain the illusion that remote procedures are no different
from local ones, since writing an exception handler for “Cannot locate server”
would be a rather unusual request in a nondistributed system.

Lost request messages
The second item on the list is dealing with lost request messages. This is
the easiest one to deal with: just have the operating system or client stub
start a timer when sending the request. If the timer expires before a reply or
an acknowledgment comes back, the message is sent again. If the message
was truly lost, the server will not be able to tell the difference between the
retransmission and the original, and everything will work fine. Unless, of
course, so many request messages are lost that the client gives up and falsely
concludes that the server is down, in which case we are back to “Cannot
locate server.” If the request was not lost, the only thing we need to do is let
the server be able to detect it is dealing with a retransmission. Unfortunately,
doing so is not so simple, as we explain when discussing lost replies.

Server crashes
The next failure on the list is a server crash. The normal sequence of events
at a server is shown in Figure 8.20(a). A request arrives, is carried out, and a
reply is sent. Now consider Figure 8.20(b). A request arrives and is carried
out, just as before, but the server crashes before it can send the reply. Finally,
look at Figure 8.20(c). Again a request arrives, but this time the server crashes
before it can even be carried out. And, of course, no reply is sent back.
    The annoying part of Figure 8.20 is that the correct treatment differs for (b)
and (c). In (b) the system has to report failure back to the client (e.g., raise an
exception), whereas in (c) it can just retransmit the request. The problem is
that the client’s operating system cannot tell which is which. All it knows is
that its timer has expired.
    Three schools of thought exist on what to do here [Spector, 1982]. One
philosophy is to wait until the server reboots (or let the client’s middleware
transparently rebind to a new server) and try the operation again. The idea is

            (a)                       (b)                        (c)

Figure 8.20: A server in client-server communication. (a) The normal case.
(b) Crash after execution. (c) Crash before execution.

to keep trying until a reply has been received, then give it to the client. This
technique is called at-least-once semantics and guarantees that the RPC has
been carried out at least one time, but possibly more.
    The second philosophy gives up immediately and reports back failure.
This approach is called at-most-once semantics and guarantees that the RPC
has been carried out at most one time, but possibly not at all.
    The third philosophy is to guarantee nothing. When a server crashes, the
client gets no help and no promises about what happened. The RPC may
have been carried out anywhere from zero to many times. The main virtue of
this scheme is that it is easy to implement.
    None of these are terribly attractive. What one would like is exactly-once
semantics, but in general, there is no way to arrange this. Imagine that
the remote operation consists of processing a document, such as producing
a number of PDF files from LATEX and other sources. The server sends a
completion message to the client when the document has been completely
processed. Also assume that when a client issues a request, it receives an
acknowledgment that the request has been delivered to the server. There are
two strategies the server can follow. It can either send a completion message
just before it actually tells the document processor to do its work, or after the
document has been processed.
    Assume that the server crashes and subsequently recovers. It announces
to all clients that it has just crashed but is now up and running again. The
problem is that the client does not know whether its request to process a
document will actually have been carried out.
    There are four strategies the client can follow. First, the client can decide
to never reissue a request, at the risk that the document will not be processed.
Second, it can decide to always reissue a request, but this may lead to the
document being processed twice (which may easily incur a significant amount
of work when dealing with intricate documents). Third, it can decide to
reissue a request only if it did not yet receive an acknowledgment that its
request had been delivered to the server. In that case, the client is counting
on the fact that the server crashed before the request could be delivered.
The fourth and last strategy is to reissue a request only if it has received an

acknowledgment for the request. With two strategies for the server, and four
for the client, there are a total of eight combinations to consider. Unfortunately,
as it turns out, no combination is satisfactory: it can be shown that for any
combination either the request is lost forever, or carried out twice.

  Note 8.8 (Advanced: Why fully transparent server recovery is impossible)
  To explain about server recovery, note that there are three events that can happen
  at the server: send the completion message (M), complete the processing of
  the document (P), and crash (C). Note that crashing during the processing of a
  document is considered the same as crashing before its completion. These events
  can occur in six different orderings:
      1. M → P → C: A crash occurs after sending the completion message and
         processing the document.
      2. M → C (→ P): A crash happens after sending the completion message, but
         before the document could be (completely) processed.
      3. P → M → C: A crash occurs after sending the completion message and
         processing the document.
      4. P → C (→ M): The document was processed, after which a crash occurs
         before the completion message could be sent.
      5. C (→ P → M): A crash happens before the server could complete the
         processing of the document.
      6. C (→ M → P): A crash happens before the server could even do anything.
  The parentheses indicate an event that can no longer happen because the server
  already crashed. Figure 8.21 shows all possible combinations. As can be readily
  verified, there is no combination of client strategy and server strategy that will
  work correctly under all possible event sequences. The bottom line is that the
  client can never know whether the server crashed just before or after having the
  text printed.

                                  Strategy M → P                  Strategy P → M
       Reissue strategy         MPC   MC(P)   C(MP)            PMC    PC(M)   C(PM)
            Always              DUP     OK     OK              DUP     DUP      OK
             Never              OK    ZERO    ZERO              OK      OK    ZERO
       Only when ACKed          DUP     OK    ZERO             DUP      OK    ZERO
      Only when not ACKed       OK    ZERO     OK               OK     DUP      OK
             Client                    Server                          Server
                            OK      =   Document processed once
                            DUP     =   Document processed twice
                            ZERO    =   Document not processed at all

Figure 8.21: Different combinations of client and server strategies in the
      presence of server crashes. Events between brackets never take place
      because of a previous crash.

     In short, the possibility of server crashes radically changes the nature of RPC
  and clearly distinguishes single-processor systems from distributed ones. In the

  former case, a server crash also implies a client crash, so recovery is neither
  possible nor necessary. In the latter we can and should take action.

Lost reply messages
Lost replies can also be difficult to deal with. The obvious solution is just to
rely on a timer again that has been set by the client’s operating system. If no
reply is forthcoming within a reasonable period, just send the request once
more. The trouble with this solution is that the client is not really sure why
there was no answer. Did the request or reply get lost, or is the server merely
slow? It may make a difference.
    In particular, some operations can safely be repeated as often as necessary
with no damage being done. A request such as asking for the first 1024
bytes of a file has no side effects and can be executed as often as necessary
without any harm being done. A request that has this property is said to be
idempotent.
    Now consider a request to a banking server asking to transfer money from
one account to another. If the request arrives and is carried out, but the reply
is lost, the client will not know this and will retransmit the message. The
bank server will interpret this request as a new one, and will carry it out too.
Twice the amount of money will be transferred. Transferring money is not
idempotent.
    One way of solving this problem is to try to structure all the requests in
an idempotent way. In practice, however, many requests (e.g., transferring
money) are inherently nonidempotent, so something else is needed. Another
method is to have the client assign each request a sequence number. By
having the server keep track of the most recently received sequence number
from each client that is using it, the server can tell the difference between
an original request and a retransmission and can refuse to carry out any
request a second time. However, the server will still have to send a response
to the client. Note that this approach does require that the server maintains
administration on each client. Furthermore, it is not clear how long to maintain
this administration. An additional safeguard is to have a bit in the message
header that is used to distinguish initial requests from retransmissions (the
idea being that it is always safe to perform an original request; retransmissions
may require more care).

Client crashes
The final item on the list of failures is the client crash. What happens if a
client sends a request to a server to do some work and crashes before the
server replies? At this point a computation is active and no parent is waiting
for the result. Such a computation is called an orphan (computation).

    Orphan computations can cause a variety of problems that can interfere
with normal operation of the system. As a bare minimum, they waste pro-
cessing power. They can also lock files or otherwise tie up valuable resources.
Finally, if the client reboots and does the RPC again, but the reply from the
orphan comes back immediately afterward, confusion can result. Note that,
in this case, we are essentially dealing with the problem of guaranteeing
at-most-once semantics and bringing the client back into a state just before it
crashed. As we will explain later, checkpointing just before sending a request,
and restoring the client to the checkpointed state will solve many problems
with orphan computations. In essence, it boils down to let the orphan do its
work, and properly restoring the client.
    Yet, what can be done about orphans? Four solutions have been pro-
posed [Nelson, 1981]. First, before a client stub sends an RPC message, it
makes a log entry telling what it is about to do. The log is kept on disk or some
other medium that survives crashes. After a reboot, the log is checked and the
orphan is explicitly killed off. This solution is called orphan extermination,
an admittedly not very empathically sounding name.
    The disadvantage of this scheme is the expense of writing a disk record
for every RPC. Furthermore, it may not even work, since orphans themselves
may do RPCs, thus creating grandorphans or further descendants that are
difficult or impossible to locate. Finally, the network may be partitioned, for
example because of a failed gateway, making it impossible to kill them, even
if they can be located. All in all, this is not a promising approach, and, in
general, will need to be avoided due to its complexity.
    With the second solution, called reincarnation, all these problems can
be solved without the need to write disk records. The way it works is to
divide time up into sequentially numbered epochs. When a client recovers,
it broadcasts a message to all machines declaring the start of a new epoch.
When such a broadcast comes in, all remote computations are killed. Of
course, if the network is partitioned, some orphans may survive. Fortunately,
however, when they report back, their replies will contain an obsolete epoch
number, making them easy to detect.
    The third solution is a variant on this idea, but somewhat less Draconian.
It is called gentle reincarnation. When an epoch broadcast comes in, each
machine checks to see if it has any remote computations running locally, and
if so, tries its best to locate their owners. Only if the owners cannot be located
anywhere is the computation killed.
    In the fourth solution, called expiration, each RPC is given a standard
amount of time, T, to do the job. If it cannot finish, it must explicitly ask for
another quantum. Of course, this is quite a nuisance. On the other hand, if
after a crash the client waits a time T before rebooting, all orphans are sure to
be gone. The problem to be solved here is choosing a reasonable value of T in
the face of RPCs with wildly differing requirements.

    In practice, all of these methods are crude and undesirable. Worse yet,
killing an orphan may have unforeseen consequences. For example, suppose
that an orphan has obtained locks on one or more files or database records.
If the orphan is suddenly killed, these locks may remain forever. Also, an
orphan may have already made entries in various remote queues to start
up other processes at some future time, so even killing the orphan may not
remove all traces of it. Conceivably, it may even have started again, with
unforeseen consequences. Orphan elimination is discussed in more detail
by Panzieri and Shrivastava [1988].
    As mentioned, the best solution is often not to do anything special, but
attempt to restore the client to a state in which it can handle any response
from its previously orphaned computation. This brings us to checkpointing
and message logging, which we discuss in Section 8.6.

8.4     Reliable group communication
Considering how important process resilience by replication is, it is not
surprising that reliable multicast services are important as well. Such services
guarantee that messages are delivered to all members in a process group.
Unfortunately, reliable multicasting turns out to be surprisingly tricky. In
this section, we take a closer look at the issues involved in reliably delivering
messages to a process group.

8.4.1   Introduction
Let us first define what reliable group communication actually is. Intuitively,
it means that a message that is sent to a process group should be delivered
to each member of that group. If we separate the logic of handling messages
from the core functionality of a group member, we can conveniently make the
distinction between receiving messages and delivering messages, as illustrated
in Figure 8.22. A message is received by a message-handling component,
which, in turn, delivers a message to the component containing the core
functionality of a group member. Informally, a message that is received by
process P will also be delivered by P.
    As an example, ensuring that messages from the same sender are delivered
in the same order as they were sent, is typically taken care of by a message-
handling component. Likewise, providing reliable message-passing is a
feature that can and should be separated from the core functionality of a group
member, and is typically implemented by a message-handling component (if
not by the underlying operating system).
    With this separation between receiving and delivering messages, we can
be more precise about what reliable group communication means. Let us
make a distinction between reliable communication in the presence of faulty
processes, and reliable communication when processes are assumed to operate

Figure 8.22: The distinction between receiving and delivering messages.

correctly. In the first case, group communication is considered to be reliable
when it can be guaranteed that a message is received by and subsequently
delivered to all nonfaulty group members.
    The tricky part here is that agreement should be reached on what the
group actually looks like before a message can be delivered. If a sender
intended to have a message delivered by each member of a group G, but that,
for whatever reason, at the time of delivery we actually have another group
G′ ̸= G, we should ask ourselves whether the message can be delivered.
    The situation becomes simpler if we can ignore consensus on group mem-
bership. In particular, let us first assume that a sending process has a list of
intended recipients. In that case, it can simply deploy reliable transport-level
protocols such as TCP and, one by one, sends its message to each recipient. If
a receiving process fails, the message may be resent later when the process
recovers, or ignored altogether (for example, because the sender had left the
group). In case a group member is expected to send a response, even if it
is just an acknowledgement, communication can be speeded up by separat-
ing the sending of a request from receiving a response, as illustrated by the
message sequence charts in Figure 8.23.
    Most transport layers offer reliable point-to-point channels; they rarely
offer reliable communication to a group of processes. The best they offer is to
let a process set up a point-to-point connection to each other process it wants
to communicate with. When process groups are relatively small, this approach
to establishing reliability is a straightforward and practical solution. On the
other hand, we can often assume that the underlying communication system
does offer unreliable multicasting, meaning that a multicast message may be
lost part way and delivered by some, but not all, of the intended receivers.

                                      (a)

                                      (b)

Figure 8.23: (a) A sender sends out requests, but waits for a response before
sending out the next one. (b) Requests are sent out in parallel, after which the
sender waits for incoming responses.

    A simple solution to reach reliable group communication is shown in
Figure 8.24. The sending process assigns a sequence number to each message
it multicasts and stores the message locally in a history buffer. Assuming
the receivers are known to the sender, the sender simply keeps the message
in its history buffer until each receiver has returned an acknowledgement.
A receiver can suspect it is missing a message m with sequence number s
when it has received messages with sequence numbers higher than s. In that
case, it returns a negative acknowledgement to the sender, requesting for a
retransmission of m.
    There are various design trade-offs to be made. For example, to reduce
the number of messages returned to the sender, acknowledgements could
possibly be piggybacked with other messages. Also, retransmitting a message
can be done using point-to-point communication to each requesting process,
or using a single multicast message sent to all processes. General issues on
reliable multicasting are discussed by Popescu et al. [2007]. A survey and
overview of reliable multicasting in the context of publish/subscribe systems,
which is also relevant here, is provided by Esposito et al. [2013].

                                       (a)

                                       (b)

Figure 8.24: A solution for reliable multicasting. (a) Message transmission.
(b) Reporting feedback.

8.4.2      Scalability in reliable multicasting
The main problem with the reliable multicast scheme just described is that
it cannot support large numbers of receivers. If there are N receivers, the
sender must be prepared to accept at least N acknowledgements. With many
receivers, the sender may be swamped with such feedback messages, which is
also referred to as a feedback implosion. When replicating processes for fault
tolerance, this situation is not likely to occur as process groups are relatively
small. When replicating for performance, we have a different case. Moreover,
we may then also need to take into account that the receivers are spread across
a wide-area network.
    One solution to the problem of a feedback implosion is not to have re-
ceivers acknowledge the receipt of a message. Instead, a receiver returns a
feedback message only to inform the sender it is missing a message. Return-
ing only such negative acknowledgements can be shown to generally scale
better [Towsley et al., 1997], but no hard guarantees can be given that feedback
implosions will never happen.
    Another problem with returning only negative acknowledgements is that
the sender will, in theory, be forced to keep a message in its history buffer
forever. Because the sender can never know if a message has been correctly
delivered to all receivers, it should always be prepared for a receiver requesting

the retransmission of an old message. In practice, the sender will remove a
message from its history buffer after some time has elapsed to prevent the
buffer from overflowing. However, removing a message is done at the risk of
a request for a retransmission not being honored.
    Several proposals for scalable, reliable multicasting exist. A comparison
between different schemes can be found in [Levine and Garcia-Luna-Aceves,
1998]. We now briefly discuss two very different approaches that are represen-
tative of many existing solutions.
    The key issue to scalable solutions for reliable multicasting is to reduce
the number of feedback messages that are returned to the sender. A popular
model that has been applied to several wide-area applications is feedback
suppression. This scheme underlies the Scalable Reliable Multicasting
(SRM) protocol developed by Floyd et al. [1997] and works as follows.
    First, in SRM, receivers never acknowledge the successful delivery of a
multicast message, but instead, report only when they are missing a mes-
sage. How message loss is detected is left to the application. Only negative
acknowledgements are returned as feedback. Whenever a receiver notices that
it missed a message, it multicasts its feedback to the rest of the group.
    Multicasting feedback allows another group member to suppress its own
feedback. Suppose several receivers missed message m. Each of them will
need to return a negative acknowledgement to the sender, S, so that m can
be retransmitted. However, if we assume that retransmissions are always
multicast to the entire group, it is sufficient that only a single request for
retransmission reaches S.
    For this reason, a receiver R that did not receive message m schedules a
feedback message with some random delay. That is, the request for retrans-
mission is not sent until some random time has elapsed. If, in the meantime,
another request for retransmission for m reaches R, R will suppress its own
feedback, knowing that m will be retransmitted shortly. In this way, ideally,
only a single feedback message will reach S, which in turn subsequently
retransmits m. This scheme is shown in Figure 8.25.
    Feedback suppression has shown to scale reasonably well, and has been
used as the underlying mechanism for a number of collaborative Internet
applications, such as a shared whiteboard. However, the approach also
introduces a number of serious problems. First, ensuring that only one request
for retransmission is returned to the sender requires a reasonably accurate
scheduling of feedback messages at each receiver. Otherwise, many receivers
will still return their feedback at the same time. Setting timers accordingly in
a group of processes that is dispersed across a wide-area network is not that
easy.
    Another problem is that multicasting feedback also interrupts those pro-
cesses to which the message has been successfully delivered. In other words,
other receivers are forced to receive and process messages that are useless

Figure 8.25: Several receivers have scheduled a request for retransmission, but
the first retransmission request leads to the suppression of others.

to them. The only solution to this problem is to let receivers that have
not received message m join a separate multicast group for m, as explained
by Kasera et al. [1997]. Unfortunately, this solution requires that groups can
be managed in a highly efficient manner, which is hard to accomplish in a
wide-area system. A better approach is therefore to let receivers that tend to
miss the same messages team up and share the same multicast channel for
feedback messages and retransmissions. Details on this approach are found
in [Liu et al., 1998].
    To enhance the scalability of SRM, it is useful to let receivers assist in local
recovery. In particular, if a receiver to which message m has been successfully
delivered, receives a request for retransmission, it can decide to multicast m
even before the retransmission request reaches the original sender. Further
details can be found in [Floyd et al., 1997] and [Liu et al., 1998].
    Feedback suppression as just described is basically a nonhierarchical so-
lution. However, achieving scalability for large groups of receivers requires
that hierarchical approaches are adopted. A solution is shown in Figure 8.26.
The group of receivers is partitioned into a number of subgroups, which
are subsequently organized into a tree. Within each subgroup, any reliable
multicasting scheme that works for small groups can be used. Each subgroup
appoints a local coordinator, which represents that group in the multicast tree.
A link in the tree between two nodes corresponds to a reliable connection
between the coordinators of the respective subgroups.
    When a process S in group G wants to send a message, it simply uses the
reliable multicast scheme for G to reach all its members, including the group’s
coordinator, say C. C, in turn, will forward the message to its neighboring
coordinators. As a general rule, a coordinator will forward an incoming
message m to all its neighboring coordinators, except the one from which it
received m. In addition, a coordinator will reliably multicast the incoming
message to all members of the subgroup it represents, and notably also handle
retransmissions for that group.

   In an ACK-based scheme, if coordinator C of group G sends a message
m to coordinator C′ of another, neighboring group G′ , it will keep m in its
history buffer at least until C′ has sent an acknowledgement. In a NACK-
based scheme, only if G′ detects it has missed m (and thus also all members
of G′ , and all coordinators to which G ′ would have forwarded m), it will send
a nack message to C. It is thus seen that a single ack or nack message from a
coordinator, aggregates many feedback control messages from other processes,
leading to a much more scalable, reliable multicasting scheme. Scalability
is further improved by letting a coordinator handle the retransmissions to
neighboring coordinators, to which it had forwarded a message.

Figure 8.26: The essence of hierarchical reliable multicasting. Each local
coordinator forwards the message to its neighboring coordinators in the tree
and later handles retransmission requests.

    Note that the nonhierarchical feedback control which we discussed before
can be used to improve the scalability of a single multicast group. Together
with hierarchical feedback control, we would combine relatively large reliable-
multicast subgroups into potentially large trees, thus being able to support
reliable multicasting for large groups of processes.
    The main problem with hierarchical solutions is the construction and
management of the tree: how are subgroups formed, which processes are
appointed to be coordinator, and how are the subgroups organized in a tree.
In many cases, a tree needs to be constructed dynamically. Unfortunately,
traditional network-level solutions provide almost no adequate services for
tree management. For this reason, application-level multicasting solutions as
we discussed in Section 4.4.1 have gained popularity.
    Finally, let us briefly consider gossip-based multicasting schemes, in par-
ticular the following push-pull anti-entropy scheme that we discussed exten-
sively in Section 4.4.3.
    In this scheme, a node P picks another node Q at random, and subsequently
exchanges updates with Q. In other words, P pushes updates that Q has not

seen before to Q, and pulls in any updates that Q has, but which were missed
by P. After the exchange, both processes have the same data. Clearly, this
scheme is already inherently robust, for if the communication between P
and Q fails for whatever reason, P will simply pick some other node to
exchange updates. The net effect is that the speed by which an update
propagates through the system slows down, but the reliability is affected only
in extreme cases. Nevertheless, this slowdown is considered important for
some applications. In this light, the comparison between traditional tree-based
multicasting and gossip-based multicasting for the purpose of aggregation as
discussed by Nyers and Jelasity [2015] may be of interest.

8.4.3      Atomic multicast
Let us now return to the situation in which we need to achieve reliable
multicasting in the presence of process failures. In particular, what is often
needed in a distributed system is the guarantee that a message is delivered to
either all (nonfaulty) group members or to none. This is also known as the
atomic multicast problem, to which we return with greater precision below.
    To see why atomicity is so important, consider a replicated database con-
structed as an application on top of a distributed system. The distributed
system offers reliable multicasting facilities. In particular, it allows the con-
struction of process groups to which messages can be reliably sent. The
replicated database is therefore constructed as a group of processes, one
process for each replica. Update operations are always multicasted to all
replicas and subsequently performed locally. We are thus assuming that an
active-replication protocol is being used.
    To keep matters simple, assume a client contacts a replica P and requests
it to perform an update. The replica does so by multicasting the update to
the other group members. Unfortunately, before the multicast completes,
P crashes, leaving the rest of the group in a difficult position: some group
members will have received the update request; others will not. If the members
who have received the request, deliver it to the database, then obviously
we will have an inconsistent replicated database. Some replicas will have
processed the update, others will not. This situation needs to be avoided, and
we should either have that the update is delivered to all nonfaulty members, or
to none. The former case reflects that P crashed after completing the multicast,
while the latter represents P crashing before it even got a chance to request
the update.
    Both these situations are fine, and correspond to the case in which a client
communicates with a single server that is allowed to crash. If a number
of the group members would execute the update, while others would not,
distribution transparency is at stake, but even worse, the client would not
know what to make of the situation.

Virtual synchrony
Reliable multicast in the presence of process failures can be accurately defined
in terms of process groups and changes to group membership. As we did
earlier, we make a distinction between receiving and delivering a message. In
particular, we again adopt a model in which the distributed system consists
of message-handling components, as was shown in Figure 8.22. A received
message is locally buffered in this component until it can be delivered to the
application, which is logically placed as a group member at a higher layer.
    The whole idea of atomic multicasting is that a multicast message m is
uniquely associated with a list of processes that should deliver it. This delivery
list corresponds to a group view, namely, the view on the set of processes
contained in the group, which the sender had at the time message m was
multicasted. An important observation is that each process on that list has the
same view. In other words, they should all agree that m should be delivered
by each one of them and by no other process.
    Now suppose that message m is multicasted at the time its sender, say
P, has group view G. Furthermore, assume that while the multicast is
taking place, another process Q joins or leaves the group. This change in
group membership is naturally announced to all processes in G. Stated
somewhat differently, a view change takes place by multicasting a message
vc announcing the joining or leaving of Q. We now have two multicast
messages simultaneously in transit: m and vc. What we need to guarantee
is that m is either delivered by all processes in G before any one executes
the view change as specified by vc, or m is not delivered at all. Note that
this requirement is comparable to totally ordered multicasting, which we
discussed in Section 5.2.1.
    A question that quickly comes to mind is that if m is not delivered by
any process, how can we speak of a reliable multicast protocol? In principle,
there is only one case in which delivery of m is allowed to fail: when the
group membership change is the result of the sender P of m crashing. In that
case, either all remaining (nonfaulty) members of G should deliver m before
agreeing P is no longer member of the group, or none should deliver m. As
mentioned before, the latter corresponds to the situation that P is considered
to have crashed before it had a chance to send m.
    This stronger form of reliable multicast guarantees that a message multicast
to group view G is delivered by each nonfaulty process in G. If the sender of
the message crashes during the multicast, the message is either delivered to
all remaining processes, or ignored by each of them. Such a reliable multicast
is said to be virtually synchronous [Birman and Joseph, 1987].
    To illustrate these matters, consider the four processes shown in Figure 8.27.
At a certain moment, we have a group consisting of S1 , S2 , S3 , and S4 . After
some messages have been multicast, S3 crashes. However, before crashing,
it succeeded in multicasting a message to processes S2 and S4 , but not to S1 .

Figure 8.27: The principle of virtual synchronous multicast.

Virtual synchrony in this case guarantees that the message is not delivered
at all, effectively establishing the situation that the message was never sent
before S3 crashed.
    After S3 has been removed from the group, communication proceeds
between the remaining group members. Later, when S3 recovers, it can join
the group again, after its state has been brought up to date.
    The principle of virtual synchrony comes from the fact that all multicasts
take place between view changes. Put somewhat differently, a view change
acts as a barrier across which no multicast can pass. In a sense, it is comparable
to the use of a synchronization variable in distributed data stores, as discussed
in the Chapter 7. All multicasts that are in transit while a view change
takes place are completed before the view change comes into effect. The
implementation of virtual synchrony is not trivial, as we discuss below.

Message Ordering
Virtual synchrony allows an application developer to think about multicasts
as taking place in epochs that are separated by group membership changes.
However, nothing has yet been said concerning the ordering of multicasts. In
general, four different orderings are distinguished:

   1. Unordered multicasts
   2. FIFO-ordered multicasts
   3. Causally ordered multicasts
   4. Totally ordered multicasts

    A reliable, unordered multicast is a virtually synchronous multicast
in which no guarantees are given concerning the order in which received
messages are delivered by different processes. (Note that reliable multicasting
is still about realizing the all-or-nothing property when it comes to delivering

messages to group members.) To explain, assume that reliable multicasting is
supported by a library providing a send and a receive primitive. The receive
operation blocks the caller until a message can be delivered.

            Event order     Process P1     Process P2    Process P3
                1            sends m1      receives m1   receives m2
                2            sends m2      receives m2   receives m1

Figure 8.28: Three communicating processes in the same group. The ordering
of events per process is shown along the vertical axis.

    Now suppose a sender P1 multicasts two messages to a group, while two
other processes in that group are waiting for messages to arrive, as shown
in Figure 8.28. Assuming that processes do not crash or leave the group
during these multicasts, it is possible that the message-handling component
at P2 first receives message m1 and then m2 . Because there are no message-
ordering constraints, the messages may be delivered in the order that they are
received. In contrast, the message-handling component at P3 may first receive
message m2 followed by m1 , and delivers these two in this same order to the
higher-level application of P3 .
    In the case of reliable FIFO-ordered multicasts, the message-handling
component layer is forced to deliver incoming messages from the same process
in the same order as they have been sent. Consider the communication within
a group of four processes, as shown in Figure 8.29. With FIFO ordering,
the only thing that matters is that message m1 is always delivered before
m2 , and, likewise, that message m3 is always delivered before m4 . This rule
has to be obeyed by all processes in the group. In other words, when the
communication layer at P3 receives m2 first, it will wait with delivery to P3
until it has received and delivered m1 .

     Event order    Process P1       Process P2    Process P3    Process P4
         1           sends m1        receives m1   receives m3    sends m3
         2           sends m2        receives m3   receives m1    sends m4
         3                           receives m2   receives m2
         4                           receives m4   receives m4

Figure 8.29: Four processes in the same group with two different senders, and
a possible delivery order of messages under FIFO-ordered multicasting.

   However, there is no constraint regarding the delivery of messages sent
by different processes. In other words, if process P2 receives m1 before m3 , it
may deliver the two messages in that order. Meanwhile, process P3 may have
received m3 before receiving m1 . FIFO ordering states that P3 may deliver m3
before m1 , although this delivery order is different from that of P2 .

    Finally, reliable causally ordered multicast delivers messages so that
potential causality between different messages is preserved. In other words, if
a message m1 causally precedes another message m2 , regardless of whether
they were multicasted by the same sender, then the communication layer
at each receiver will always deliver m2 after it has received and delivered
m1 . Note that causally ordered multicasts can be implemented using vector
timestamps, as discussed in Chapter 5.
    Besides these three orderings, there may be the additional constraint that
message delivery is to be totally ordered as well. Totally ordered delivery
means that regardless of whether message delivery is unordered, FIFO or-
dered, or causally ordered, it is required additionally that when messages are
delivered, they are delivered in the same order to all group members.
    For example, with the combination of FIFO and totally ordered multicast,
processes P2 and P3 in Figure 8.29 may both first deliver message m3 and
then message m1 . However, if P2 delivers m1 before m3 , while P3 delivers m3
before delivering m1 , they would violate the total-ordering constraint. Note
that FIFO ordering should still be respected. In other words, m2 should be
delivered after m1 and, accordingly, m4 should be delivered after m3 .
    Virtually synchronous reliable multicasting offering totally ordered de-
livery of messages is called atomic multicasting. It encompasses the all-
or-nothing property discussed before (i.e., all members have the message
delivered to, or none of them do), yet atomic multicasting also requires a to-
tally ordered delivery of messages. With the three different message ordering
constraints discussed above, this leads to six forms of reliable multicasting, as
shown in Figure 8.30 [Hadzilacos and Toueg, 1993].

           Multicast                 Basic message ordering      TO delivery?
           Reliable multicast        None                        No
           FIFO multicast            FIFO-ordered delivery       No
           Causal multicast          Causal-ordered delivery     No
           Atomic multicast          None                        Yes
           FIFO atomic multicast     FIFO-ordered delivery       Yes
           Causal atomic multicast   Causal-ordered delivery     Yes

Figure 8.30: Six different versions of virtually synchronous reliable multicast-
ing and considering totally ordered delivery.

  Note 8.9 (Advanced: Implementing virtual synchrony)
  Let us now consider a possible implementation of a virtually synchronous reliable
  multicast. An example of such an implementation appears in Isis, a fault-tolerant
  distributed system that has been in practical use in industry for several years. We
  will focus on some of the implementation issues of this technique as described in
  Birman et al. [1991].

      Reliable multicasting in Isis makes use of available reliable point-to-point com-
  munication facilities of the underlying network, in particular, TCP. Multicasting a
  message m to a group of processes is implemented by reliably sending m to each
  group member. As a consequence, although each transmission is guaranteed to
  succeed, there are no guarantees that all group members receive m. In particular,
  the sender may fail before having transmitted m to each member.
      Besides reliable point-to-point communication, Isis also assumes that messages
  from the same source are received by a communication layer in the order they
  were sent by that source. In practice, this requirement is solved by using TCP
  connections for point-to-point communication.
      The main problem that needs to be solved is to guarantee that all messages
  sent to view G are delivered to all nonfaulty processes in G before the next group
  membership change takes place. The first issue that needs to be taken care of
  is making sure that each process in G has received all messages that were sent
  to G. Note that because the sender of a message m to G may have failed before
  completing its multicast, there may indeed be processes in G that will never
  receive m. Because the sender has crashed, these processes should get m from
  somewhere else.
      The solution to this problem is to let every process in G keep m until it knows
  for sure that all members in G have received it. If m has been received by all
  members in G, m is said to be stable. Only stable messages are allowed to be
  delivered. To ensure stability, it is sufficient to select an arbitrary live process in
  G and request it to send m to all other processes in G.

              (a)                           (b)                            (c)

Figure 8.31: (a) Process 4 notices that process 7 has crashed and sends a
      view change. (b) Process 6 sends out all its unstable messages, followed by
      a flush message. (c) Process 6 installs the new view when it has received
      a flush message from everyone else.

       To be more specific, assume the current view is Gi , but that it is necessary
  to install the next view Gi+1 . Without loss of generality, we assume that Gi and
  Gi+1 differ by at most one process. A process P notices the view change when
  it receives a view-change message. Such a message may come from the process
  wanting to join or leave the group, or from a process that had detected the failure

  of a process in Gi that is now to be removed, as shown in Figure 8.31(a).
      When a process P receives the view-change message for Gi+1 , it first forwards
  a copy of any unstable message from Gi it still has to every process in Gi+1 , and
  subsequently marks it as being stable. Recall that Isis assumes point-to-point
  communication is reliable, so that forwarded messages are never lost. Such
  forwarding guarantees that all messages in Gi that have been received by at least
  one process are received by all nonfaulty processes in Gi . Note that it would also
  have been sufficient to elect a single coordinator to forward unstable messages.
      To indicate that P no longer has any unstable messages and that it is prepared
  to install Gi+1 as soon as the other processes can do that as well, it multicasts a
  flush message for Gi+1 , as shown in Figure 8.31(b). After P has received a flush
  message for Gi+1 from each other process, it can safely install the new view, as
  shown in Figure 8.31(c).
      When a process Q receives a message m while Q still believes the current
  view is Gi , it delivers m taking any additional message-ordering constraints into
  account. If it had already received m, it considers the message to be a duplicate
  and discards it.
      Because process Q will eventually receive the view-change message for Gi+1 ,
  it will also first forward any of its unstable messages and subsequently wrap
  things up by sending a flush message for Gi+1 . Note that due to the assumed
  FIFO-message ordering as provided by the underlying communication layer, a
  flush message from a process is always received after the receipt of an unstable
  message from that same process.
      The major flaw in the protocol described so far is that it cannot deal with
  process failures while a new view change is being announced. In particular, it
  assumes that until the new view Gi+1 has been installed by each member in
  Gi+1 , no process in Gi+1 will fail (which would lead to a next view Gi+2 ). This
  problem is solved by announcing view changes for any view Gi+k even while
  previous changes have not yet been installed by all processes. The details are
  rather intricate, yet the principle should be clear.

8.5    Distributed commit
The atomic multicasting problem discussed in the previous section is an
example of a more general problem, known as distributed commit. The
distributed commit problem involves having an operation being performed
by each member of a process group, or none at all. In the case of reliable
multicasting, the operation is the delivery of a message. With distributed
transactions, the operation may be the commit of a transaction at a single site
that takes part in the transaction. Other examples of distributed commit, and
how it can be solved, are discussed by Tanisch [2000].
    Distributed commit is often established by a coordinator. In a simple
scheme, this coordinator tells all other processes that are also involved, called
participants, whether to (locally) perform the operation in question. This

scheme is referred to as a one-phase commit protocol. It has the obvious
drawback that if one of the participants cannot actually perform the operation,
there is no way to tell the coordinator. For example, in the case of distributed
transactions, a local commit may not be possible because this would violate
concurrency control constraints.
   In practice, more sophisticated schemes are needed, the most common one
being the two-phase commit protocol, which we discuss in detail below. The
main drawback of this protocol is that it cannot generally efficiently handle
the failure of the coordinator. To that end, a three-phase protocol has been
developed, which we discuss separately in Note 8.11.
   The original two-phase commit protocol (2PC) is due to Gray [1978].
Without loss of generality, consider a distributed transaction involving the
participation of a number of processes, each running on a different machine.
Assuming that no failures occur, the protocol consists of the following two
phases, each consisting of two steps (see also Bernstein and Newcomer [2009]):

   1. The coordinator sends a vote-request message to all participants.
   2. When a participant receives a vote-request message, it returns either a
      vote-commit message to the coordinator, telling the coordinator that it
      is prepared to locally commit its part of the transaction, or otherwise, a
      vote-abort message.
   3. The coordinator collects all votes from the participants. If all participants
      have voted to commit the transaction, then so will the coordinator. In that
      case, it sends a global-commit message to all participants. However,
      if one participant had voted to abort the transaction, the coordinator
      will also decide to abort the transaction and multicasts a global-abort
      message.
   4. Each participant that voted for a commit waits for the final reaction
      by the coordinator. If a participant receives a global-commit mes-
      sage, it locally commits the transaction. Otherwise, when receiving a
      global-abort message, the transaction is locally aborted as well.

The first phase is the voting phase, and consists of steps 1 and 2. The second
phase is the decision phase, and consists of steps 3 and 4. These four steps
are shown as finite state diagrams in Figure 8.32.
   Several problems arise when this basic 2PC protocol is used in a system
where failures occur. First, note that the coordinator as well as the participants
have states in which they block waiting for incoming messages. Consequently,
the protocol can easily fail when a process crashes, as other processes may be
indefinitely waiting for a message from that process. For this reason, timeout
mechanisms are used. These mechanisms are explained next.
   When taking a look at the finite state machines in Figure 8.32, it can be seen
that there are a total of three states in which either a coordinator or participant

                 (a)                                      (b)

Figure 8.32: (a) The finite state machine for the coordinator in 2PC. (b) The
finite state machine for a participant.

is blocked waiting for an incoming message. First, a participant may be
waiting in its INIT state for a vote-request message from the coordinator.
If that message is not received after some time, the participant will simply
decide to locally abort the transaction, and thus send a vote-abort message
to the coordinator.
    Likewise, the coordinator can be blocked in state WAIT, waiting for the
votes of each participant. If not all votes have been collected after a cer-
tain period of time, the coordinator should vote for an abort as well, and
subsequently send global-abort to all participants.
    Finally, a participant can be blocked in state READY, waiting for the global
vote as sent by the coordinator. If that message is not received within a given
time, the participant cannot simply decide to abort the transaction. Instead,
it must find out which message the coordinator actually sent. The simplest
solution to this problem is to let each participant block until the coordinator
recovers again.
    A better solution is to let a participant P contact another participant Q to
see if it can decide from Q’s current state what it should do. For example,
suppose that Q had reached state COMMIT. This is possible only if the
coordinator had sent a global-commit message to Q just before crashing.
Apparently, this message had not yet been sent to P. Consequently, P may
now also decide to locally commit. Likewise, if Q is in state ABORT, P can
safely abort as well.
    Now suppose that Q is still in state INIT. This situation can occur when
the coordinator has sent vote-request to all participants, but this message
has reached P (which subsequently responded with a vote-commit message),
but has not reached Q. In other words, the coordinator had crashed while
multicasting vote-request. In this case, it is safe to abort the transaction:
both P and Q can make a transition to state ABORT.
    The most difficult situation occurs when Q is also in state READY, waiting
for a response from the coordinator. In particular, if it turns out that all

participants are in state READY, no decision can be taken. The problem
is that although all participants are willing to commit, they still need the
coordinator’s vote to reach the final decision. Consequently, the protocol
blocks until the coordinator recovers. The various options are summarized in
Figure 8.33.

                     State of Q      Action by P
                     COMMIT          Make transition to COMMIT
                     ABORT           Make transition to ABORT
                     INIT            Make transition to ABORT
                     READY           Contact another participant

Figure 8.33: Actions taken by a participant P when residing in state READY
and having contacted another participant Q.

    To ensure that a process can actually recover, it is necessary that it saves
its state to persistent storage. For example, if a participant was in state INIT,
it can safely decide to locally abort the transaction when it recovers, and then
inform the coordinator. Likewise, when it had already taken a decision such
as when it crashed while being in either state COMMIT or ABORT, it is to
recover to that state again, and retransmit its decision to the coordinator.
    Problems arise when a participant crashed while residing in state READY.
In that case, when recovering, it cannot decide on its own what it should do
next, that is, commit or abort the transaction. Consequently, it is forced to
contact other participants to find what it should do, analogous to the situation
when it times out while residing in state READY as described above.
    The coordinator has only two critical states it needs to keep track of. When
it starts the 2PC protocol, it should record that it is entering state WAIT so
that it can possibly retransmit the vote-request message to all participants
after recovering. Likewise, if it had come to a decision in the second phase, it
is sufficient if that decision has been recorded so that it can be retransmitted
when recovering.
    It may thus be possible that a participant will need to block until the
coordinator recovers. This situation occurs when all participants have received
and processed the vote-request message from the coordinator, while mean-
while, the coordinator crashed. In that case, participants cannot cooperatively
decide on the final action to take. For this reason, 2PC is also referred to as a
blocking commit protocol.
    There are several solutions to avoid blocking. One solution is to use a
multicast primitive, by which a receiver immediately multicasts a received
message to all other processes [Babaoglu and Toueg, 1993]. It can be shown
that this approach allows a participant to reach a final decision, even if the
coordinator has not yet recovered. Another solution is to use three instead of
two phases, as we discuss in Note 8.11.

  Note 8.10 (Advanced: 2PC outlined in Python)
  An outline of the actions that are executed by the coordinator is given in Fig-
  ure 8.34. The coordinator starts by multicasting a vote-request to all participants
  to collect their votes. It subsequently records that it is entering the WAIT state,
  after which it waits for incoming votes from participants.
       If not all votes have been collected, but no more votes are received within
  a given time interval prescribed in advance, the coordinator assumes that one
  or more participants have failed. Consequently, it should abort the transaction
  and multicasts a global-abort to the (remaining) participants. Likewise, if only
  a single participant decides to abort the transaction, the coordinator will have
  to call off the transaction. If all participants vote to commit, global-commit is
  first logged and subsequently sent to all processes. Otherwise, the coordinator
  multicasts a global-abort (after recording it in the local log).

      1   class Coordinator:
      2     def run(self):
      3       yetToReceive = list(self.participants)
      4       self.log.info(’WAIT’)
      5       self.chan.sendTo(self.participants, VOTE_REQUEST)
      6       while len(yetToReceive) > 0:
      7         msg = self.chan.recvFrom(self.participants, BLOCK, TIMEOUT)
      8         if msg == -1 or (msg[1] == VOTE_ABORT):
      9           self.log.info(’ABORT’)
   10             self.chan.sendTo(self.participants, GLOBAL_ABORT)
   11             return
   12           else: # msg[1] == VOTE_COMMIT
   13             yetToReceive.remove(msg[0])
   14         self.log.info(’COMMIT’)
   15         self.chan.sendTo(self.participants, GLOBAL_COMMIT)

Figure 8.34: The steps taken by the coordinator in a 2PC protocol.

      After receiving a vote request, the participant does its work. All bets are
  off if its work failed, but otherwise, it will vote for committing the transaction.
  It records its decision in a local log and informs the coordinator by sending a
  vote-commit message. The participant must then wait for the global decision.
  Assuming this decision (which again should come from the coordinator) comes in
  on time, it is simply written to the local log, after which it can be carried out (the
  latter is not shown in the code).
      Figure 8.35 shows the steps taken by a participant. First, the process waits for
  a vote request from the coordinator. If no message comes in, the transaction is
  simply aborted. Apparently, the coordinator had failed.
      However, if the participant times out while waiting for the coordinator’s
  decision to come in, it executes a termination protocol by first multicasting a
  decision-request message to the other processes, after which it subsequently
  blocks while waiting for a response. When a decisive response comes in (possibly
  from the coordinator, which is assumed to eventually recover), the participant

  writes the decision to its local log and handles accordingly. Any request from
  another participant for the final decision is left unanswered as long as that decision
  is not known.

   1   class Participant:
   2     def run(self):
   3       self.log.info(’INIT’)
   4       msg = self.chan.recvFrom(self.coordinator, BLOCK, TIMEOUT)
   5       if msg == -1: # Crashed coordinator - give up entirely
   6         decision = LOCAL_ABORT
   7       else: # Coordinator will have sent VOTE_REQUEST
   8         decision = self.do_work()
   9         if decision == LOCAL_ABORT:
  10           self.chan.sendTo(self.coordinator, VOTE_ABORT)
  11           self.log.info(’LOCAL_ABORT’)
  12         else: # Ready to commit, enter READY state
  13           self.log.info(’READY’)
  14           self.chan.sendTo(self.coordinator, VOTE_COMMIT)
  15           msg = self.chan.recvFrom(self.coordinator, BLOCK, TIMEOUT)
  16           if msg == -1: # Crashed coordinator - check the others
  17             self.log.info(’NEED_DECISION’)
  18             self.chan.sendTo(self.participants, NEED_DECISION)
  19             while True:
  20               msg = self.chan.recvFromAny()
  21               if msg[1] in [GLOBAL_COMMIT, GLOBAL_ABORT, LOCAL_ABORT]:
  22                 decision = msg[1]
  23                 break
  24           else: # Coordinator came to a decision
  25             decision = msg[1]
  26       if decision == GLOBAL_COMMIT:
  27         self.log.info(’COMMIT’)
  28       else: # decision in [GLOBAL_ABORT, LOCAL_ABORT]:
  29         self.log.info(’ABORT’)
  30       while True: # Help any other participant when coordinator crashed
  31         msg = self.chan.recvFrom(self.participants)
  32         if msg[1] == NEED_DECISION:
  33           self.chan.sendTo([msg[0]], decision)

Figure 8.35: The steps taken by a participant process in 2PC.

      We keep every participant up-and-running after it decided to either commit
  or abort. It can then assist other participants in need of a decision after detecting
  that the coordinator had crashed. To this end, a participant blocks on incoming
  messages and returns its own decision when asked for. Note that we are actually
  providing an implementation that supports partially synchronous behavior: we
  assume that timeouts can be applied as a mechanism to detect failures, but take
  into account that we may have mistakenly concluded that a server crashed.
      Of course, the final, now endless loop should eventually terminate. To that
  end, we need a mechanism to detect that all processes have indeed come to a
  decision. We leave it as an exercise to the reader for designing such a detector.

  Note 8.11 (Advanced: Three-phase commit)
  A problem with the two-phase commit protocol is that when the coordinator has
  crashed, participants may not be able to reach a final decision. Consequently,
  participants may need to remain blocked until the coordinator recovers. Skeen
  [1981] developed a variant of 2PC, called the three-phase commit protocol (3PC),
  that avoids blocking processes in the presence of fail-stop crashes. Although 3PC
  is widely referred to in the literature, it is not applied often in practice, as the
  conditions under which 2PC blocks rarely occur. We discuss the protocol, as
  it provides further insight into solving fault-tolerance problems in distributed
  systems.
      Like 2PC, 3PC is also formulated in terms of a coordinator and a number of
  participants. Their respective finite state machines are shown in Figure 8.36. The
  essence of the protocol is that the states of the coordinator and each participant
  satisfy the following two conditions:
      1. There is no single state from which it is possible to make a transition directly
         to either a COMMIT or an ABORT state.
      2. There is no state in which it is not possible to make a final decision, and
         from which a transition to a COMMIT state can be made.
  It can be shown that these two conditions are necessary and sufficient for a commit
  protocol to be nonblocking [Skeen and Stonebraker, 1983].

                    (a)                                           (b)

Figure 8.36: (a) The finite state machine for the coordinator in 3PC. (b) The
      finite state machine for a participant.

      The coordinator in 3PC starts with sending a vote-request message to all
  participants, after which it waits for incoming responses. If any participant
  votes to abort the transaction, the final decision will be to abort as well, so
  the coordinator sends global-abort. However, when the transaction can be
  committed, a prepare-commit message is sent. Only after each participant has
  acknowledged it is now prepared to commit, will the coordinator send the final
  global-commit message by which the transaction is actually committed.
      Again, there are only a few situations in which a process is blocked while
  waiting for incoming messages. First, if a participant is waiting for a vote request

  from the coordinator while residing in state INIT, it will eventually make a
  transition to state ABORT, thereby assuming that the coordinator has crashed.
  This situation is identical to that in 2PC. Analogously, the coordinator may be in
  state WAIT, waiting for the votes from participants. On a timeout, the coordinator
  will conclude that a participant crashed, and will thus abort the transaction by
  multicasting a global-abort message.
      Now suppose the coordinator is blocked in state PRECOMMIT. On a timeout,
  it will conclude that one of the participants had crashed, but that participant
  is known to have voted for committing the transaction. Consequently, the co-
  ordinator can instruct the operational participants to commit by multicasting a
  global-commit message. In addition, it relies on a recovery protocol for the
  crashed participant to commit its part of the transaction when it comes up again.
      A participant P may block in the READY state or in the PRECOMMIT state.
  On a timeout, P can conclude only that the coordinator has failed so that it now
  needs to find out what to do next. As in 2PC, if P contacts any other participant
  that is in state COMMIT (or ABORT), P should move to that state as well. In
  addition, if all participants are in state PRECOMMIT, the transaction can be
  committed.
      Again analogous to 2PC, if another participant Q is still in the INIT state,
  the transaction can safely be aborted. It is important to note that Q can be in
  state INIT only if no other participant is in state PRECOMMIT. A participant
  can reach PRECOMMIT only if the coordinator had reached state PRECOMMIT
  before crashing, and has thus received a vote to commit from each participant. In
  other words, no participant can reside in state INIT while another participant is in
  state PRECOMMIT.
      If each of the participants that P can contact is in state READY (and they
  together form a majority), the transaction should be aborted. The point to note
  is that another participant may have crashed and will later recover. However,
  neither P, nor any other of the operational participants knows what the state of
  the crashed participant will be when it recovers. If the process recovers to state
  INIT, then deciding to abort the transaction is the only correct decision. At worst,
  the process may recover to state PRECOMMIT, but in that case, it cannot do any
  harm to still abort the transaction.
      This situation is the major difference with 2PC, where a crashed participant
  could recover to a COMMIT state while all the others were still in state READY.
  In that case, the remaining operational processes could not reach a final decision
  and would have to wait until the crashed process recovered. With 3PC, if any
  operational process is in its READY state, no crashed process will recover to a state
  other than INIT, ABORT, or PRECOMMIT. For this reason, surviving processes
  can always come to a final decision.
      Finally, if the processes that P can reach are in state PRECOMMIT (and they
  form a majority), then it is safe to commit the transaction. Again, it can be shown
  that in this case, all other processes will either be in state READY or at least,
  will recover to state READY, PRECOMMIT, or COMMIT when they had crashed.
  More on 3PC can be found in [Bernstein et al., 1987].

8.6     Recovery
So far, we have mainly concentrated on algorithms that allow us to tolerate
faults. However, once a failure has occurred, it is essential that the process
where the failure happened can recover to a correct state. In what follows, we
first concentrate on what it actually means to recover to a correct state, and
subsequently when and how the state of a distributed system can be recorded
and recovered to, through checkpointing and message logging.

8.6.1      Introduction
Fundamental to fault tolerance is the recovery from an error. Recall that an
error is that part of a system that may lead to a failure. The whole idea of
error recovery is to replace an erroneous state with an error-free state. There
are essentially two forms of error recovery.
    In backward recovery, the main issue is to bring the system from its
present erroneous state back into a previously correct state. To do so, it will
be necessary to record the system’s state from time to time, and to restore
such a recorded state when things go wrong. Each time (part of) the system’s
present state is recorded, a checkpoint is said to be made.
    Another form of error recovery is forward recovery. In this case, when the
system has entered an erroneous state, instead of moving back to a previous,
checkpointed state, an attempt is made to bring the system to a correct new
state from which it can continue to execute. The main problem with forward
error recovery mechanisms is that it has to be known in advance which errors
may occur. Only in that case, it is possible to correct those errors and move to
a new state.
    The distinction between backward and forward error recovery is easily
explained when considering the implementation of reliable communication.
The common approach to recover from a lost packet is to let the sender
retransmit that packet. In effect, packet retransmission establishes that we
attempt to go back to a previous, correct state, namely the one in which the
packet that was lost is being sent. Reliable communication through packet
retransmission is therefore an example of applying backward error recovery
techniques.
    An alternative approach is to use a method known as erasure correction.
In this approach, a missing packet is constructed from other, successfully
delivered packets. For example, in an (n, k)-block erasure code, a set of k
source packets is encoded into a set of n encoded packets, such that any set of k
encoded packets is enough to reconstruct the original k source packets. Typical
values are k = 16 or k = 32, and k < n ≤ 2k (see, for example, Rizzo [1997]). If
not enough packets have yet been delivered, the sender will have to continue
transmitting packets until a previously lost packet can be constructed. Erasure
correction is a typical example of a forward error recovery approach.

    By and large, backward error recovery techniques are widely applied as a
general mechanism for recovering from failures in distributed systems. The
major benefit of backward error recovery is that it is a generally applicable
method independent of any specific system or process. In other words, it
can be integrated into (the middleware layer) of a distributed system as a
general-purpose service.
    However, backward error recovery also introduces some problems [Singhal
and Shivaratri, 1994]. First, restoring a system or process to a previous state
is generally a relatively costly operation in terms of performance. As will be
discussed in succeeding sections, much work generally needs to be done to
recover from, for example, a process crash or site failure. A potential way out
of this problem is to devise very cheap mechanisms by which components are
simply rebooted.
    Second, because backward error recovery mechanisms are independent of
the distributed application for which they are actually used, no guarantees
can be given that once recovery has taken place, the same or similar failure
will not happen again. If such guarantees are needed, handling errors often
requires that the application gets into the loop of recovery. In other words,
full-fledged failure transparency can generally not be provided by backward
error recovery mechanisms.
    Finally, although backward error recovery requires checkpointing, some
states can simply never be rolled back to. For example, once a (possibly
malicious) person has taken the $1,000 that suddenly came rolling out of the
incorrectly functioning automated teller machine, there is only a small chance
that money will be stuffed back in the machine. Likewise, recovering to a
previous state in most Unix systems after having enthusiastically typed
    /bin/rm -fr *
but from the wrong working directory, may turn a few people pale. Some
things are simply irreversible.
    Checkpointing allows the recovery to a previous, correct state. However,
taking a checkpoint is often a costly operation and may have a severe perfor-
mance penalty. As a consequence, many fault-tolerant distributed systems
combine checkpointing with message logging. In this case, after a check-
point has been taken, a process logs its messages before sending them off
(called sender-based logging). An alternative solution is to let the receiving
process first log an incoming message before delivering it to the application
it is executing. This scheme is also referred to as receiver-based logging.
When a receiving process crashes, it is necessary to restore the most recently
checkpointed state, and from there on replay the messages that have been sent.
Consequently, combining checkpoints with message logging makes it possible
to restore a state that lies beyond the most recent checkpoint without the cost
of checkpointing.
    In a system where only checkpointing is used, processes will be restored

to a checkpointed state. From there on, their behavior may be different from
it was before the failure occurred. For example, because communication times
are not deterministic, messages may now be delivered in a different order,
in turn leading to different reactions by the receivers. However, if message
logging takes place, an actual replay of the events that happened since the
last checkpoint takes place. Such a replay makes it easier to interact with the
outside world.
    For example, consider the case that a failure occurred because a user
provided erroneous input. If only checkpointing is used, the system would
have to take a checkpoint before accepting the user’s input in order to recover
to the same state. With message logging, an older checkpoint can be used, after
which a replay of events can take place up to the point that the user should
provide input. In practice, the combination of having fewer checkpoints and
message logging is more efficient than having to take many checkpoints.
    Elnozahy et al. [2002] provide a survey of checkpointing and logging in
distributed systems. Various algorithmic details can be found in Chow and
Johnson [1997].

8.6.2      Checkpointing
In a fault-tolerant distributed system, backward error recovery requires that
the system regularly saves its state2 . In particular, we need to record a
consistent global state, also called a distributed snapshot. In a distributed
snapshot, if a process P has recorded the receipt of a message, then there
should also be a process Q that has recorded the sending of that message.
After all, it must have come from somewhere.

Figure 8.37: A recovery line.

     To recover after a process or system failure requires that we construct a
consistent global state from local states as saved by each process. In particular,
it is best to recover to the most recent distributed snapshot, also referred to
as a recovery line. In other words, a recovery line corresponds to the most
recent consistent collection of checkpoints, as shown in Figure 8.37.
   2We assume that each process has access to a local, reliable storage.

Coordinated checkpointing
In coordinated checkpointing all processes synchronize to jointly write their
state to local storage. The main advantage of coordinated checkpointing is
that the saved state is automatically globally consistent. A simple solution
is to use a two-phase blocking protocol. A coordinator first multicasts a
checkpoint-request message to all processes. When a process receives
such a message, it takes a local checkpoint, queues any subsequent message
handed to it by the application it is executing, and acknowledges to the
coordinator that it has taken a checkpoint. When the coordinator has received
an acknowledgment from all processes, it multicasts a checkpoint-done
message to allow the (blocked) processes to continue.
    It is easy to see that this approach will indeed lead to a globally consis-
tent state because no incoming message will ever be registered as part of a
checkpoint. This is because any message that follows a request for taking
a checkpoint is not considered to be part of the local checkpoint. At the
same time, outgoing messages (as handed to the checkpointing process by
the application it is running), are queued locally until the checkpoint-done
message is received.
    An improvement to this algorithm is to send a checkpoint request only to
those processes that depend on the recovery of the coordinator, and ignore the
other processes. A process is dependent on the coordinator if it has received a
message that is directly or indirectly causally related to a message that the
coordinator had sent since the last checkpoint. This leads to the notion of an
incremental snapshot.
    To take an incremental snapshot, the coordinator sends a checkpoint
request only to those processes it had sent a message to since it last took a
checkpoint. When a process P receives such a request, it forwards the request
to all those processes to which P itself had sent a message since the last
checkpoint, and so on. A process forwards the request only once. When all
processes have been identified, a second multicast is used to actually trigger
checkpointing and to let the processes continue where they had left off.

Independent checkpointing
Now consider the case in which each process simply records its local state
from time to time in an uncoordinated fashion. To discover a recovery line,
requires that each process is rolled back to its most recently saved state. If
these local states jointly do not form a distributed snapshot, further rolling
back is necessary. This process of a cascaded rollback may lead to what is
called the domino effect and is shown in Figure 8.38.
    When process P2 crashes, we need to restore its state to the most recently
saved checkpoint. As a consequence, process P1 will also need to be rolled
back. Unfortunately, the two most recently saved local states do not form a

Figure 8.38: The domino effect.

consistent global state: the state saved by P2 indicates the receipt of a message
m, but no other process can be identified as its sender. Consequently, P2 needs
to be rolled back to an earlier state.
    However, the next state to which P2 is rolled back also cannot be used as
part of a distributed snapshot. In this case, P1 will have recorded the receipt
of message m∗ , but there is no recorded event of this message being sent. It is
therefore necessary to also roll P1 back to a previous state. In this example, it
turns out that the recovery line is actually the initial state of the system.
    As processes take local checkpoints independent of each other, this method
is also referred to as independent checkpointing. Its implementation requires
that dependencies are recorded in such a way that processes can jointly roll
back to a consistent global state. To that end, let CPi (m) denote the mth
checkpoint taken by process Pi . Also, let INTi (m) denote the interval between
checkpoints CPi (m − 1) and CPi (m).
    When process Pi sends a message in interval INTi (m), it piggybacks the
pair (i, m) to the receiving process. When process Pj receives a message in in-
terval INT j (n), along with the pair of indices (i, m), it records the dependency
INTi (m) → INT j (n). Whenever Pj takes checkpoint CP j (n), it additionally
saves this dependency to its local storage, along with the rest of the recovery
information that is part of CP j (n).
    Now suppose that at a certain moment, process Pi is required to roll back
to checkpoint CPi (m − 1). To ensure global consistency, we need to ensure
that all processes that have received messages from Pi and that were sent in
interval INTi (m), are rolled back to a checkpointed state preceding the receipt
of such messages. In particular, process Pj in our example, will need to be
rolled back at least to checkpoint CP j (n − 1). If CP j (n − 1) does not lead to a
globally consistent state, further rolling back may be necessary.
    Calculating the recovery line requires an analysis of the interval dependen-
cies recorded by each process when a checkpoint was taken. It turns out that
such calculations are fairly complex. In addition, as it turns out, it is often
not the coordination between processes that is the dominating performance
factor, but the overhead as the result of having to save the state to local stable
storage. Therefore, coordinated checkpointing, which is much simpler than
independent checkpointing, is often more popular, and will presumably stay
so even when systems grow to much larger sizes [Elnozahy and Plank, 2004]

8.6.3   Message logging
Considering that checkpointing can be an expensive operation, techniques
have been sought to reduce the number of checkpoints, but still enable re-
covery. One such technique is logging messages. The basic idea underlying
message logging is that if the transmission of messages can be replayed, we
can still reach a globally consistent state, but without having to restore that
state from local storage. Instead, a checkpointed state is taken as a starting
point, and all messages that have been sent since are simply retransmitted
and handled accordingly.
    This approach works fine under the assumption of what is called a piece-
wise deterministic execution model. In such a model, the execution of each
process is assumed to take place as a series of intervals in which events take
place. These events are the same as those discussed in the context of Lam-
port’s happened-before relationship in Section 5.2.1. For example, an event
may be the execution of an instruction, the sending of a message, and so on.
Each interval in the piecewise deterministic model is assumed to start with
a nondeterministic event, such as the receipt of a message. However, from
that moment on, the execution of the process is completely deterministic. An
interval ends with the last event before a nondeterministic event occurs.
    In effect, an interval can be replayed with a known result, that is, in a
completely deterministic way, provided it is replayed, starting with the same
nondeterministic event as before. Consequently, if we record all nondeter-
ministic events in such a model, it becomes possible to completely replay the
entire execution of a process in a deterministic way.
    Considering that message logs are necessary to recover from a process
crash so that a globally consistent state is restored, it becomes important to
know precisely when messages are to be logged. Following the approach
described by Alvisi and Marzullo [1998], it turns out that many existing
message-logging schemes can be easily characterized if we concentrate on
how they deal with orphan processes.
    An orphan process is a process that survives the crash of another process,
but whose state is inconsistent with the crashed process after its recovery. As
an example, consider the situation shown in Figure 8.39. Process Q receives
messages m1 and m2 from process P and R, respectively, and subsequently
sends a message m3 to R. However, in contrast to all other messages, message
m2 is not logged. If process Q crashes and later recovers again, only the logged
messages required for the recovery of Q are replayed, in our example, m1 .
Because m2 was not logged, its transmission will not be replayed, meaning
that the transmission of m3 may also not take place.
    However, the situation after the recovery of Q is inconsistent with that
before its recovery. In particular, R holds a message (m3 ) that was sent before
the crash, but whose receipt and delivery do not take place when replaying
what had happened before the crash. This should obviously be avoided.

Figure 8.39: Incorrect replay of messages after recovery, leading to an orphan
process R.

  Note 8.12 (Advanced: Characterizing message-logging schemes)
  To characterize different message-logging schemes, we follow the approach de-
  scribed by Alvisi and Marzullo [1998]. Each message m is considered to have a
  header that contains all information necessary to retransmit m, and to properly
  handle it. For example, each header will identify the sender and the receiver, but
  also a sequence number to recognize it as a duplicate. In addition, a delivery
  number may be added to decide when exactly it should be handed over to the
  receiving application.
      A message is said to be stable if it can no longer be lost, for example because
  it has been written to reliable, local storage. Stable messages can thus be used for
  recovery by replaying their transmission.
      Each message m leads to a set DEP(m) of processes that depend on the
  delivery of m. In particular, DEP(m) consists of those processes to which m has
  been delivered. In addition, if another message m∗ is causally dependent on
  the delivery of m, and m∗ has been delivered to a process Q, then Q will also
  be contained in DEP(m). Note that m∗ is causally dependent on the delivery of
  m, if it was sent by the same process that previously delivered m, or which had
  delivered another message that was causally dependent on the delivery of m.
      The set COPY(m) consists of those processes that have a copy of m, but have
  not (yet) reliably stored it. When a process Q delivers message m, it also becomes
  a member of COPY(m). Note that COPY(m) consists of those processes that could
  hand over a copy of m that can be used to replay the transmission of m. If all
  these processes crash, replaying the transmission of m is clearly not feasible.
      Using these notations, it is now easy to define precisely what an orphan
  process is. Let FAIL denote the collection of crashed processes, and assume Q is
  one of the survivors. Q is an orphan process if there is a message m, such that
  Q is contained in DEP(m), while at the same time every process in COPY(m) has
  crashed. More formally:

             Q is orphaned ⇔ ∃m : Q ∈ DEP(m) and COPY(m) ⊆ FAIL

  In other words, an orphan process appears when it is dependent on m, but there

  is no way to replay m’s transmission.
       To avoid orphan processes, we thus need to ensure that if each process in
  COPY(m) crashed, then no surviving process is left in DEP(m). In other words, all
  processes in DEP(m) should have crashed as well. This condition can be enforced
  if we can guarantee that whenever a process becomes a member of DEP(m), it also
  becomes a member of COPY(m). In other words, whenever a process becomes
  dependent on the delivery of m, it will keep a copy of m.
       There are essentially two approaches that can now be followed. The first
  approach is represented by what are called pessimistic logging protocols. These
  protocols take care that for each nonstable message m, there is at most one process
  dependent on m. In other words, pessimistic logging protocols ensure that each
  nonstable message m is delivered to at most one process. Note that as soon as m
  is delivered to, say, process P, P becomes a member of COPY(m).
       The worst that can happen is that process P crashes without m ever having
  been logged. With pessimistic logging, P is not allowed to send any messages
  after the delivery of m without first having ensured that m has been written to
  reliable storage. Consequently, no other processes will ever become dependent on
  the delivery of m to P, without having the possibility of replaying the transmission
  of m. In this way, orphan processes are always avoided.
       In contrast, in an optimistic logging protocol, the actual work is done after
  a crash occurs. In particular, assume that for some message m, each process in
  COPY(m) has crashed. In an optimistic approach, any orphan process in DEP(m)
  is rolled back to a state in which it no longer belongs to DEP(m). Clearly, optimistic
  logging protocols need to keep track of dependencies, which complicates their
  implementation.
       As pointed out by Elnozahy et al. [2002], pessimistic logging is so much
  simpler than optimistic approaches, that it is the preferred way of message
  logging in practical distributed systems design.

8.7   Summary
Fault tolerance is an important subject in distributed systems design. Fault
tolerance is defined as the characteristic by which a system can mask the
occurrence and recovery from failures. In other words, a system is fault
tolerant if it can continue to operate in the presence of failures.
     Several types of failures exist. A crash failure occurs when a process
simply halts. An omission failure occurs when a process does not respond to
incoming requests. When a process responds too soon or too late to a request,
it is said to exhibit a timing failure. Responding to an incoming request, but in
the wrong way, is an example of a response failure. The most difficult failures
to handle are those by which a process exhibits any kind of failure, called
arbitrary or Byzantine failures.
     Redundancy is the key technique needed to achieve fault tolerance. When
applied to processes, the notion of process groups becomes important. A

process group consists of a number of processes that closely cooperate to
provide a service. In fault-tolerant process groups, one or more processes
can fail without affecting the availability of the service the group implements.
Often, it is necessary that communication within the group be highly reliable,
and adheres to stringent ordering and atomicity properties to achieve fault
tolerance.
    The real problem is that members of a process group need to reach consen-
sus in the presence of various failures. Paxos is by now a well-established and
highly robust consensus algorithm. By using 2k + 1 servers, it can establish
k-fault tolerance. However, we need a total of 3k + 1 servers if it is needed to
deal with arbitrary failures.
    Reliable group communication, also called reliable multicasting, comes
in different forms. As long as groups are relatively small, it turns out that
implementing reliability is feasible. However, as soon as large groups have to
be supported, scalability of reliable multicasting becomes problematic. The
key issue in achieving scalability is to reduce the number of feedback messages
by which receivers report the (un)successful receipt of a multicasted message.
    Matters become worse when atomicity is to be provided. In atomic mul-
ticast protocols, it is essential that each group member has the same view
concerning to which members a multicasted message has been delivered.
Atomic multicasting can be precisely formulated in terms of a virtual syn-
chronous execution model. In essence, this model introduces boundaries
between which group membership does not change and which messages are
reliably transmitted. A message can never cross a boundary.
    Group membership changes are an example where each process needs to
agree on the same list of members. Such agreement can be reached through a
commit protocol, of which the two-phase commit protocol is the most widely
applied. In a two-phase commit protocol, a coordinator first checks whether
all processes agree to perform the same operation (i.e., whether they all agree
to commit), and in a second round, multicasts the outcome of that poll. A
three-phase commit protocol is used to handle the crash of the coordinator
without having to block all processes to reach agreement until the coordinator
recovers.
    Recovery in fault-tolerant systems is invariably achieved by checkpointing
the state of the system on a regular basis. Checkpointing is completely
distributed. Unfortunately, taking a checkpoint is an expensive operation.
To improve performance, many distributed systems combine checkpointing
with message logging. By logging the communication between processes,
it becomes possible to replay the execution of the system after a crash has
occurred.

