   09

SECURITY

    What makes a distributed system secure? Answering this question can
easily fill entire books, and can certainly not be fully addressed in a single
chapter. One of the challenges in making systems secure is that we need to
address a negative goal [Saltzer and Kaashoek, 2009]: we need to protect a
system against all unauthorized actions. Proving or demonstrating that this
goal has been reached is generally (close to) impossible. Much easier is to
show that a positive goal has been accomplished, for example, showing that
Alice can log in to a system.
    In this chapter, we aim to provide a brief introduction into secure dis-
tributed systems. We do so by mainly concentrating on two important mecha-
nisms: authentication and authorization. Authentication is all about ensuring
that you are dealing with people and devices that have been properly identi-
fied before providing access to a system. Authorization is all about ensuring
that identified entities, having access to the system, can perform only those
operations they are allowed to execute.
    Yet, authentication and authorization are not enough. It is equally impor-
tant to ensure that operations are carried out correctly: have they affected data
in a way that may leave the system in an inconsistent state, has the request to
execute an operation not been tampered with, etc.? This aspect of ensuring
integrity, or at the very least identifying that integrity has been affected, is
essential for any secure system and will be discussed as well.
    This brings us to perhaps one of the most discussed topics in the last
decade: confidentiality, or, to keep it simple, ensuring that information is kept
private. Achieving confidentiality time and again turns out to be a difficult
subject, not in the least because keeping information private depends so much
on the context of that information. For example, in the European’s General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) it is stated that without explicit consent,
no data set should allow for the identification of an individual. However,
realizing this otherwise indisputable reasonable requirement turns out to
be technically a very demanding task in general, yet solutions for specific
situations have been developed. Understanding the context turns out to be
important, and as we shall see in this chapter, this actually holds for many
situations when trying to secure a distributed system.
    Realizing security mechanisms and establishing confidentiality and in-
tegrity relies heavily on cryptography, which is a huge field in itself. Never-
theless, explaining the basic principles of cryptographic protocols necessary
for distributed systems is actually not too difficult and are also discussed in
this chapter.

9.1    Introduction to security
We start our description of security in distributed systems by taking a look
at some general security issues. First, it is necessary to define what a secure

system is. We distinguish security policies from security mechanisms. Our
second concern is to consider some general design issues for secure systems.
Finally, we briefly discuss some cryptographic algorithms, which play a key
role in the design of security protocols.

9.1.1   Security threats, policies, and mechanisms
Security in a computer system is strongly related to the notion of dependability.
Informally, a dependable computer system is one that we justifiably trust
to deliver its services [Laprie, 1995]. Dependability includes availability,
reliability, safety, and maintainability. However, if we are to put our trust in a
computer system, then confidentiality and integrity should also be considered.
Confidentiality refers to the property that information is disclosed only
to authorized parties. Integrity is the characteristic that alterations to a
system’s assets can be made only in an authorized way, ensuring accuracy
and completeness during the lifetime of assets. In other words, improper
alterations in a secure computer system should be detectable and recoverable.
Major assets of any computer system are its hardware, software, and data (see
also Beckers et al. [2015]).
    Another way of looking at security in computer systems is that we attempt
to protect the services and data it offers against security threats. Follow-
ing Saltzer and Kaashoek [2009] we distinguish the following three broad
classes of threats:

   1. Unauthorized information disclosure
   2. Unauthorized information modification
   3. Unauthorized denial of use

In all these cases, we explicitly mention unauthorized actions: actions taken by
people, software, or devices (and generally as a combination) that are, simply
put, not allowed, or have not been intended to be allowed. To what extent
allowing or disallowing actions has been sufficiently expressed or enforced is
less important for qualifying a security threat as such: the intent is sufficient
for now.
    Each of these three classes of threats relate directly to confidentiality,
integrity, and availability, respectively.
    Simply stating that a system should be able to protect itself against all
possible security threats is not the way to actually build a secure system.
What is first needed is a description of security requirements, that is, a
security policy. A security policy describes precisely which actions the
entities in a system are allowed to take and which ones are prohibited. Entities
include users, services, data, machines, and so on. We will not go into the
many aspects of formulating security policies. A good introduction is given
by Bishop [2019]. Once a security policy has been laid down, it becomes

possible to concentrate on the security mechanisms by which a policy can be
enforced. We distinguish the following four important security mechanisms:

   1. Encryption
   2. Authentication
   3. Authorization
   4. Monitoring and auditing

Encryption is fundamental to computer security. Encryption allows us to
transform data into something an attacker cannot understand. In other words,
encryption provides a means to implement data confidentiality. In addition,
encryption allows us to check whether data have been modified. It thus also
provides support for integrity checks.
    Authentication is used to verify the claimed identity of a user, client,
server, host, device, and so on. In the case of clients, the basic premise is that
before a service starts to perform any work on behalf of a client, the service
must learn the client’s identity (unless the service is available to all). Typically,
users are still authenticated through passwords, but there are many other
ways to authenticate clients.
    After a client has been authenticated, it is necessary to check whether
that client is authorized to perform the action requested. Access to records
in a medical database is a typical example. Depending on who accesses the
database, permission may be granted to read records, to modify certain fields
in a record, or to add or remove a record.
    Monitoring and auditing tools are used to trace accesses to assets, such
as which clients are accessing or have accessed what, and in which way. It
has become increasingly important to not just record what has happened, but
to continuously monitor what is going on in a system with the aim to detect
any unauthorized intrusions. With the rise of advanced machine-learning
techniques, we are witnessing increasingly sophisticated intrusion detection
systems, which we shall discuss further in Section 9.6. Although auditing does
not really provide any protection against security threats, audit logs can be
extremely useful for the analysis of a security breach, and subsequently taking
measures against intruders. For this reason, attackers are generally keen not
to leave any traces that could eventually lead to exposing their identity. In
this sense, logging accesses makes attacking sometimes a riskier business.

9.1.2      Design issues
Security principles
A distributed system, or any computer system for that matter, must provide se-
curity services by which a wide range of security policies can be implemented.
There are a number of important design issues that need to be considered

when implementing general-purpose security services. Various design princi-
ples have been devised over the years, starting with the influential list of eight
such principles by Saltzer and Schroeder [1975]. Almost 40 years later, Smith
[2012] concluded that many still thrive:

   • Fail-safe defaults
   • Open design
   • Separation of privilege
   • Least privilege
   • Least common mechanism

    Fail-safe defaults are assuming that any set of defaults will generally not
be changed. Perhaps the most infamous example is the initial (user,password)
combination “(admin, admin)” or something similar, for edge devices. In many
cases, the password is never changed, making edge devices the source of
countless security breaches. This principle states that defaults should already
guarantee a good degree of protection. In particular, access decisions should
be based on permissions, not exclusions. For edge devices, it could mean
that each should be shipped with a default, unique strong password (which
has become common practice by now when purchasing and installing a new
modem, for example).
    The principle of open design is all about not applying security by obscurity:
it is essential that every aspect of a distributed system is open for review.
Everyone should be able to see which mechanisms are being used, how they
are being used, how they have been implemented, etc. An obvious problem
with this principle for modern distributed systems, is that many of them
have become so immense complex that a mere inspection of design and
implementation is no longer a guarantee for openness. Good documentation
next to the continuous focus on keeping systems and their components as
simple as possible are key. Unfortunately, simplicity is increasingly becoming
more of an ideal state than something that most engineers can realize.
    Separation of privilege is about ensuring that truly critical aspects of a
system can never be fully controlled by just a single entity. A top-secret file
may need to be double encrypted, with keys in the hands of two different
people. Likewise, shutting down critical services may need to be controlled
by two authorized administrators, each having their own keys to push the
(digital) button.
    The principle of least privilege states that a process should operate with
the fewest possible privileges. As a practical example, in Unix systems, most
processes (and thus users) cannot execute operations that are intended to
be executed by the root. It is therefore needed to explicitly execute the sudo
operation, after which one would normally need to provide a password in
order to gain administrative rights.

    Finally, the least common mechanism refers to designing systems in
such a way that if multiple components require the same mechanism, then
they should all be offered the same implementation of that mechanism. An
important motivation for this principle is that maintenance and simplicity is
much easier to achieve with a single implementation than having a mechanism
spread across the system, possibly with different implementations. A typical
example of this approach is that all users have access to the same library
(implementation).
    Saltzer and Schroeder [1975] also mentioned three other principles, in-
cluding economy of mechanism, complete mediation, and psychological
acceptability. Economy of mechanism means making systems as simple as
possible. Although this is still an excellent goal, achieving it is often close to
impossible considering how modern distributed systems are, literally, com-
posed. Nevertheless, it also sometimes seems that designers have let go of this
principle entirely. Accepting that systems can become complex in an almost
uncontrolled fashion does not mean, however, that striving for simplicity
should be abandoned.
    Complete mediation means that every access to every object must be
checked when it comes to whether it is allowed. With the complex, distributed
nature of modern systems, it has become extremely difficult to even figure
out how and where an adversary has entered a system.
    Finally, psychological acceptance often translates to building the appro-
priate user interfaces so that people can do only the right thing. It has a
lot to do with building a mental model of how a system is operating, and
subsequently operate according to that model. Smith [2012] may be correct in
stating that this aspect is receiving more attention than before, but that further
advancements are simply hindered by costs. This may change, however, as or-
ganizations are increasingly becoming aware of how vulnerable they are, only
because their employees find it so difficult to work with modern information
systems.

Layering of security mechanisms
An important issue in designing secure systems is to decide at which level
security mechanisms should be placed. A level in this context is related to
the logical organization of a system into a number of layers. For example,
computer networks are often organized into layers following some reference
model, as we discussed in Section 4.1.1. In Section 2.2, we introduced the
organization of distributed systems consisting of separate layers for appli-
cations, middleware, operating system services, and the operating system
kernel. Combining the two organizations leads roughly to what is shown in
Figure 9.1.
    Typically, what we have shown as low-level protocols encompass general
network-security solutions. An often-used solution is to set up a virtual

Figure 9.1: The logical organization of a distributed system into several layers.

private network, generally abbreviated to VPN. In essence, a VPN sets up a
tunnel between two remote local networks, or between a host and a remote
network. The effect is that a computer on one network seems to be directly
connected to the remote network. Although not strictly necessary, a VPN
normally encrypts all traffic between its end points and operates at the level
of the data link layer or the network layer, as we discussed in Section 4.1.1.
    Going higher up the network stack, a well-known example is the transport-
layer security (TLS) service, which can be used to securely send messages
across a TCP connection. TLS forms the standard approach for secure commu-
nication with Websites employing HTTPS. HTTPS establishes an authenticated
connection to a Website through which all data exchanged between a client
and the server is encrypted.
    Where VPNs and secure Website communication can be considered as
operating at the level of networking protocols, this is less obvious for protocols
such as SSH. The Secure Shell Protocol (SSH) is used to establish a secure
remote login. As such, one can argue that it operates as an operating-system
service. Unlike HTTPS (which formally operates at the application level in
terms of networking stacks), SSH comes with its own security protocol and
does not rely on a transport-layer security service.
    One of the main reasons for introducing middleware was to offer services
that are useful for a wide range of distributed applications, while at the same
being independent of specific operating systems. One example that we will
discuss in detail later is that of an authentication service such as Kerberos.
The service is indeed independent of a specific operating system (Kerberos
has been implemented for a wide range of operating systems, including
Windows, many Unix versions, and other non-Unix systems). Other examples
of secure middleware services include secure RPC, secure Web servers (think
of WordPress), as well as a range of secure databases.
    Finally, an approach that is increasingly being adopted is developing end-
to-end application-level security. In these cases, all secure communication

within the distributed application is handled by the application itself. There is
no reliance on middleware security services. A well-known example is formed
by modern user-messaging services like WhatsApp, Signal, and Telegram. Like-
wise, distributed applications that, for example, make use of cloud storage
services, may be configured to first encrypt any data before sending it off to
the cloud, as is done with BoxCryptor.
   What these examples illustrate is that there are choices to be made con-
cerning where and which security mechanisms will be deployed. Obviously,
application-level security need generally not rely on lower-level security guar-
antees, yet the price to pay is that all mechanisms need to be deployed and
maintained by the application itself. This is not always the best choice, as it
does make sense to separate application functionality from what is needed
regarding security. Just imagine automating your own backup services for
a collection of remote computers. Making use of available operating-system
level services for secure execution of remote commands and file transfers
makes life a lot easier.

Trusted Computing Base
Dependencies between services regarding trust lead to the notion of a trusted
computing base (TCB). A TCB is the set of all security mechanisms in a
(distributed) computer system that are necessary and sufficient to enforce
a security policy, and that thus need to be trusted [Committee on National
Security Systems, 2015]. The TCB encompasses firmware, hardware, software,
as well as humans. The smaller the TCB, the better. The idea is that if the
TCB can be clearly identified, we at least know what to concentrate on when
scrutinizing a computer system to state that it is secure.
    Identifying the TCB means identifying the modules that need to be trusted,
and those that do not. Unfortunately, identifying the trusted modules is not
that simple, nor is it even that simple to design a system such that there is
always a clear distinction between trusted and untrusted modules.
    For example, it is clear that a program needing administrative privileges
to be executed will be part of the TCB, for the simple reason that if that
program is compromised, an attacker may be able to do much more than
what that program was designed for. But what about a Web-based service
that facilitates storage on a local server, such as ownCloud? Such a service
is typically implemented as a collection of scripts that are executed by a
process spawned by the Apache server. The spawned process runs entirely
without any special privileges, yet the collection of scripts also include code for
adding and removing users (separate from the users known to the underlying
operating system). Are the set of scripts that make up this service to be trusted
or not? Or more specifically, which scripts from this set are to be trusted?
Clearly, the answer to this question depends on the security specifications
for, in this case, the ownCloud service. If the policy states that users should be

fully separated, then the scripts for user management and access control will
need to be inspected, but also the dependency of those scripts (and perhaps
others) on other modules that ownCloud depends on (such as a mysql database
and the Apache server).
    The ownCloud example illustrates that it may not be that easy to separate
trusted from untrusted modules, especially when no security policy has been
explicitly specified, or is perhaps otherwise incomplete. The same may hold
when designing for security. For example, often we assume a so-called honest-
but-curious server: a server that behaves according to some protocol, but in
the worst case keeps track of all the things it does [Goldreich, 2009]. Making
such an assumption may be fine, but what measures have been taken that
justify such an assumption? Equally important, are those measures sufficient?
When components or modules are complex, it may be very difficult to establish
whether a module actually satisfies its specifications and to what extent we
may need to classify it as trusted or not.

Privacy
If there is one thing clear when it comes to designing for secure distributed
systems, then it is the role of data. In this era of data and notably the effect
it has on the personal lives of many, protecting privacy has become a major
issue for distributed systems. Privacy and confidentiality are closely related,
yet are different. Following Francis [2008], one could state that privacy is
invaded, whereas confidentiality is breached. Important is to recognize that
just ensuring confidentiality, that is, data and information is not disclosed in
any unauthorized manner, is not enough to guarantee privacy. In this light,
one can understand why Nissenbaum [2010] states that the right to privacy is
about “a right to appropriate flow of personal information.” In other words,
controlling who gets to see what, when, and how. This also implies, for
example, that a person should be able to stop and revoke a flow of personal
information.
    Discussions on how to design distributed systems that meet such privacy
requirements have only recently started to mature. One approach is to con-
centrate on ownership, such as done in Solid [Sambra et al., 2016], which
essentially puts control on personal information at a single person. To what
extent this will be sufficient remains to be seen. A point of debate is whether
ownership by itself is sufficient to provide the necessary privacy guarantees.
    Another approach is to look at what regulations state and to what extent
it is possible to design systems that comply to those regulations. Impor-
tant in this respect is the General Data Protection Regulation, or simply
GDPR [Voigt and Von dem Bussche, 2017], which was installed in 2016. The
GDPR is a comprehensive set of regulations aiming to protect personal data.
As with many regulations, it is yet unclear to what extent one can develop a
truly GDPR-compliant distributed system, but it can be argued that making

a system GDPR-compliant after the fact may be much more difficult, if not
impossible.
    Like Solid, Schwarzkopf et al. [2019] follow an approach in which a user
has a separate, privately owned and controlled database with personal in-
formation, denoted as a shard. Acknowledging that the real challenge lies
in keeping track of how personal information flows into other systems, the
authors argue for designing a distributed system by considering it to consist
of as being a large dataflow computation. A user can contribute her shard
to the system, but equally remove it and along with that removal, revoke
participation in all related data flows.
    As an example, consider a collection of users, each maintaining their own
shard. A shard represents a user’s contributions to an online social network
with three elements:

   • Some personal information, such as name, organization, etc.
   • A set of connections, each connection referring to another shard.
   • A set of posts, as is common in many social networks, often as a reaction
     to another post.

An application can be developed that builds a tree consisting of posts and
reactions to posts. The development of that tree starts with a single, new
post P and implements the function react taking the original post P and a
(dynamic) list of reactions R1 , R2 , . . . , Rn as input. Each reaction is, of course,
also a post and can be reacted to. When Alice at a certain point decides she
wants to completely withdraw from the discussion, she can simply withdraw
her post(s), leading to a new tree. All reactions to her posts may necessarily
be removed as well, as each of her posts operates as the root of a branch. This
can be done automatically, assuming that the function react is continuously
updated on its inputs, and we assume that removal of the post that led to
reactions, recursively leads to the removal of the entire branch.
    More intricate examples are described by Agarwal et al. [2022], yet the
essence is that removal of an element as part of a dataflow leads to an update
of that flow but without the personal information represented by that element.
The example above also illustrates that we may not be out of the woods yet,
for what happens if Alice is explicitly mentioned in one of the reactions? In
other words, more needs to be done to ensure that all references to Alice and
her posts are indeed removed.
    This example already illustrates that taking a database perspective may
help in designing GDPR-compliant systems. Shastri et al. [2020] show that
such a perspective may indeed be fruitful, yet the real challenge is maintaining
a large amount of metadata, as shown in Figure 9.2. The authors come to
the conclusion that extending databases so that a system can meet GDPR
requirements is doable from a functional point of view, but has serious adverse
effect on performance and, in turn, on the scalability of solutions.

           GDPR regulation                    Impact on database systems
                                            Attributes          Actions
 Collect data for explicit purposes      Purpose           Metadata indexing
 Do not store data indefinitely          TTL               Timely deletion
 Inform customers about GDPR             Purpose, TTL,     Metadata indexing
 metadata associated with their data     Origin, Sharing
 Allow customers to access their data    Person id         Metadata indexing
 Allow customers to erase their data     TTL               Timely deletion
 Do not use data for objected reasons    Objections        Metadata indexing
 Allow customers to withdraw from        Automated         Metadata indexing
 algorithmic decision-making             decisions
 Safeguard and restrict access to data                     Access control
 Do not grant unlimited access to data                     Access control
 Audit operations on personal data       Audit trail       Monitor and log
 Implement appropriate data security                       Encryption
 Share audit trails from affected        Audit trail       Monitor and log
 systems

Figure 9.2: The effects on (distributed) databases when designing for GDPR
compliance (adapted from [Shastri et al., 2020]).

9.2     Cryptography
Let us now draw attention to an essential mechanism in developing secure
distributed systems, namely the application of cryptographic solutions. In
the following, we first pay attention to some basic cryptographic functions,
including symmetric and asymmetric cryptosystems, and secure hashing, to
then continue with managing security.

9.2.1   Basics
Fundamental to security in distributed systems is the use of cryptographic
techniques. The basic idea of applying these techniques is simple. Consider a
sender S wanting to transmit message m to a receiver R. To protect the message
against security threats, the sender first encrypts it into an unintelligible
message m′ , and subsequently sends m′ to R. R, in turn, must decrypt the
received message into its original form m.
   Encryption and decryption are accomplished by using cryptographic meth-
ods parameterized by keys, as shown in Figure 9.3. The original form of the
message that is sent is called the plaintext, shown as P in Figure 9.3. The
encrypted form is referred to as the ciphertext, illustrated as C.
   To describe the various security protocols that are used in building security
services for distributed systems, it is useful to have a notation to relate

Figure 9.3: Intruders and eavesdroppers in communication.

plaintext, ciphertext, and keys. Following common notational conventions, we
will use C = EK (P) to denote that the ciphertext C is obtained by encrypting
the plaintext P using key EK . Likewise, P = DK (C) is used to express the
decryption of the ciphertext C using key DK , resulting in the plaintext P.
    Returning to our example shown in Figure 9.3, while transferring a mes-
sage as ciphertext C, there are three different attacks that we need to protect
against, and for which encryption helps. First, an intruder may intercept the
message without either the sender or receiver being aware that eavesdropping
is happening. Of course, if the transmitted message has been encrypted in
such a way that it cannot be easily decrypted without having the proper key,
interception is useless: the intruder will see only unintelligible data. (By the
way, the fact alone that a message is being transmitted may sometimes be
enough for an intruder to draw conclusions. For example, if during a world
crisis, the amount of traffic into the White House suddenly drops dramati-
cally while the amount of traffic going into a certain mountain in Colorado
increases, there may be useful information in knowing that.)
    The second type of attack that needs to be dealt with is that of modifying
the message. Modifying plaintext is easy; modifying ciphertext that has been
properly encrypted is much more difficult because the intruder will first have
to decrypt the message before it can be meaningfully modified. In addition,
the intruder will also have to properly encrypt it again, or otherwise the
receiver may notice that the message has been tampered with.
    The third type of attack is when an intruder inserts encrypted messages
into the communication system, attempting to make R believe these messages
came from S. Again, encryption can help protect against such attacks. Note
that if an intruder can modify messages, she can also insert messages.
    The art and science of devising algorithms for cryptographic systems has
a long and fascinating history [Kahn, 1967], and building secure systems is

often surprisingly difficult. It is beyond the scope of this book to discuss any
of these algorithms in detail. Information on cryptographic algorithms can be
found in [Ferguson et al., 2010] and [Smart, 2016].

9.2.2   Symmetric and asymmetric cryptosystems
There is a fundamental distinction between different cryptographic systems,
based on whether the encryption and decryption key are the same. In a
symmetric cryptosystem, the same key is used to encrypt and decrypt a
message:
                      DK = EK with P = DK ( EK (P)).
Symmetric cryptosystems are also referred to as secret-key or shared-key
systems because the sender and receiver are required to share the same key,
and to ensure that protection works, this shared key must be kept secret; no
one else is allowed to see the key. We will use the notation KA,B to denote a
key shared by A and B.
   In an asymmetric cryptosystem, the keys for encryption and decryption
are different, but together form a unique pair. In other words, there is a
separate key EK for encryption and one for decryption, DK , such that

                        DK ̸= EK with P = DK ( EK (P)).

One of the keys in an asymmetric cryptosystem is kept private; the other is
made public. For this reason, asymmetric cryptosystems are also referred to
as public-key systems. In what follows, we use the notation PKA to denote a
public key belonging to A, and SKA as its corresponding private (i.e., secret)
key.
   Which one of the encryption or decryption keys that is actually made
public depends on how the keys are used. For example, if Alice wants to send
a confidential message m to Bob, she should use Bob’s public key to encrypt
the message. Because Bob is the only one holding the associated and private
decryption key, he is also the only person who can decrypt the message:

                     if m is to be kept private: C = PK B (m).

On the other hand, suppose that Bob wants to know for sure that the message
he just received actually came from Alice. In that case, Alice can keep
her encryption key private to encrypt the messages she sends. If Bob can
successfully decrypt a message using Alice’s public key (and the plaintext
in the message has enough information to make it meaningful to Bob), he
knows that message must have come from Alice because the decryption key
is uniquely tied to the encryption key:

                    if m is to be authenticated: C = SK A (m).

We return to digitally signing messages shortly.

   An aspect of asymmetric cryptosystems that is becoming increasingly
important is that of homomorphic encryption. What it boils down to is that
when using homomorphic encryption, mathematical operations on plaintext
can also be performed on the corresponding ciphertext. In particular, if x and
y are two numbers, then
                             EK ( x ) ⋆ EK (y) = EK ( x ⋆ y)
where “⋆” is some mathematical operation, typically an addition or multiplica-
tion. The importance of homomorphic encryption cannot be underestimated.
By now, we understand what it takes to store data safely on a remote, un-
trusted server: simply encrypt it with a public key before sending it to the
server. This is what tools such as BoxCryptor do. However, whenever stored
data needs to be operated on, servers generally require that the data is avail-
able as plaintext. Homomorphic encryption changes that: a server can apply
operations on encrypted data and the result (also automatically encrypted
with the same key) can be safely stored as well, or used in other computations.
    There is only one problem with homomorphic encryption: its general form
(known as full homomorphic encryption or simply FHE) is performance-
wise slow. FHE supports addition and multiplication, which is enough to
implement any mathematical operation. Currently, FHE implementations are
often too slow to be generally applicable. In contrast, there are also partial
homomorphic encryption (PHE) schemes, which support either addition
or multiplication, for which efficient implementations exist. However, PHE
schemes do require often very specific applications. For a good overview of
homomorphic encryption, see Acar et al. [2018].

  Note 9.1 (Example: Counting pedestrians over time and space)
  As a practical and advanced example of how homomorphic encryption can be
  applied, consider the following. In many cities, it has become common practice to
  monitor pedestrian behavior by simply picking up Wi-Fi signals from carry-on
  devices, notably Wi-Fi–enabled smartphones. Most of these signals are network
  packets carrying the unique MAC address of the device. By extracting the MAC
  address as a device identifier, it becomes possible to track movements. That by
  itself need not necessarily be a problem, but without having explicit consent from
  a device owner, it is simply a serious infringement of privacy.
       Interestingly, many cities are not interested in actually tracking individuals.
  They are interested in simple questions such as how many people moved from
  one location to another, or what is the average time that people stayed at a specific
  location. Such questions are easy to answer when you know the identifier of
  a device, yet become much more difficult when keeping those identifiers long
  enough to come to an answer, is simply forbidden.
       Stanciu et al. [2020] propose a solution that allows to count devices over
  time and space without the need to keep device identifiers. A setup consists
  of a collection of sensors, each sensor essentially being a Wi-Fi–packet sniffer.

  During a short epoch (typically a few minutes), a sensor picks up Wi-Fi packets,
  extracts MAC addresses, and subsequently stores (a pseudonymized version) of
  each MAC address in a so-called Bloom filter. A Bloom filter is a vector of m
  bits, initially all set to 0 [Bloom, 1970]. Using a collection of k hash functions,
  an element x is added to a Bloom filter by setting the position hi ( x ) to 1 for
  each of the k hash functions. Each element is thus represented as an m-bit vector
  consisting of exactly k bits set to 1. More elements are added by performing a
  bitwise OR operation each time an element is added.
        A Bloom filter has the important property that one cannot retrieve the elements
  of the set it represents other than by exhaustively testing for all possible elements.
  In other words, a Bloom filter supports only membership tests. To check if x is in
  a set A represented by the Bloom filter BF, one needs to check if every position
  hi ( x ) has been set to 1:

                                              k
                            x ∈ A only if ∏ BF[hi ( x )] = 1
                                             i =i

  Counting is possible by a simple estimation n∗ of the number of elements in a
  Bloom filter [Swamidass and Baldi, 2007]:

                                           m       X
                                  n∗ = −     ln(1 − )
                                           k       m
  where X is the number of nonzero elements in the Bloom filter.
      Counting the number of devices that were at one location and later at another,
  then resorts to taking the intersection of two Bloom filters and estimating the size
  of the intersection. Likewise, checking how many people stayed at a location for
  a specific, long time, amounts to constructing intersections of Bloom filters and
  estimating the size. In all cases, there is, strictly speaking, no need to test for
  membership.
      However, using Bloom filters in the clear is not safe: a simple brute-force
  attack can easily give a very good impression of detected devices, and thus also
  the ability to track devices. Of course, when the Bloom filters are encrypted, de-
  tecting actual devices becomes more difficult. Moreover, computing intersections
  should preferably be done on encrypted Bloom filters. Fortunately, computing
  an intersection is nothing else but constructing a Bloom filter through a bitwise
  AND operation, which is equivalent to a multiplication of 0’s and 1’s. Specifically,
  if we need to compute the intersection of two Bloom filters A and B, we do so
  using their homomorphically encrypted versions and compute:

                        ∀i : PK (A ⊙ B)[i ] = PK (A[i ]) · PK (B[i ])

  where “⊙” represents an elementwise multiplication of two vectors. The basic
  idea is that a third party, say Alice, who needs the value of a count provides a
  public key PK by which each sensor homomorphically encrypts the entries of its
  Bloom filters. Note that if a value p is encrypted, leading to p1 = PK ( p), and that
  same value is encrypted a next time, leading to p2 = PK ( p), the two encrypted

  values will be different: p1 ̸= p2 and an observer will not be able to distinguish
  the two underlying values to be the same.
       An encrypted filter can be handed out to a separate server without disclosing
  any detections. That server also computes intersections, but completely ignorant
  of the results, for the simple reason that it cannot decrypt any of the filters. The
  only thing the server does is shuffle the elements of any (computed) Bloom filter
  before handing it to Alice, who owns the private key SK associated with PK. This
  shuffling is important: when Alice decrypts the result, she will have a Bloom
  filter that has nothing to do with the original, unshuffled Bloom filter. One might
  say that it represents a completely random set of detections. The only thing in
  common with the original filter is the number of nonzero elements, from which
  she can then estimate the size and thus the number of detections. This number is
  the only information that Alice can get from the server’s response.

9.2.3      Hash functions
One final application of cryptography in distributed systems, is the use of
hash functions. A hash function H takes a message m of arbitrary length as
input and produces a bit string h having a fixed length as output:

                          h = H (m) with length of h fixed.

A hash h is somewhat comparable to the extra bits that are appended to a
message in communication systems to allow for error detection, such as a
cyclic-redundancy check (CRC). A well-known application is securely storing
passwords: instead of storing a password pw, we keep only H (pw). Then,
when Alice logs in with a password pw′ , we need merely check if H (pw) =
H (pw′ ).
     Hash functions that are used in cryptographic systems, also known as
trapdoors, have a number of essential properties. First, they are one-way
functions, meaning that it is computationally infeasible to find the input
m that corresponds to a known output h. On the other hand, computing h
from m is easy. Second, they have the weak collision resistance property,
meaning that given an input m and its associated output h = H (m), it is
computationally infeasible to find another, different input m′ ̸= m, such
that H (m) = H (m′ ). Finally, cryptographic hash functions also have the
strong collision resistance property, which means that, when given only H,
it is computationally infeasible to find any two different input values m and
m′ , such that H (m) = H (m′ ). In this way, an attacker will need to guess
passwords instead of simply stealing or trying to derive them what is already
known.
     Similar properties must apply to any encryption function E and the keys
that are used. For any encryption function EK , it should be computationally
infeasible to find the key EK when given the plaintext P and associated

ciphertext C = EK (P). Likewise, analogous to collision resistance, when given
a plaintext P and a key EK , it should be effectively impossible to find another
key EK′ such that EK (P) = EK′ (P).

Digital signatures
Let us now take a look at an often-used application of hash functions, namely
placing digital signatures as part of sending messages. Consider the situation
in which Bob has just sold Alice a collector’s item of some vinyl record for
$500. The whole deal was done through e-mail. In the end, Alice sends Bob a
message confirming that she will buy the record for $500. There are at least
two issues that need to be taken care of regarding the integrity of the message.

   1. Alice needs to be assured that Bob will not maliciously change the
      $500 mentioned in her message into something higher, and claim she
      promised more than $500.
   2. Bob needs to be assured that Alice cannot deny ever having sent the
      message, for example because she had second thoughts.

These two issues can be dealt with if Alice digitally signs the message in
such a way that her signature is uniquely tied to its content. The unique
association between a message and its signature prevents that modifications to
the message will go unnoticed. In addition, if Alice’s signature can be verified
to be genuine, she cannot later repudiate the fact that she signed the message.
    There are several ways to place digital signatures. One popular form is to
use a public-key cryptosystem. When Alice sends a message m to Bob, she
encrypts it with her private key SKA , and sends it off to Bob. If she also wants
to keep the message content a secret, she can use Bob’s public key and send
PK B (m, SK A (m)), which combines m and the version signed by Alice:

               Alice: send C = PK B ([m, sig]) with sig = SK A (m).

When Bob receives the ciphertext C, he decrypts it with his private key SKB
and uses Alice’s public key to verify the signature:

     Bob: receive and decrypt [m, sig] = SK B (C) and verify m = PK A (sig).

If Bob can be assured that the public key is indeed owned by Alice, then
decrypting the signed version of m and successfully comparing it to m can
mean only that it came from Alice. Alice is protected against any malicious
modifications to m by Bob because Bob will always have to prove that the
modified version of m was also signed by Alice. In other words, the decrypted
message alone essentially never counts as proof. It is also in Bob’s own interest
to keep the signed version of m to protect himself against repudiation by Alice.
    An issue with the scheme just described is that Alice encrypts the entire
message with her private key. Such an encryption may be costly in terms of

processing requirements and is actually unnecessary. Recall that we need to
uniquely associate a signature with only a specific message. A cheaper and
arguably more elegant scheme is to use a message digest.
    A message digest is a fixed-length bit string h that has been computed
from an arbitrary-length message m through a cryptographic hash function H.
If m is changed to m′ , its hash H (m′ ) will be different from h = H (m) so that
it can easily be detected that a modification has taken place.
    To digitally sign a message, Alice can first compute a message digest and
subsequently encrypt the digest with her private key. The encrypted digest is
sent along with the message to Bob:

                    Alice: send [m, sig] with sig = SK A ( H (m)).

When Bob receives the message and its encrypted digest, he need merely
decrypt the digest with Alice’s public key, and separately calculate the message
digest. If the digest calculated from the received message and the decrypted
digest match, Bob knows the message has been signed by Alice:

        Bob: receive [m, sig], compute h′ = H (m) and verify h′ = PK A (sig).

Note that the message itself is sent as plaintext: everyone is allowed to read it.
If confidentiality is required, then the message should also be encrypted with
Bob’s public key.
    There are still a number of problems with both schemes, although the
protocols are correct. First, the validity of Alice’s signature holds only as
long as Alice’s private key remains a secret. If Alice wants to bail out of
the deal even after sending Bob her confirmation, she could claim that her
private key was stolen before the message was sent. We will later describe
how blockchains may help in keeping a decentralized account of transactions,
such as those between Alice and Bob.
    Another problem occurs when Alice decides to change her private key.
Doing so may in itself be not such a bad idea, as changing keys from time to
time generally helps against intrusion. However, once Alice has changed her
key, her statement sent to Bob, becomes worthless. What may be needed in
such cases is a central authority that keeps track of when keys are changed, in
addition to using timestamps when signing messages. We look at this issue
next; Figure 9.4 summarizes the notations and abbreviations we use in the
mathematical expressions throughout this book.

9.2.4      Key management
So far, we have described cryptographic protocols in which we (implicitly)
assumed that various keys are readily available. For example, in the case of
public-key cryptosystems, we assumed that a sender of a message had the
public key of the receiver at its disposal so that it could encrypt the message

            Notation      Description
            KA,B          Secret key shared by A and B
            PKA           Public key of A
            SKA           Private (secret) key of A
            EK (P)        Encryption of plaintext P using key EK (or key K)
            DK ( C )      Decryption of ciphertext C using key DK (or key K)
            H (m)         The hash of m computed using function H
            [m]A          The message m digitally signed by A

Figure 9.4: Notations used in this chapter.

to ensure confidentiality. Likewise, when verifying the signature of a message,
the receiver will need to have the public key of the sender. In both these
examples, we also need to be sure that the public key being used actually
belongs to the presumed owner.
    However, establishing and distributing keys is not a trivial matter. For
example, digitally distributing secret keys without using encryption is out of
the question and there are cases where we even have to resort to out-of-band
methods. Also, mechanisms are needed to revoke keys, that is, prevent a key
from being used after it has been compromised or invalidated.

Key establishment
How are keys actually established? Let us take a look at a simple and widely
deployed approach for automatically establishing remote secure connections
through SSH. As we mentioned, SSH allows a person to securely log in to
a remote computer. We can also use SSH to let a user alice at computer
A log in as user bob at computer B using a ( public, private)-key pair. An
actual authentication protocol will be described later; here we are interested
in establishing and distributing keys in the SSH system using the openSSL
framework.
    First, Alice needs to generate a ( public, private)-key pair, which can be
done as follows:1

      ssh-keygen -f a

This will generate two keys: a private key contained in the file a and a
corresponding public key in the file a.pub. The file a will be stored in a special
directory (namely in .ssh in Alice’s home directory). The file a.pub will have
to be transferred to computer B, which can be done as follows:
    1We are deliberately taking an extremely simple example that works in practice yet is not

very sophisticated.

      ssh-copy-id -i a bob@B
We assume that B is the actual computer name that can be used when Alice
would normally log in to B as user bob. It is important to note that Alice is
assumed to know the password of Bob at B. The ssh-copy-id command will
ask for Bob’s password at B before completing the transfer. If successful, the
file a.pub will be appended to a special file in the .ssh directory in the home
directory of user bob at B. From that moment on, Alice can simply log in to B
through the command
      ssh bob@B
where she will no longer be asked for a password.
     This simple example illustrates two important issues. First, security keys
are simply generated through programs such as ssh-keygen and stored in files
that can be distributed as any other file (or should be kept secret and properly
protected against unauthorized access). Second, we can easily distribute keys
provided we have the authorization to do so. That authorization can come from
knowing a password, but there are other means as well, as we discuss shortly.
Interestingly, in lack of authorization (and thus authentication), we would
need to rely on the receiving party to trust the claimed ownership of the keys.
We return to trust below.
     Let us move on to a more sophisticated example and consider how session
keys can be established. As it name suggests, a session key is a temporary
shared secret key that is used during a single communication session between
two parties. A session typically consists of a series of message exchanges.
When the session ends, the session key is discarded and never used again.
As we shall also explain later, an important reason for using session keys is
that one should use long-lasting keys, be they shared, public, or private as
little as possible: the more data that is used for encrypting or decrypting data,
the easier it becomes to discover the keys used. Two ways immediately come
to mind, by which Alice and Bob can agree on establishing a session key. In
a symmetric cryptosystem and assuming that Alice and Bob already have a
long-lasting shared secret key KA,B , Alice could decide to generate a session
key sk and send it to Bob as the message
                           Alice: send m = K A,B (sk).
Likewise, in an asymmetric cryptosystem, Alice could encrypt the key with
Bob’s public key:
                        Alice: send m = PK B (sk).
After that, sk can be used for encrypting and decrypting messages for as long
as the session lasts.
    Both methods require that the communicating parties already have the
means available to send and receive encrypted messages. In other words,
some form of key establishment and distribution must have taken place before.

    An elegant scheme that is widely applied for establishing a shared key
across an insecure channel is the Diffie-Hellman key exchange [Diffie and
Hellman, 1976]. The protocol works as follows. Suppose that Alice and Bob
want to establish a shared secret key. The first requirement is that they agree
on two large numbers, p and g that are subject to a number of mathematical
properties (which we do not discuss here). Both p and g can be made public;
there is no need to hide them from outsiders. Alice picks a large random
number, say x, which she keeps secret. Likewise, Bob picks his own secret
large number, say y. At this point, there is enough information to construct a
shared secret key, as shown in Figure 9.5.

Figure 9.5: The principle of Diffie-Hellman key exchange.

     Alice starts by sending g x mod p to Bob, along with p and g. It is impor-
tant to note that this information can be sent as plaintext, as it is virtually
impossible to compute x given g x mod p. When Bob receives the message,
he subsequently calculates ( g x mod p)y which is mathematically equal to
g xy mod p. In addition, he sends gy mod p to Alice, who can then compute
( gy mod p) x = g xy mod p. Consequently, both Alice and Bob, and only those
two, will now have the shared secret key g xy mod p. Note that neither of them
needed to make their private number (x and y, respectively), known to the
other. Diffie-Hellman can also be viewed as a public-key cryptosystem. In the
case of Alice, x is her private key, whereas g x mod p is her public key.
     In practice, Alice will not send p and g to Bob, but first negotiate which
so-called Diffie-Hellman group they will use. In essence, the choice of group
defines p and g, but also exactly which cryptographic algorithm to use. In
our example, we have used g x mod p, yet an alternative is to use a so-called
elliptic curve.
     It is also relevant to note that in practice, Alice and Bob will regularly
change their respective private keys. In particular, new values for x and y may
be chosen for each new communication session between Alice and Bob, in
which case we speak of ephemeral Diffie-Hellman key exchange. As we shall
see, the Diffie-Hellman key exchange has shown to be a powerful security
mechanism throughout many practical situations. In the following note, we
discuss another example of its application.

  Note 9.2 (Advanced: Computing while keeping data private)
  In many distributed systems, we see that security comes almost as an afterthought:
  designers focus on providing functionality to later adjust the system to meet
  specific security requirements. For long, it has been thought that functionality
  may actually suffer from imposing security (or privacy) demands, yet it is unclear
  to what extent there is actually a tradeoff to consider [Rowe et al., 2012]. Let us
  look at an increasingly popular technique that makes use of Diffie-Hellman key
  exchange.
      As also mentioned in our discussion on privacy, an important challenge that
  many distributed systems will need to face is to deal with enormous amounts of
  data while preserving privacy. A particular case is when private data is essential
  to compute important statistics. A simple example is computing who has the
  highest salary among a number of people without anyone having to reveal their
  salary. Along the same lines, we may wish to compute the number of votes cast
  for a specific candidate without revealing who voted for whom.
      What we are dealing with is known as (secure) multiparty computations
  (MPC). For a long time, it has been a field of cryptography that was difficult to put
  into practice for its low performance, but the last decade has shown impressively
  better implementations that make MPC a practical tool for secure distributed
  computations. At the same time, one may need to devise application-specific
  solutions for the simple reason that there are too many parties to make general
  tools practically feasible. We will discuss an example in which resource constraints
  demand an alternative solution.
      It is beyond the scope of this chapter to go into any significant depth con-
  cerning MPC; the interested reader is referred to Evans et al. [2018] for a good
  introduction. Let us first consider an important building block for MPC, namely
  oblivious transfer. In this case, we assume Alice has n secret messages m1 , . . . , mn ,
  while Bob is interested (and allowed) to know only one of those messages. Which
  specific message he wants to know should be kept secret to Alice, while at the
  same time all other messages should be kept secret to Bob. Assume Bob wishes
  to know the ith message. In that case, he generates a number Q that Alice, in turn,
  uses to generate a total of n different keys PK1 , . . . , PKn to encrypt each message:

                                      mi∗ = PKi (mi )

  Bob, meanwhile, uses Q to generate a decryption key SKi that matches only PKi .
  Clearly, when Bob receives the set of encrypted messages m1∗ , . . . , mn∗ there will be
  only a single message that he can decrypt, namely mi∗ . Using SKi any attempt to
  decrypt mj∗ (with i ̸= j) will fail.
      An important assumption for this scheme to work, is that having only Q,
  Bob cannot successfully generate any decryption key SKj for PKj . For the case
  that n = 2, there is an elegant, simple protocol that achieves this, based on a
  Diffie-Hellman key exchange [Chou and Orlandi, 2015]. The protocol is shown
  in Figure 9.6 (note that all computations are assumed to take place in Z p , that is,
  modulo p).

Figure 9.6: A simple 1-out-of-2 oblivious transfer.

         In the protocol, besides having his own private key y, Bob also has a choice for
  an additional binary parameter, denoted here as c. The value of c determines what
  Bob will do in response to the initial message from Alice. Assume first that c = 0,
  in which case Bob will choose Q = gy . This is, actually, the regular Diffie-Hellman
  key exchange: Bob computes BK = g xy , while Alice also computes AK1 = g xy ,
  after which she encrypts m1 using the now shared secret key g xy = BK. Alice also
                              2
  computes AK2 = g xy− x , yet using BK is useless. Moreover, because Bob does not
                                2
  have x, computing g xy− x is computationally infeasible.
         Now assume that c = 1, so that Bob sets Q = g x+y . Alice computes AK1 =
      2
  g xy and AK2 = ( g x gy /g x ) x = g xy . In other words, we now see that BK = AK2
    x   +

  allowing Bob to successfully decrypt only message m2∗ . He will never get to know
  m1∗ , while Alice in this setup will also never know which message Bob was able
  to decrypt.
         To illustrate how oblivious transfer is used in MPC, suppose we have two
  parties P1 and P2 who need to compute a function F ( a, b) on two input values:
  a secret a known only to P1 and a secret b known only to P2 . For simplicity,
  let us also assume that a ∈ X and b ∈ Y and that both X and Y are finite, i.e.,
  each contains only a finite number of elements. In that case, we can construct a
  matrix F of size |X| · |Y| with F[i, j] = F ( xi , y j ) for each pair ( xi , y j ) ∈ X × Y. The
  problem we want to solve is to let both P1 and P2 compute F ( a, b) yet the other
  should not be able to discover b or a, respectively.
         To this end, P1 generates |X| · |Y| unique key pairs (Ki , Kj ) and encrypts each
  entry of the table F, leading to a table F∗ [i, j] = Ki (K j ( F ( xi , x j ))). Assume that a
  corresponds to the ith element of X (i.e., a = xi ). P1 then sends F∗ and Ki to P2 ,
  but not before having permuted all its elements. In addition, it sends Q using a
  1-out-of-|Y | oblivious transfer. Assume that b = y j . Using Q, P2 can construct
  the key Kj , and only the key Kj that allows it to decrypt F∗ [i, j], corresponding
  to F ( a, b). All other entries will remain a secret to P2 , while at the same time, P1
  will not know about b = y j .
         Note that permuting the table before sending it to P2 is essential, for oth-
  erwise a and b could be looked up. Also, we assume that P2 can recognize
  that it decrypted the correct entry, for how would it otherwise know that the
  decrypted value makes sense? This recognition can be done by adding some extra
  information, such as a specific bit string that pops up after successful decryption.

Key distribution

One of the more difficult parts in key management is the actual distribution
of initial keys. In a symmetric cryptosystem, the initial shared secret key must
be communicated along a secure channel: a communication channel that, in
principle, provides mutual authentication of the two communicating parties,
as well as confidentiality for the messages that are exchanged, as shown in
Figure 9.7. We will return to secure channels later in this chapter. If there
are no keys available to Alice and Bob to set up such a secure channel, it is
necessary to distribute the key out-of-band. In other words, Alice and Bob
will have to get in touch with each other using some other communication
channel.

                                      (a)

                                      (b)

Figure 9.7: (a) Secret-key distribution.     (b) Public-key distribution (see
also [Menezes et al., 1996]).

    In the case of a public-key cryptosystem, we need to distribute the public
key in such a way that the receivers can be sure that the key is indeed paired
to a claimed private key. In other words, as shown in Figure 9.7, although
the public key itself may be sent as plaintext, it is necessary that the channel

through which it is sent can provide authentication. The private key, of course,
needs to be sent across a secure channel, providing authentication as well as
confidentiality.
    When it comes to key distribution, the authenticated distribution of public
keys is perhaps the most interesting. In practice, public-key distribution takes
place by public-key certificates. Such a certificate consists of a public key
together with a string identifying the entity to which that key is associated.
The entity could be a user, but also a host or some special device. The public
key and identifier have together been signed by a certification authority, and
this signature has been placed on the certificate as well. (The identity of
the certification authority is naturally part of the certificate.) Signing takes
place by a private key SKCA that belongs to the certification authority. The
corresponding public key PKCA is assumed to be well known. For example,
the public keys of various certification authorities are built into most Web
browsers and shipped with the binaries.
    Using a public-key certificate works as follows. Assume that a client wishes
to ascertain that the public key found in the certificate, indeed belongs to the
identified entity. It then uses the public key of the associated certification
authority to verify the certificate’s signature. If the signature on the certificate
matches the (public key, identifier)-pair, the client accepts that the public key
indeed belongs to the identified entity.
    It is important to note that by accepting the certificate as being in order, the
client actually trusts that the certificate has not been forged. In particular, the
client must assume that the public key PKCA indeed belongs to the associated
certification authority. If in doubt, it should be possible to verify the validity
of PKCA through another certificate coming from a different, possibly more
trusted certification authority.

  Note 9.3 (More information: Lifetime of certificates)
  An important issue concerning certificates is their longevity. First, let us consider
  the situation in which a certification authority hands out lifelong certificates.
  Essentially, what the certificate then states is that the public key will always be
  valid for the entity identified by the certificate. Clearly, such a statement is not
  what we want. If the private key of the identified entity is ever compromised, no
  unsuspecting client should ever be able to use the public key (let alone malicious
  clients). In that case, we need a mechanism to revoke the certificate by making it
  publicly known that the certificate is no longer valid.
       There are several ways to revoke a certificate. One common approach is with a
  certificate revocation list (CRL) published regularly by the certification authority.
  Whenever a client checks a certificate, it will have to check the CRL to see whether
  the certificate has been revoked or not. This means that the client will at least have
  to contact the certification authority each time a new CRL is published. Note that
  if a CRL is published daily, it also takes a day to revoke a certificate. Meanwhile, a

  compromised certificate can be falsely used until it is published on the next CRL.
  Consequently, the time between publishing CRLs cannot be too long.
       An alternative approach is to restrict the lifetime of each certificate. The valid-
  ity of a certificate automatically expires after some time. If, for whatever reason,
  the certificate should be revoked before it expires, the certification authority can
  still publish it on a CRL. However, this approach will still force clients to check
  the latest CRL whenever verifying a certificate.
       A final extreme case is to reduce the lifetime of a certificate to nearly zero. In
  effect, this means that certificates are no longer used; instead, a client will always
  have to contact the certification authority to check the validity of a public key.
  As a consequence, the certification authority must be continuously online and
  capable of handling potentially continuous streams of validity checks.
       In practice, certificates are handed out with restricted lifetimes, after which
  they need to be renewed. Depending on the application, renewal may require
  manual intervention, akin to renewing automatically expired passwords. In other
  cases, such as identifying Web servers, renewal can also be done completely
  automatically as essentially a check of the existence of a specific file at a spe-
  cific location suffices. The latter happens with the Let′ s Encrypt system for TLS
  certificates.

    Using certification authorities is one way of ensuring that a public key
is valid in the sense of claimed ownership. However, it can easily come
with administrative hassle. Also, making use of certification authorities is
no guarantee that certificates are correct: there have been cases in which the
ownership of a public key was systematically not properly established, and
also certification authorities are known to have been subject to successful
attacks.
    As an alternative, systems have been developed relying on developing a
web of trust. A well-known example comes from its initiator, Phil Zimmerman,
the developer of the Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) system, which has been
around ever since the 1990s [Garfinkel, 1995]. The key idea, when developing
a web of trust, is that groups of people get to together and exchange their
public keys. At that point, one establishes the true ownership of a public
key. In particular, Alice may digitally sign Bob’s public key PKbob , effectively
endorsing that the public key belongs to Bob. Other people will also endorse
Bob’s public key (and that of many others during the meeting). The result
is that anyone who trusts the ownership of Alice’s public key, that is, trusts
the signature attached to Bob’s public key, has no reason not to believe that
PKbob is indeed owned by Bob.
    In a more sophisticated setup, one can also attach a weight to Alice’s
signature. For example, if Chuck believes Alice to be somewhat sloppy when it
comes to signing other people’s public key, he may decide to wait until he has
seen at least k > 1 people in his web of trust who have signed Bob’s public key
as well before deciding that PKbob is genuinely owned by Bob. An important

question is whether Chuck, in turn, could ever endorse Bob’s key without ever
having truly established his identity. With automatic endorsements, we open
the floor to digital attacks of all sorts, including ones in which an attacker
behaves well for a long time to strike hard only after considerable trust has
been established. For this reason, the big question with a web of trust is how
quickly, and with which confidence, can we actually disseminate trustworthy
certificates? It has been a topic of much research, yet after all these years there
is no consensus to what extent webs of trust can operate on a large scale. In
this sense, Ulrich et al. [2011] draw interesting conclusions from a practical
analysis of that web: its core is formed by mutually connected (and endorsed)
relationships, yet is relatively small. In particular, many users are connected
to each other and that core through relatively few and often long paths. Such
paths make it much harder to establish trust in a robust way.

9.3     Authentication
We continue our discussion by looking at authentication. After discussing
some of the basics, we concentrate on various authentication protocols, the
use of an authentication service, and how various aspects come together when
setting up a secure communication channel.

9.3.1   Introduction to authentication
As we mentioned before, authentication is all about verifying the claimed
identity of a person, a software component, a device, and so on. In the follow-
ing, we shall use the generic term “client” for any of these types of entities.
Following Stallings [2017], we distinguish four means of authentication:

   1. Authentication based on what a client knows, such as a password or a
      personal identification number.
   2. Authentication based on what a client has, such as an ID card, cell
      phone, or software token.
   3. Authentication based on what a client is, i.e., static biometrics such as a
      fingerprint or facial characteristics.
   4. Authentication based on what a client does, i.e., dynamic biometrics
      such as voice patterns or typing patterns.

    In the case of single-factor authentication, only one of the four means of
authentication is used. In practice, this means that clients are asked to enter
something they know, such as a password. However, we have also come across
single-factor authentication based on what a client has, namely a software
token in the case of automatically logging in within the SSH framework using
a (private,public)-key pair. With modern cell phones, it is by now also common

to make use of what a client is, typically, face recognition or fingerprints.
Single-factor authentication based on dynamic biometrics is less common.
    It is safe to say that humans are generally not good at all when it comes to
managing passwords (see, for example, a study by Ur et al. [2016] that shows
that users are generally not even aware of how bad their passwords are). In
this light, we have been seeing increasingly more multi-factor authentication
schemes being used. A common one is to use a cell phone that a user has
registered with a service. When logging into a system using a password or
PIN, the user is asked to acknowledge the login through that cell phone, or
even provide additional information like a number sent by the service to that
phone, a PIN code, or have a fingerprint scanned and verified (in which case
we sometimes speak of additional electronic authentication).
    An important observation is that, in general, authentication takes place
only once: when a client wants access to a service. However, this one-time
authentication for the duration of a session is often not good enough to
guarantee that the service is dealing with the client it originally authenticated.
The simplest example is when someone is helping out, but for a different
account. Alice logs in, and grants Bob access from the same computer. Of
course, this may be fine if Alice trusts Bob (and the service trusts Alice enough
to allow for these type of take-overs to happen), but the situation becomes
different if Alice is forced by Bob to let him into the system. In such cases,
continuous authentication is needed: the client is not only authenticated
when requesting access at the beginning of a session, but also during the
entire session.
    Continuous authentication is not new, yet with the availability of powerful
internet-of-things devices, new scenarios have been considered [Ayeswarya
and Norman, 2019; Gonzalez-Manzano et al., 2019]. For example, if a user
can be continuously authenticated, it becomes possible to monitor different
situations, such as safely driving a vehicle, or ensuring that a room is opti-
mized for a specific person. When ensuring that logins are not handed off to
unauthorized people, as just described, it may help to see if a personalized
device is still close to the computer accessing the service. Jakubeit et al. [2022]
describe a situation in which the location of a user is fingerprinted based on
Wi-Fi signals to see whether the client is at a known location from which it
was previously authenticated. If not, a second authentication factor may be
explicitly required from the client.

9.3.2      Authentication protocols
Before going into the details of various authentication protocols, it is worth-
while noting that authentication and message integrity cannot do without
each other. Consider, for example, a distributed system that supports authen-
tication of two communicating parties, but does not provide mechanisms to
ensure message integrity. In such a system, Bob may know for sure that Alice

is the sender of a message m. However, if Bob cannot be given guarantees that
m has not been modified during transmission, what use is it to him to know
that Alice sent (the original version of) m?
    Likewise, suppose that only message integrity is supported, but no mecha-
nisms exist for authentication. When Bob receives a message stating that he
has just won $1,000,000 in the lottery, how happy can he be if he cannot verify
that the message was sent by the organizers of that lottery?
    Consequently, authentication and message integrity should go together. In
many protocols, the combination works roughly as follows. Again, assume
that Alice and Bob want to communicate, and that Alice takes the initiative in
setting up a channel. Alice starts by sending a message to Bob, or otherwise to
a trusted third party, who will help set up the channel. Once the channel has
been set up, Alice knows for sure that she is talking to Bob, and Bob knows
for sure he is talking to Alice, they can exchange messages.
    To subsequently ensure integrity of the data messages that are exchanged
after authentication has taken place, it is common practice to use secret-key
cryptography through session keys. As we explained, a session key is a shared
(secret) key that is used to encrypt messages for integrity and possibly also
confidentiality. Such a key is generally used only for as long as the channel
exists. When the channel is closed, its associated session key is destroyed. We
return to session keys below.

Authentication based on a shared secret key
Let us start by taking a look at an authentication protocol based on a secret key
that is already shared between Alice and Bob. How the two actually managed
to obtain a shared key securely is not essential for now. In the description
of the protocol, Alice and Bob are abbreviated by A and B, respectively, and
their shared key is denoted as KA,B . The protocol takes a common approach
whereby one party challenges the other to a response that can be correct only
if the other knows the shared secret key. Such solutions are also known as
challenge-response protocols.
     In the case of authentication based on a shared secret key, the protocol
proceeds as shown in Figure 9.8. First, Alice sends her identity to Bob (message
1), indicating that she wants to set up a communication channel between the
two. Bob subsequently sends a challenge RB to Alice, shown as message 2.
Such a challenge could take the form of a random number. Alice is required to
encrypt the challenge with the secret key KA,B that she shares with Bob, and
return the encrypted challenge to Bob. This response is shown as message 3
in Figure 9.8 containing K A,B (RB ).
     When Bob receives the response K A,B (RB ) to his challenge RB , he can
decrypt the message using the shared key again to see if it contains RB . If
so, he then knows that Alice is on the other side, for who else could have
encrypted RB with KA,B in the first place? In other words, Bob has now

Figure 9.8: Authentication based on a shared secret key.

verified that he is indeed talking to Alice. However, note that Alice has not
yet verified that it is indeed Bob on the other side of the channel. Therefore,
she sends a challenge RA (message 4), which Bob responds to by returning
K A,B (RA ), shown as message 5. When Alice decrypts it with KA,B and sees
her RA , she knows she is talking to Bob.

  Note 9.4 (Advanced: On the design of security protocols)
  One of the difficult issues in security is designing protocols that actually work.
  To illustrate how easily things can go wrong, consider an “optimization” of the
  authentication protocol in which the number of messages has been reduced from
  five to three, as shown in Figure 9.9. The basic idea is that if Alice eventually
  wants to challenge Bob anyway, she might as well send a challenge along with
  her identity when setting up the channel. Likewise, Bob returns his response to
  that challenge, along with his own challenge, in a single message.

Figure 9.9: Authentication based on a shared secret key, but using three
      instead of five messages.

      Unfortunately, this protocol no longer works. It can easily be defeated by what
  is known as a reflection attack. To explain how such an attack works, consider an
  intruder called Chuck, whom we denote as C in our protocols. Chuck’s goal is to
  set up a channel with Bob so that Bob believes he is talking to Alice. Chuck can
  establish this if he responds correctly to a challenge sent by Bob, for instance, by
  returning the encrypted version of a number that Bob sent. Without knowledge

  of KA,B , only Bob can do such an encryption, and this is precisely what Chuck
  tricks Bob into doing.

Figure 9.10: The reflection attack.

      The attack is illustrated in Figure 9.10 Chuck starts out by sending a message
  containing Alice’s identity A, along with a challenge RC . Bob returns his challenge
  RB and the response K A,B (RC ) in a single message. At that point, Chuck would
  need to prove he knows the secret key by returning K A,B (RB ) to Bob. Unfortu-
  nately, he does not have KA,B . Instead, what he does is attempt to set up a second
  channel to let Bob do the encryption for him.
      Therefore, Chuck sends A and RB in a single message as before, but now
  pretends that he wants a second channel. This is shown as message 3 in Figure 9.10
  Bob, not recognizing that he, himself, had used RB before as a challenge, responds
  with K A,B (RB ) and another challenge RB2 , shown as message 4. At that point,
  Chuck has K A,B (RB ) and finishes setting up the first session by returning message
  5 containing the response K A,B (RB ), which was originally requested from the
  challenge sent in message 2.
      As explained by Kaufman et al. [2003], one of the mistakes made during the
  adaptation of the original protocol was that the two parties in the new version of
  the protocol were using the same challenge in two different runs of the protocol.
  A better design is to always use different challenges for the initiator and for the
  responder. For example, if Alice always uses an odd number and Bob an even
  number, Bob would have recognized that something fishy was going on when
  receiving RB in message 3 in Figure 9.10. (Unfortunately, this solution is subject
  to other attacks, notably the one known as the “man-in-the-middle-attack,” which
  is explained in [Ferguson et al., 2010].) In general, letting the two parties setting
  up a secure channel doing a number of things identically is not a good idea.
      Another principle that is violated in the adapted protocol is that Bob gave
  away valuable information in the form of the response K A,B (RC ) without knowing
  for sure to whom he was giving it. This principle was not violated in the original
  protocol, in which Alice first needed to prove her identity, after which Bob was
  willing to pass her encrypted information.

   There are many principles that developers of cryptographic protocols have
gradually come to learn over the years. One important lesson is that designing
security protocols that do what they are supposed to do is often much harder
than it looks. Also, tweaking an existing protocol to improve its performance,

can easily affect its correctness. More on design principles for protocols can be
found in [Abadi and Needham, 1996] with a more recent analysis in [Fiebig
et al., 2018].

Authentication using a key distribution center
One of the problems with using a shared secret key for authentication is
scalability. If a distributed system contains N hosts, and each host is required
to share a secret key with each of the other N − 1 hosts, the system as a whole
needs to manage N ( N − 1)/2 keys, and each host has to manage N − 1 keys.
For large N, this will lead to problems. An alternative is to use a centralized
approach by a key distribution center (KDC). This KDC shares a secret key
with each of the hosts, but no pair of hosts is required to have a shared secret
key as well. In other words, using a KDC requires that we manage N keys
instead of N ( N − 1)/2, which is clearly an improvement.
    If Alice wants to set up a secure channel with Bob, she can do so through a
(trusted) KDC. The whole idea is that the KDC hands out a key to both Alice
and Bob that they can use for communication, shown in Figure 9.11.

Figure 9.11: The principle of using a Key Distribution Center (KDC).

    Alice first sends a message to the KDC, telling it that she wants to talk to
Bob. The KDC returns a message containing a shared secret key KA,B that
she can use. The message is encrypted with the secret key KA,KDC that Alice
shares with the KDC. In addition, the KDC sends KA,B also to Bob, but now
encrypted with the secret key KB,KDC it shares with Bob.
    The main drawback of this approach is that Alice may want to start setting
up a secure channel with Bob even before Bob had received the shared key
from the KDC. In addition, the KDC is required to get Bob into the loop by
passing him the key. These problems can be circumvented if the KDC just
passes K B,KDC (KA,B ) back to Alice, and lets her take care of connecting to Bob.
This leads to the protocol shown in Figure 9.12. The message K B,KDC (KA,B ) is
also known as a ticket. It is Alice’s job to pass this ticket to Bob. Note that Bob
is still the only one who can make sensible use of the ticket, as he is the only
one besides the KDC who knows how to decrypt the information it contains.

Figure 9.12: Using a ticket and letting Alice set up a connection to Bob.

  Note 9.5 (Advanced: The Needham-Schroeder protocol)
  The protocol shown in Figure 9.12 is actually a variant of a well-known example
  of an authentication protocol using a KDC, known as the Needham-Schroeder
  authentication protocol, named after its inventors [Needham and Schroeder,
  1978]. The Needham-Schroeder protocol, shown in Figure 9.13 is a so-called
  multiway challenge-response protocol and works as follows.
      When Alice wants to set up a secure channel with Bob, she sends a request to
  the KDC containing a challenge RA , along with her identity A and, of course, that
  of Bob. The KDC responds by giving her the ticket K B,KDC (KA,B ), along with the
  secret key KA,B that she can subsequently share with Bob.

Figure 9.13: The Needham-Schroeder authentication protocol.

      The challenge RA1 that Alice sends to the KDC along with her request to set
  up a channel to Bob is also known as a nonce. A nonce is a random number that
  is used only once, such as one chosen from a very large set. The main purpose of
  a nonce is to uniquely relate two messages to each other, in this case message 1
  and message 2. In particular, by including RA1 again in message 2, Alice will
  know for sure that message 2 is sent as a response to message 1, and that it is not,
  for example, a replay of an older message.
      To understand the problem at hand, assume that we did not use nonces, and
  that Chuck has stolen one of Bob’s old keys, say KoldB,KDC . In addition, Chuck has
                                                   old
  intercepted an old response K A,KDC (B, KA,B , K B,KDC (A, KA,B )) that the KDC had
  returned to a previous request from Alice to talk to Bob. Meanwhile, Bob will

  have negotiated a new shared secret key with the KDC. However, Chuck patiently
  waits until Alice again requests to set up a secure channel with Bob. At that point,
  he replays the old response, and fools Alice into making her believe she is talking
  to Bob because he can decrypt the ticket and prove he knows the shared secret key
  KA,B . Clearly this is unacceptable and must be defended against. By including a
  nonce, such an attack is impossible because replaying an older message (having a
  different nonce) will immediately be discovered.

      Message 2 also contains B, the identity of Bob. By including B, the KDC pro-
  tects Alice against the following attack. Suppose that B was left out of message 2.
  In that case, Chuck could modify message 1 by replacing the identity of Bob with
  his own identity, say C. The KDC would then think Alice wants to set up a secure
  channel to Chuck, and responds accordingly. As soon as Alice intends to contact
  Bob, Chuck intercepts the message and fools Alice into believing she is talking
  to Bob. By copying the identity of the other party from message 1 to message 2,
  Alice will immediately detect that her request had been modified.

      After the KDC has passed the ticket to Alice, the secure channel between Alice
  and Bob can be set up. Alice starts with sending message 3, which contains the
  ticket to Bob, and a challenge RA2 encrypted with the shared key KA,B that the
  KDC had just generated. Bob then decrypts the ticket to find the shared key, and
  returns a response RA2 − 1 along with a challenge RB for Alice.

      The following remark regarding message 4 is in order. In general, by returning
  RA2 − 1 and not just RA2 , Bob not only proves he knows the shared secret key, but
  also that he has actually decrypted the challenge. Again, this ties message 4 to
  message 3 in the same way that the nonce RA tied message 2 to message 1. The
  protocol is thus more protected against replays. However, in this special case, it
  would have been sufficient to just return K A,B (RA2 , RB ), for the simple reason that
  this message has not yet been used anywhere in the protocol before. K A,B (RA2 , RB )
  already proves that Bob has been capable of decrypting the challenge sent in
  message 3. Message 4 as shown in Figure 9.13 is due to historical reasons.

      The Needham-Schroeder protocol as presented here still has the weak point
  that if Chuck ever got a hold of an old key Kold
                                                A,B , he could replay message 3 and
  get Bob to set up a channel. Bob will then believe he is talking to Alice, while,
  in fact, Chuck is at the other end. In this case, we need to relate message 3 to
  message 1, that is, make the key dependent on the initial request from Alice to set
  up a channel with Bob. The solution is shown in Figure 9.14.

      The trick is to incorporate a nonce in the request sent by Alice to the KDC.
  However, the nonce has to come from Bob: this assures Bob that whoever wants
  to set up a secure channel with him, will have gotten the appropriate information
  from the KDC. Therefore, Alice first requests Bob to send her a nonce RB1 ,
  encrypted with the key shared between Bob and the KDC. Alice incorporates this
  nonce in her request to the KDC, which will then subsequently decrypt it and
  put the result in the generated ticket. In this way, Bob will know for sure that the
  session key is tied to the original request from Alice to talk to Bob.

Figure 9.14: Protection against malicious reuse of a previously generated
      session key in the Needham-Schroeder protocol.

Authentication using public-key cryptography
Let us now look at authentication with a public-key cryptosystem that does
not require a KDC. Again, consider the situation that Alice wants to set
up a secure channel to Bob, and that both are in the possession of each
other’s public key. A typical authentication protocol based on public-key
cryptography is shown in Figure 9.15 which we explain next.

Figure 9.15: Mutual authentication in a public-key cryptosystem.

   Alice starts with sending a challenge RA to Bob encrypted with his public
key PKB . It is Bob’s job to decrypt the message and return the challenge to
Alice. Because Bob is the only person that can decrypt the message (using
the private key that is associated with the public key Alice used), Alice will
know that she is talking to Bob. Note again that it is important that Alice is
guaranteed to be using Bob’s public key, and not the public key of someone
impersonating Bob.
   When Bob receives Alice’s request to set up a channel, he returns the
decrypted challenge, along with his own challenge RB to authenticate Alice.
In addition, he generates a session key KA,B that can be used for further
communication. Bob’s response to Alice’s challenge, his own challenge, and

the session key are put into a message encrypted with the public key PKA
belonging to Alice, shown as message 2 in Figure 9.15. Only Alice will be
capable of decrypting this message using her private key SKA .
   Alice, finally, returns her response to Bob’s challenge using the session
key KA,B generated by Bob. In that way, she will have proven that she could
decrypt message 2, and thus that she is actually Alice to whom Bob is talking.

The need for session keys

During the establishment of a secure channel, after the authentication phase
has completed, the communicating parties generally use a unique shared
session key for confidentiality. The session key is safely discarded when
the channel is no longer used. An alternative would have been to use the
same keys for confidentiality as those that are used for setting up the secure
channel. However, there are a number of important benefits to using session
keys [Kaufman et al., 2003].
    First, when a key is used often, it becomes easier to reveal it. In a sense,
cryptographic keys are subject to “wear and tear” just like ordinary keys.
The basic idea is that if an intruder can intercept a lot of data that has been
encrypted using the same key, it becomes possible to mount attacks to find
certain characteristics of the keys used, and possibly reveal the plaintext or
the key itself. For this reason, it is much safer to use the authentication keys
as little as possible. In addition, such keys are often exchanged using some
relatively time-expensive out-of-band mechanism, such as regular mail or
telephone. Exchanging keys that way should be kept to a minimum.
    Another important reason for generating a unique key for each secure
channel is to ensure protection against replay attacks, as we have come across
previously a number of times. By using a unique session key each time a
secure channel is set up, the communicating parties are at least protected
against replaying an entire session. To protect replaying individual messages
from a previous session, additional measures are generally needed, such as
including timestamps or sequence numbers as part of the message content.
    Suppose that message integrity and confidentiality were achieved by using
the same key used for session establishment. In that case, whenever the key
is compromised, an intruder may be able to decrypt messages transferred
during an old conversation, clearly not a desirable feature. Instead, it is much
safer to use per-session keys because if such a key is compromised, at worst,
only a single session is affected. Messages sent during other sessions stay
confidential.
    Related to this last point is that Alice may want to exchange some confi-
dential data with Bob, but she does not trust him so much that she would
provide him information in the form of data that have been encrypted with
long-lasting keys. She may want to reserve such keys for highly confidential

messages that she exchanges with parties she really trusts. In such cases,
using a relatively cheap session key to talk to Bob is sufficient.
    By and large, authentication keys are often established in such a way that
replacing them is relatively expensive. Therefore, the combination of such
long-lasting keys with the much cheaper and more temporary session keys is
often a good choice for implementing secure channels for exchanging data.

Example of an authentication service: Kerberos
It should be clear by now that incorporating security into distributed systems
is not trivial. Problems are caused by the fact that the entire system must be
secure; if some part is insecure, the whole system may be compromised. To
assist the construction of distributed systems that can enforce a myriad of
security policies, a number of supporting systems have been developed that
can be used as a basis for further development. An important system that is
widely used is Kerberos [Steiner et al., 1988; Kohl et al., 1994]
    Kerberos was developed at M.I.T. and is based on the Needham-Schroeder
authentication protocol. A detailed description of the Kerberos system can
be found in [Neuman et al., 2005] whereas practical information on running
Kerberos is described by Garman [2003]. A publicly available implementation
of Kerberos, known as Shishi, is described in [Josefsson, 2015].
    Kerberos can be viewed as a security system that assists clients in setting
up a secure channel with any server that is part of a distributed system.
Security is based on shared secret keys. There are two different components.
The authentication server (AS) is responsible for handling a login request
from a user. The AS authenticates a user and provides a key that can be used
to set up secure channels with servers. Setting up secure channels is handled
by a ticket-granting service (TGS). The TGS hands out special messages,
known as tickets, that are used to convince a server that the client is really
who it claims to be.
    Let us take a look at how Alice logs onto a distributed system that uses
Kerberos and how she can set up a secure channel with server Bob. We
assume that Alice has previously been registered at the distributed system, so
that there already exists a shared secret key KA,AS between her and the authen-
tication server. That key is assumed to be derived from Alice’s password. For
example, assuming a character-string password, we can take a cryptographic
hash of that password as the secret key. Of course, we do need to ensure that
the secret key is protected against unauthorized access. For Alice to log onto
the system, she can use any workstation available. The workstation sends her
name in plaintext to the AS, which returns a session key KA,TGS and a ticket
that she will need to hand over to the TGS.
    The ticket that is returned by the AS contains the identity of Alice, along
with a generated secret key that Alice and the TGS can use to communicate
with each other. The ticket itself will be handed over to the TGS by Alice.

Therefore, it is important that no one but the TGS can read it. For this reason,
the ticket is encrypted with the secret key KAS,TGS shared between the AS
and the TGS.

Figure 9.16: Authentication in Kerberos.

    This part of the login procedure is shown as messages 1, 2, and 3 in
Figure 9.16, respectively. Message 1 is not really a message, but corresponds
to Alice typing in her login name at a workstation. Message 2 contains that
name and is sent to the AS. Message 3 contains the session key KA,TGS and
the ticket K AS,TGS (A, KA,TGS ). To ensure privacy, message 3 is encrypted with
the secret key KA,AS shared between Alice and the AS.
    When the workstation receives the response from the AS, it prompts Alice
for her password (shown as message 4), which it uses subsequently to generate
the shared key KA,AS . Note that this approach not only has the advantage that
Alice’s password is never sent as plaintext across the network, but also that the
workstation does not even have to temporarily store it. Moreover, as soon as
it has derived the shared key KA,AS from that password, the workstation will
find the session key KA,TGS , and can forget about Alice’s password altogether
(as well as the shared secret KA,AS ).
    After this part of the authentication has taken place, Alice can consider
herself logged into the system through the current workstation. The ticket
received from the AS is stored temporarily (typically for 8–24 hours), and
will be used for accessing remote services. Of course, if Alice leaves her
workstation, she should destroy any cached tickets. If she wants to talk to Bob,
she requests the TGS to generate a session key for Bob, shown as message 6 in
Figure 9.16. The fact that Alice has the ticket K AS,TGS (A, KA,TGS ) proves that
she is Alice. The TGS responds with a session key KA,B , again encapsulated
in a ticket that Alice will later have to pass to Bob.
    Message 6 also contains a timestamp, t, encrypted with the secret key
shared between Alice and the TGS. This timestamp is used to prevent Chuck
from maliciously replaying message 6 again, and trying to set up a channel to
Bob. The TGS will verify the timestamp before returning a ticket to Alice. If it

differs more than a few minutes from the current time, the request for a ticket
is rejected.
    This scheme establishes what is known as single sign-on. As long as
Alice does not change workstations, there is no need for her to authenticate
herself to any other server that is part of the distributed system. This feature
is important when having to deal with many services that are spread across
multiple machines. In principle, servers in a way have delegated client
authentication to the AS and TGS, and will accept requests from any client
that has a valid ticket. Of course, services such as remote login will require that
the associated user has an account, but this is independent of authentication
through Kerberos.

Figure 9.17: Setting up a secure channel in Kerberos.

    Setting up a secure channel with Bob is now straightforward, and is shown
in Figure 9.17. First, Alice sends to Bob a message containing the ticket she
got from the TGS, along with an encrypted timestamp. When Bob decrypts
the ticket, he notices that Alice is talking to him because only the TGS could
have constructed the ticket. He also finds the secret key KA,B , allowing him to
verify the timestamp. At that point, Bob knows he is talking to Alice and not
someone maliciously replaying message 1. By responding with K A,B (t + 1),
Bob proves to Alice that he is indeed Bob.

Example of a secure channel: HTTP over TLS
Let us now look at an often-used protocol suite for setting up a secure channel:
the Transport Layer Security protocol, or simply TLS. The protocol suite
comes in a number of flavors, originating from the Secure Socket Layer
protocol that was designed in 1994. The most recent version is TLS 1.3,
specified in [Rescorla et al., 2018]. TLS is generally best known for its use in
securing the connection to a Web server when using HTTP, also known as
HTTPS. In this case, HTTP is secured by setting up a secure channel between
a client and the Web server using TLS in combination with TCP.
    Understanding TLS can be quite difficult, mainly for two reasons. First,
TLS 1.3 needs to be backward compatible with previous versions (at least
the ones that have not been deprecated). Second, the two communicating
parties need to go through a negotiation phase to decide precisely how they
are actually going to use TLS. The latter starts with agreeing on the version,
but also includes agreements on which cryptosystems (called cipher suites)

to use. TLS 1.3 simplifies matters in comparison to its predecessors in that it
limits the options. We are going to ignore all kinds of extra information that
is sent during the negotiation phase and stick to the core of the protocol.
    As mentioned, TLS 1.3 limits the choices for client and server when it
comes to using cipher suites. Let us assume that a client wants to set up
a secure channel based on ephemeral Diffie-Hellman key exchange, using
one of the possible Diffie-Hellman groups, say G. For example, G could be
ffdhe2048 which corresponds to g = 2 and p equal to

              p = 22048 − 21984 + (⌊21918 ∗ e⌋ + 560316) ∗ 264 − 1

where e denotes the base of the natural logarithm (i.e., e ≈ 2.718281).

Figure 9.18: The principle of setting up a secure channel using TLS 1.3.

   The client starts with choosing a private key x as explained when intro-
ducing Diffie-Hellman key exchange. By choice of G, the client computes a
corresponding public key PKDH      x
                             C = g mod p. The client continues by sending
a client-hello message to the server. This message contains at least the
public key PKDH
              C , a nonce RC and G:

                 Client: sends client-hello = [PKDH
                                                 C , RC , G ]

The server, assuming it accepts G, also chooses a private key y and gener-
ates its associated public key PKDH     y
                                 S = g mod p. It subsequently returns a
server-hello message:

                 Server: responds server-hello = [PKDH
                                                    S , RS ]

Note that at this point, the client has no guarantees that it is actually com-
municating with the intended server. The only thing the two have essentially
communicated are generated public keys. These keys can be used to compute
a shared secret key SKDH         xy
                        C,S = g mod p. As a next step, the client and the
server first each compute the following hash:

                      MAC = H ([PKDH            DH
                                  C , RC , G, PKS , RS ])

where H is the SHA256 hashing function [Eastlake and Hansen, 2011]. In other
words, MAC is the 256-bit hash obtained by concatenating the client-hello
and server-hello messages. MAC and SKDH are then used to generate the
final shared secret session key SKC ∗ = f (MAC, SKDH ) where f is a so-called
                                     ,S                C,S
key-derivation function. From this moment on, the communication between
the client and the server is kept private, i.e., encrypted with the shared secret
key SKC ∗ . The server then continues with authenticating itself. To that end,
         ,S
we assume it can provide a certificate containing a public key PKS signed by
the certification authority CA. The server encrypts all its communication with
the client using SKC ∗ :
                      ,S
                         ∗
          Server sends SKC,S ([PKS , sigCA ]) with sigCA = SKCA (PKS )

At this point, the client can authenticate the server. Applications running on
top of TLS could, in principle, rely entirely on the use of the shared secret key
SKC∗ while keeping the communication private. Better is to generate keys
    ,S
that the application-level protocol can use, independent of what is being used
by the TLS connection. To that end, both client and server each compute a
shared secret key from the information exchanged so far:

               AMAC = H ([PKDH            DH
                            C , RC , G, PKS , RS , PKS , sigCA ])

that is, essentially the concatenation of the messages client-hello and
server-hello, along with the certificate and again hashed using H = SHA256.
                                                               ∗∗ = f (AMAC,
The final application-level shared secret key is computed as SKC,S
   ∗
SKC,S ). A summary of what we have just discussed is shown in Figure 9.18.

9.4   Trust in distributed systems
Fundamental to authentication is that a process can prove to be who it claims
to be. Once that proof has been given, the question arises how good that proof
actually is. One can argue that this is where trust starts to play: does the
receiver of the proof accept that proof to be sufficient to provide the process
access to the system? Yet trust as facilitated or implemented in distributed
systems extends beyond just authentication, as witnessed by the vast interest
in distributed ledger systems such as those implemented by blockchains.
The issue of trust has also become more prominent with the increase of

(semi-)automated decision-making procedures that have been installed in
numerous information systems and that directly affect the lives of many
human beings. Making unjustified decisions does not help in building trust,
and many such decisions have been made, and are presumably still being
made. Perhaps most problematic are the situations in which one needs to
trust decision-making without understanding the underlying process, as is
generally inherently the case when applying machine-learning techniques.
    In this section, we will zoom into matters of trust, yet will stay close to
technical issues relevant for the design and implementation of distributed
systems. Wierzbicki [2010] discusses trust in a broader context while still
linking it strongly to information systems. A recent survey on trust and
reputation models for information systems is provided by Braga et al. [2018].

9.4.1      Trust in the face of Byzantine failures
Before we take a more explicit look at trust, it is worthwhile considering its
relation to failure models. Trust becomes an issue when there is a dependency
of one process P on another process Q and a possibility that the latter no
longer behaves according to what P expects. More specifically:

        Trust is the assurance that one entity holds that another will perform
        particular actions according to a specific expectation.

This definition, by Bursell [2022], can be refined in many ways, yet will do
for now. The point is that when expectations have been made explicit, i.e.,
specified, there may be no need to talk about trust anymore. If we take a look
at Byzantine failures within process groups, the underlying assumption is that
there may be processes from which we cannot expect anything anymore: they
may be behaving correctly or incorrectly, but we have no means of always
correctly detecting whether they are living up to their specifications.
    The interesting aspect of Byzantine failure models is that we can let go of
trust and develop solutions in which there is no need to trust the individual
processes. The only thing that matters is that the process group lives up to its
specifications, that is, with a group size of n processes, at most k ≤ (n − 1)/3
will go rogue. Such a group can still reach a correct agreement among the
nonfaulty processes. If the group cannot meet its specifications, for example,
because of too many faulty processes, all bets are off.

9.4.2      Trusting an identity
Let us start by looking at a rather nasty issue when accepting incoming
requests from a source without bothering about further authentication. This
situation is not unusual: it constantly happens in many decentralized peer-
to-peer systems. The problem we need to face is that of a so-called Sybil
attack [Douceur, 2002]. The essence of this attack is that in distributed systems,

we generally rely on the fact that when presented with a logical identity, there
is just a single associated physical entity. In other words, we rely on the
following three properties, as also discussed in Section 6.1:

      1. An identifier refers to at most one entity
      2. Each entity is referred to by at most one identifier.
      3. An identifier always refers to the same entity (i.e., it is never reused).

In the case of a Sybil attack, these assumptions are violated: an attacker simply
creates multiple identities and joins the system separately with each of these
identities to subsequently stage a specific attack. The general principle of a
Sybil attack can be elegantly summarized as shown in Figure 9.19.

  1    H = set of honest nodes
  2    S = set of Sybil nodes
  3    A = Attacker node
  4    d = minimal fraction of Sybil nodes needed for an attack
  5
  6    while True:
  7        s = A.createNode()      # create a Sybil node
  8        S.add(s)                # add it to the set S
  9
 10        h = random.choice(H)    # pick an arbitrary honest node
 11        s.connectTo(h)          # connect the new sybil node to h
 12
 13       if len(S) / len(H) > d: # enough sybil nodes for...
 14           A.attack()          # ...an attack

Figure 9.19: The principle of a Sybil attack (adopted from [Iqbal and Matule-
vičius, 2021].

    A typical example of a Sybil attack is when operating a decentralized
peer-to-peer network such as Chord or Kademlia. An attacker simply creates
multiple logical nodes that join the network. As the attacker has full control
over these nodes, from a security perspective, they are viewed as a collection
of colluders. In particular, there is no reason to assume that they behave as
expected. For example, together, they can easily launch a denial-of-service
attack by not forwarding lookup requests. If the attacker has control over a
sufficient number of nodes, it is with high probability that any lookup request
will need to go through a malicious node. Likewise, the colluding nodes can
join in attacking the content stored in a network, if only to delete files they
are collectively responsible for. Even in the face of using file replication, such
a behavior may easily lead to permanent loss of data.
    As another example of a Sybil attack, consider the aforementioned web of
trust. If we allowed automatic endorsement of public keys, i.e., having Chuck
endorse the public key of Bob without an out-of-band checking that the key

is really owned by Bob, we may find ourselves in the following situation.
Note that the web of trust is essentially based on reputation: assuming Chuck
does not entirely trust Alice when it comes to validating the public key of
Bob, he may decide to also consider the validations from k > 1 others before
accepting the validity of Bob’s public key. Yet, with automatic endorsement,
Alice could launch a Sybil attack by simply cloning her efforts by installing
many nodes claiming they have validated Bob’s public key. If k of these nodes
are consulted by Chuck, then Chuck will believe the key indeed belongs to
Bob. There is no harm in this, unless Alice had stolen Bob’s private key and
is now trying to act as Bob. Without automatic endorsement, such an attack
would be much more difficult to realize.
    Closely related to a Sybil attack is the so-called eclipse attack. In this case,
a collection of colluding nodes will try to isolate a node from the network.
We showed in Section 5.5.4, how with almost minimal effort a gossip-based
service can be brought to a grinding halt before benevolent nodes may even
suspect that something fishy is going on. That service is based on continuously
exchanging randomly chosen links with neighbors in an attempt to maintain
an overlay network that resembles a random graph. The links are chosen
from a relatively small list that is local to each node in the network. An
exchanged link replaces the link in this local list. In an eclipse attack, a
number of colluding nodes never return randomly chosen links, but only
links to their fellow colluders. The effect is devastating: within only relatively
few exchanges by all nodes in the network, the malicious links will have
contaminated the local lists to the extent that each local list contains only links
to the colluding nodes. At that point, the colluders have full control over the
network (see also Jesi et al. [2007]).
    The simple way out in both cases is to use a centralized certification
authority: whenever Alice connects to Bob, she will have to prove to be the
holder of the digital identity associated with her. A certificate signed by a
trusted authority should, in principle, do the job. Suppose the certification
authority is not (sufficiently) trusted. This may happen, for example because
the certification authority is not known enough. In that case, we may rely on
a trust chain, by which the public key PKCA that is used to sign the certificate
is accompanied by its own certificate, signed by another certification authority,
say CA∗ . If the public key PKCA∗ is not trusted, then we can repeat the
procedure by having that key be accompanied by another certificate signed by
yet another certification authority CA∗∗ , and so on. However, in the end, the
recipient will have to trust the certification authority at the end of this chain.

Preventing Sybil attacks: blockchain solutions
Levine et al. [2006] and later Urdaneta et al. [2011] have looked at Sybil attacks
in decentralized networks. Both come to the conclusion, as also already stated
by Douceur [2002] that these attacks are almost impossible to prevent without

making use of a trusted authority. All other decentralized solutions up to that
point could at best discourage Sybil attacks, but not prevent them. However,
accepting a centralized, trusted party in an otherwise decentralized system is
something that many find difficult to accept. Yet, if we could devise a system
that would make having multiple identities unattractive, then maybe a trusted
party may not be necessary. This is where permissionless blockchains come
into play.
    Launching multiple identities is attractive if the attacker knows that there
is substantial gain in doing so compared to the price to pay for maintaining
multiple identities. But the price is high when, for example, an identity
is assumed to throw in considerable resources to be able to act. This is
precisely what is expected in proof-of-work (PoW) blockchain systems. In
PoW systems, validators of a block of transactions are engaged in a race,
requiring considerable computational resources. There is no incentive for an
attacker to launch another identity for the same physical node, as that identity
will need to compete as well.
    Having to run computational races is arguably a bad design choice for any
distributed system. In an attempt to still prevent Sybil attacks but avoiding
computational races, designers of blockchain systems have been investigating
proof-of-stake (PoS) solutions [Nguyen et al., 2019]. In this case, those nodes
for making decisions on validating transactions are selected according to how
much stake they have in the system. Assuming stakes are expressed as certain
tokens (such as digital coins), each token is indexed, after which a search is
made for the owner of that indexed token. Obviously, the more tokens a node
has, the higher the chance of being selected for decision-making. Again, we
see that simply creating multiple identities is not rewarding, as each of these
identities will need to obtain tokens before being able to act.
    None of these blockchain solutions are without security problems (see
Saad et al. [2020] and Li et al. [2020] for extensive overviews). Yet from the
perspective of preventing Sybil attacks, one can argue that they do their job
well.

Sybil-resistant accounting mechanisms
When trust in central authorities within a distributed system drops, we need
to resort to decentralized solutions. The fundamental problem is that Alice
has no reason whatsoever to trust Bob a priori whenever the two get in touch
and one needs the other to engage in a transaction of some sort. A common
solution is to build a reputation system by which Bob can prove to Alice that
he is trustworthy. At the same time, such a system should be resistant to a
Sybil attack, as we illustrated in the web-of-trust model.
    As part of their work on building robust blockchain systems, Otte et al.
[2020] introduced an accounting mechanism by which a node Q can show
that it has already done considerable work to convince node P to let it do

some work for P. The benefit for Q, of course, is that its own performed work
further increases so that it may later use that to ask others to work for it. The
NetFlow accounting mechanism introduced by Otte et al. is based on earlier
work by Seuken and Parkes [2014]. Interesting for our current discussion is
that this decentralized accounting mechanism is resistant to Sybil attacks.
    The basic idea is that each node P in the network maintains a list of nodes
that are interested in doing work for P, called the choice set of P, denoted
as choice(P). Which node is selected from choice(P) depends on that node’s
reputation, expressed in terms of work done for others.
    To this end, P maintains a view of what nodes in the network have done
so far for each other. The view is necessarily subjective: it may be incomplete
(because P has no knowledge of all the participating nodes) and it may be
inaccurate. In any case, P does know what it has done for others, and also
what others have done for P. This information is enough for P to compute a
capacity cap(Q) for any node Q ∈ choice(P):
                   cap(Q) = max{ MF (Q, P) − MF (P, Q), 0}
where MF (P, Q) is the value of the maximum flow from P to Q, i.e., the
amount of work that P has, or could have contributed to work done for Q,
including the work done by others. For example, if node R directly contributed
3 units of work for Q, and R had processed 7 units for P, then P indirectly may
have contributed 3 units of work for Q, yet through R. The reasoning is that R
may never have been able to work for Q if not for the work it did for P. The
capacity of node Q from P’s perspective, is thus the result of the work Q has
directly and indirectly done for P, minus the work P has done for Q. When
positive, one could say that P “owes” Q some work to do. These capacities
are then used in maximum-flow computations that result in reputation scores
for each node.
    Now let us consider a Sybil attack by a node Q ∈ choice(P). To that end,
Q creates n Sybil nodes Q1∗ , . . . , Qn∗ . We denote Q = Q0∗ as just another Sybil.
First, note that for any work contributed by a Sybil Qi∗ to another Sybil Qj∗
to cause an increase in cap(Qi∗ ), at least two conditions need to hold: (1) Qj∗
needs to have contributed work to some honest node R and (2) that node
R needs to have contributed (indirectly) to P. What this means, is that Q
can successfully launch an attack only if it had already performed work for
honest nodes. Furthermore, the attack makes sense only if Q expects that
other, honest nodes will contribute work to Q, and that this work is more
than Q’s total contributions to its Sybils. This can happen if the total capacity
Tcap(Q) of the Sybils can grow, with
                                           n
                             Tcap(Q) = ∑ cap(Qk∗ )
                                         k =0
Now assume that a unit of work is contributed by P to one of the Sybils, say
Qi∗ . In that case, MF (P, Qi∗ ) increases by 1 unit, so that cap(Qi∗ ) drops by 1

unit, and so does Tcap(Q). This may continue until Tcap(Q) = 0, at which
point P will direct its attention to other nodes and ignore any of the Sybils
until their joint capacity has grown, notably because other honest nodes have
contributed work to those Sybils.
    Having the Sybils perform work for each other does not help: if Qi∗
performs a unit of work for Qj∗ , then cap(Qi∗ ) goes up by 1 unit, yet cap(Qj∗ )
goes down by 1, leaving Tcap(Q) unaffected. The only way that Tcap(Q) can
go up without P contributing work to one of the Sybils, is if some other honest
node R contributes work. If P is unaware of R, then P will not know about this
work and keep Tcap(Q) the same. In other words, Q cannot benefit from work
it does for R to trick P into contributing work to one of its Sybils, including
itself. However, if P does know about R, we can expect that both will have the
same perspective on the value of Tcap(Q). As a consequence, R will act the
same as P: it will contribute work to one of the Sybils until Tcap(Q) drops to
0. At that point, Q is where it stood before the attack: empty-handed and in
need of a node willing to let it do some work.
    This rather intuitive reasoning shows that a proper accounting mechanism
(in the case of NetFlow based on maximum flows in a network) is actually
Sybil resistant. A precise and formal reasoning can be found in [Stannat et al.,
2021]. Also, [Otte, 2016] will be useful in understanding some underlying
details of NetFlow that we have purposefully omitted here.

9.4.3   Trusting a system
An important claimed feature of many blockchain systems is that they can
operate without the need for a trusted third party (i.e., they are completely
decentralized), in addition to the fact that there is also no need to trust any
of the individual participants. To understand this reasoning, we need to
separate the blockchain from the way it is maintained. The latter is strongly
determined by the consensus protocol that is executed to figure out which
block of validated transactions can be appended to the current blockchain. The
former has everything to do with the transparency and protection of essentially
a read-only distributed ledger. This is where ensuring data integrity is crucial.
    Recall that a blockchain is literally a chain of blocks, with each block
consisting of a number of validated transactions. When it comes to ensuring
data integrity, we need a means to be able to detect that the current blockchain
has not been tampered with, i.e., ensuring that any change to the current
chain cannot go unnoticed and thus be flagged as an attack.
    The principle of a blockchain is shown in Figure 9.20. The first block,
called the genesis block, contains the number 0x00000000 which is effectively
a null pointer. Important is that each block contains a number of transactions
and a hash value over the data contained in the block. That hash value is
copied to the successor in the chain, and also serves as input to the hash value
of the succeeding block. This cryptographic linking between two blocks is

Figure 9.20: The principle of a blockchain.

important. Suppose that block Bi has hash value hi and its successor, Bi+1
has hash value hi+1 . Obviously, any change of block Bi will invalidate hi . An
attacker may compute a new hash value, say hi∗ , but this value will have to
be propagated to block Bi+1 , in turn invalidating hi+1 . In other words, an
attack can be successful only if all blocks succeeding Bi are modified as well.
Considering that a blockchain is assumed to be a read-only data structure, it
will most likely have been massively replicated. Changing the chain while
going unnoticed is deemed to be too difficult, to say the least.
    A transaction can, in principle, take any form. Important is that a transac-
tion has been validated, for example because signatures of the parties involved
in the transaction have been verified as well as the content of the transaction.
What this validation entails is thus specific to the application of a blockchain.
    As a simple example, consider an e-voting system that is implemented
using a blockchain. In such a system, voters are assumed to have been
registered (and verified that they are entitled to vote). Registration entails
that a voter receives a single token that is to be used for voting. When Alice
wants to cast her vote, she can essentially engage in a transaction with her
favorite candidate, say Bob, and transfer the token to Bob. The latter is the
actual transaction. Validating that transaction means, for example, that the
entire chain needs to be checked to see whether that token had not been used
before. Of course, e-voting through blockchains violates some of its claimed
advantages, such as being fully decentralized.
    E-voting by making use of blockchains is also illustrative in the face of
trust. Although one can set up a system with a tamper-proof and verifiable
distributed ledger, may not be enough to warrant trust. In the case of e-voting,
Park et al. [2021] are clear: blockchains suffer from the same problems as
any electronic voting system. What it then boils down to is that one needs to
trust that the distributed system has been properly implemented and secured
against attacks.
    As also argued by Werbach [2018], it is not just that one needs to trust
the correctness of the implementation of a system, but also that it functions

as intended. In the case of blockchains, an upcoming phenomenon is the
use of smart contracts: programs that are automatically executed when
certain conditions are met within a block. This can be as simple as sending
a notification to Alice and Bob when their transaction made it to the chain,
but could also entail automatically engaging new transactions. Even if such
contracts can be proven to be correct given a specification, the question is
whether the specification meets intentions. Practice in law shows that humans
are not always that good at transforming intentions into specifications (or
regulations).
    Finally, the claim that (permissionless) blockchains do not require trust in
each participating entity, but that only the ledger needs to be trusted, may
not stand so firm. In practice, there are intermediaries who offer services to
end users for making use of blockchain applications, if only to make it easy
for people to participate. Those intermediaries, and the systems they use,
will need to be trusted. In many ways, blockchain systems and any other
distributed system share a lot when it comes to trusting a system.
    For an extensive and in-depth discussion on trust in computer systems,
we refer the interested reader to Bursell [2022].

9.5     Authorization
We now concentrate on providing an entity proper access to a system’s
resources after that entity has been authenticated.

9.5.1   General issues in access control
To understand the various issues involved in access control, the simple model
shown in Figure 9.21 is generally adopted. It consists of subjects that issue a
request to access an object. An object is very much like the objects we have
been discussing so far. It can be thought of as encapsulating its own state and
implementing the operations on that state. The operations of an object that
subjects can request to be carried out are made available through interfaces.
Subjects can best be thought of as being processes acting on behalf of users,
but can also be objects that need the services of other objects in order to carry
out their work.

Figure 9.21: General model of controlling access to objects.

    Controlling the access to an object is all about protecting the object against
invocations by subjects that are not allowed to have specific (or even any) of the
methods carried out. Also, protection may include object management issues,
such as creating, renaming, or deleting objects. Protection is often enforced
by a program called a reference monitor. A reference monitor records which
subject may do what, and decides whether a subject is allowed to have a
specific operation carried out. This monitor is called (e.g., by the underlying
trusted operating system) each time an object is invoked. Consequently, it is
critical that the reference monitor is itself tamperproof: an attacker must not
be able to fool around with it.

Access control policies
When considering the protection of an application, there are essentially three
approaches that can be followed, as shown in Figure 9.22. The first approach
is to concentrate directly on the protection of the data that is associated with
the application. By direct, we mean that irrespective of the various operations
that can possibly be performed, the primary concern is to ensure data integrity.
Typically, this type of protection occurs in database systems in which various
integrity constraints can be formulated that are automatically checked each
time a data item is modified (see, for example, Doorn and Rivero [2002]).
    The second approach is to concentrate on protection by specifying exactly
which operations may be performed, and by whom, when certain data or
resources are to be accessed. In this case, the focus of control is strongly
related to access control mechanisms, which we discuss extensively later
in this chapter. For example, in an object-based system, it may be decided
to specify for each method that is made available which specific clients are
permitted to invoke that method. Alternatively, access control methods can be
applied to an entire interface offered by an object, or to the entire object itself.
This approach thus allows for various granularities of access control.
    A third approach is to focus directly on users by taking measures by which
only specific people, or their proxies in the case of, for example, delegation,
have access to the application, irrespective of the operations they want to carry
out. For example, Alice may have been given read access to a specific file, but
no write access. On the other hand, Bob may be allowed to change the file,
or even delete it. Again, combinations of these three approaches are possible
and occur in practice.
    In general, we can distinguish several access control policies. A common
distinction is often made into the following four types:

   1. Mandatory access control
   2. Discretionary access control
   3. Role-based access control

                     (a)                                       (b)

                                        (c)

Figure 9.22: Three approaches for protection against security threats. (a) Pro-
tection against invalid operations, (b) Protection against unauthorized opera-
tions. (c) Protection against unauthorized callers.

   4. Attribute-based access control

Perhaps conceptually the simplest access control policy is that of Mandatory
Access Control (MAC). In this case, access control policies are decided beyond
the control of an individual: a central administration defines who gets access
to what. In the context of military security, data is typically labeled according
to some level of secrecy, ranging from “public access” to “top secret.” Only
if Alice has been assigned the appropriate confidentiality level, will she get
access to data up to that level. Although conceptually simple, mandatory
access control can be quite difficult from a security-management perspective.
    Easier and generally more common in many distributed systems is to
make use of Discretionary Access Control (DAC). In this case, the owner of
an object (such as a file) is entitled to change access rights (such as read, write,
or execute), but also who may have access to that object. Typically, in Unix
systems a distinction is made between the owner, a group, and the world.
MAC and DAC are often seen to be combined.
    As a next step, we can make objects in a distributed system less dependent
on owners, but instead concentrate on how they are supposed to be used by
looking at the roles of people. This leads to what is known as Role-based

Access Control (RBAC) [Ferraiolo et al., 2007]. The essence of RBAC is
that users are not authorized based on their identity, but based on the role
they have within an organization. For example, within a university, we can
distinguish roles such as teacher, student, project controller, data steward,
group leader, dean, etc. When Alice is authenticated, she will also be linked
to a role, which may need to be indicated at the time she logs into the system.
Then, in the associated role, she will have been granted various access rights
to specific objects.
    More recently, attention is being paid to Attribute-based Access Control
(ABAC) [Hu et al., 2014; 2015]. In ABAC, attributes of users and of objects they
want to access are considered for deciding on the specific access rule. ABAC
allows for much finer-grained access control in comparison to RBAC. For
example, not all teachers at a university may be allowed access to the exam
results of all students. Instead, one may want to formulate the constraint that
only teachers of the Distributed Systems course have read access to grades
from students enrolled in that course. Likewise, only the formal leader of the
group on Pervasive Systems may be entitled to read the yearly review reports
from members in that group, except the ones of the full professors. We will
return to ABAC later in this chapter.

Access control matrix
A common approach to modeling the access rights of subjects with respect to
objects is to construct an access control matrix. Each subject is represented
by a row in this matrix; each object is represented by a column. If the matrix
is denoted M, then an entry M[s, o] lists precisely which operations subject s
can request to be carried out on object o. In other words, whenever a subject s
requests to perform the operation m on object o, the reference monitor should
check if m is listed in M[s, o]. If m is not listed in M[s, o], the execution of the
operation fails.
    Considering that a system may easily need to support thousands of users
and millions of objects that require protection, implementing an access control
matrix as a true matrix, is not the way to go. Many entries in the matrix will
be empty: a single subject will generally have access to relatively few objects.
Therefore, other, more efficient ways are followed to implement an access
control matrix.
    One widely applied approach is to have each object maintain a list of the
access rights of subjects that want to access the object. In essence, this means
that the matrix is distributed column-wise across all objects, and that empty
entries are left out. This type of implementation leads to what is called an
access control list (ACL). Each object is assumed to have its own associated
ACL.
    Another approach is to distribute the matrix row-wise by giving each sub-
ject a list of capabilities it has for each object. A capability thus corresponds

to an entry in the access control matrix. Not having a capability for a specific
object means that the subject has no access rights for that object.
    A capability can be compared to a ticket: its holder is given certain rights
that are associated with that ticket. It is also clear that a ticket should be
protected against modifications by its holder. One approach that is particu-
larly suited in distributed systems, is to protect (a list of) capabilities with a
signature.
    The difference between how ACLs and capabilities are used to protect the
access to an object is shown in Figure 9.23. Using ACLs, when a client sends
a request to a server, the server’s reference monitor will check whether it
knows the client and if that client is known and allowed to have the requested
operation carried out, as shown in Figure 9.23(a).

                                       (a)

                                       (b)

Figure 9.23: Comparison between ACLs and capabilities for protecting objects.
(a) Using an ACL. (b) Using capabilities.

    When using capabilities, a client simply sends its request to the server.
The server is not necessarily interested in whether it knows the client; the
capability may say enough. However, such an approach does not prevent a
client to pass its capability to another program. This is precisely the problem
of delegation that we discussed before. Therefore, in practice, the client will
one way or the other have been registered at the server, while the capability
is simply bound to that specific client. At that point, the server need only
check whether the capability is valid (i.e., belongs to the client) and whether
the requested operation is listed in the capability. This approach to protecting
objects using capabilities is shown in Figure 9.23(b).

9.5.2      Attribute-based access control
Let us concentrate a bit more on an emerging type of access control, namely the
one based on attributes. Attribute-based access control (ABAC) is a powerful
access control policy that can viewed as superseding other policies. Yet, ABAC
still has a long way to go when it comes to its adoption in distributed systems,
as also explained by Servos and Osborn [2017] who investigated the various
issues and challenges that ABAC is facing.

Basic model
In essence, ABAC assumes that access policies are described in terms of
attributes and their values. Attributes can belong to many things, including
users, objects, and also the current state of a distributed system. To make
things concrete, let us consider ABAC for a university setting. We could then
have the following:

   • User attributes may include name, data of birth, current roles, home
     address, department, qualifiers obtained, contract status, etc. Depending
     on the role (e.g., teacher or student), a different set of attributes may be
     relevant.
   • Object attributes can be anything, such as creator, last-modified time,
     version number, file type, file size, but also information related to its
     content, such as the student or course associated with the object.
   • Environmental attributes describe the current state of the system in
     which access is requested, including date and time, current workload,
     maintenance status, storage properties, available services, and such.
   • Connection attributes provide information on the current session, for ex-
     ample an IP address, session duration, available bandwidth and latency
     estimates, type and strength of security used, and so on.
   • Finally, administrative attributes may reflect global policies, including
     minimal security settings, general access regulations, and maximum
     session durations, to name a few.

Example: The Policy Machine
To make matters concrete, let us look at an example system for attribute-based
access control, namely the Policy Machine, described in [Ferraiolo et al.,
2011; 2015]. The architecture of the Policy Machine is a simple client-server
model, where a centralized server maintains a database of (attribute,value)
pairs associated with users, applications, operations, and objects. At the client
side, a small support program is used to communicate with the server, notably
for handling the access privileges of client-side applications. Obviously, the
server and the client-side support program need to be trusted to work as

specified. Essential to the Policy Machine is the expression of access control
rules. To that end, a distinction is made between assignments, prohibitions,
and obligations.
    An assignment is simply telling the system that a user u has an associated
attribute ua: u is said to be assigned to ua, denoted as u → ua. Likewise, an
object o can be assigned to an object attribute oa. In the same fashion, an
attribute can be assigned to another attribute. For example, if ua1 → ua2 , then
all users associated with ua1 will also be associated with ua2 . Assignments
thus essentially yield sets: if u → ua, then u ∈ ua.
    In a similar vein, user attributes can be assigned to operation sets, and
operation sets can be assigned to object attributes. This leads to triplets of the
form allowed(ua, ops, oa) which expresses that a user u can perform operation
op on object o only if u ∈ ua, op ∈ ops, o ∈ oa.
    A prohibition expresses what users or applications are not allowed to
do. In particular, a user can be denied certain operations of certain objects,
expressed as denied(u, ops, os) with ops a set of operations and os a set of
objects. To ensure that operations are truly restricted to a given set of objects,
that is, denied to all other objects, the Policy Machine supports expressions
denied(u, ops, ¬os). In other words, if u requests to perform operation op ∈ ops
on an object o ̸∈ os, the Policy Machine will deny that request.
    Finally, an obligation is used to automatically take actions when certain
events happen. A simple example is denying a user to copy information from
one set of files to another:

                when u reads f ∈ fs then denied(u, {write}, ¬fs).

This is an interesting example in the sense that it forms the basis for preventing
information leakage. We have mentioned only a part of what can be expressed
by the Policy Machine, yet it should be clear that attribute-based access control
is by itself a powerful approach for expressing many kinds of access control
policies. Interestingly, the Policy Machine can also be used for MAC, DAC,
and RBAC.
    The simplest case is perhaps RBAC. By simple assignments such as Alice →
Teachers we effectively assign the role of teacher to Alice. Alice can be assigned
other roles as well, but the important aspect is that the system will take those
roles as its starting point for access control. We do note that advanced
RBAC schemes require more sophisticated assignments in terms of the Policy
Machine, yet the principle should be clear.
    When it comes to mandatory access control (MAC), the basic idea is that
one can introduce a notion of security levels L1 , . . . , Ln where L1 denotes the
lowest and Ln the highest level of security. More concrete, if Alice has access
to “top secret” documents, she should also have access to “secret” documents.
The idea is straightforward: each object is assigned to an appropriate object
security-level attribute, such as OLi . Likewise, each user is assigned to a

user security-level attribute, such as ULj . Moreover, each user security-level
attribute ULi is assigned to ULi−1 indicating that all users assigned to ULi have
the same rights as users at a less secure level, represented by the user attribute
ULi−1 .
    The real issue with MAC is that we need to prevent information leaking
from higher levels to lower levels. As before, this can be prevented by the
obligation

              when u reads f ∈ OLi then denied(u, {write}, ¬{∪nk=i OLk }).

So, for example, if we have five security levels, then anyone who reads a
document from level OL3 , cannot write to documents at level {OL1 , OL2 } or
equivalently cannot write to documents not in {OL3 , OL4 , OL5 }.
   Finally, let us have a look at discretionary access (DAC). The essence of
DAC is that each object has an owner, and that this owner can actually set
access rights for others. For example, in Unix systems, a user alice belonging
to a group teachers can set read, write and execute access rights for herself,
members of the group teachers, and anyone else. A user with administrative
privileges (typically, the root user) can additionally assign objects to users and
groups. Some simple examples illustrate these principles.

      alice$ chmod u=rw,g=r,o= document

expresses that user alice changes the rights for herself to read (r) and write (w)
document, yet allows members of the group to which document has been as-
signed to only read the file, while anyone else has no access rights whatsoever.
Likewise,

      root# chown alice:teachers document

tells us that the user root assigns ownership of document to user alice and
group teachers.
    Following Ferraiolo et al. [2011], one can create a unique user attribute per
user. So, Alice would be known to the system by assigning her to the user
attribute alice. Likewise, each group is represented by a user attribute, and
we could, for example, perform the assignment alice → teachers. Following
Unix conventions, we create an object attribute alice home which represents
the home directory of user alice. The trick is to make sure that Alice is entitled
to execute an appropriate set of administrative commands, but also to ensure
that the results match the DAC model. For example, we would need Alice
to allow to create objects within the home directory. This can be done by
assigning a create operation to the object attribute alice home and installing
the obligation

           when alice performs create(o) at alice home then o → alice home.

When considering the Unix DAC model, in which (almost) everything is a file,
we also need to consider creating objects that represent a subdirectory. Again,
being a directory can be expressed in terms of an object attribute, and typically
each directory object will need to be associated with a parent directory. In
general, we may thus have:
         when alice performs create(o) at directory then o → directory.
These examples also illustrate that expressing a DAC model in an ABAC
model requires careful consideration of all the operations and elements of
the specific DAC model at hand. In fact, being able to accurately and com-
pletely expressing other models in terms of attribute-based access control is
considered to be one of the open challenges [Servos and Osborn, 2017].

9.5.3   Delegation
Now consider the following problem. A user Alice makes use of an e-mail
service provider who stores her mailbox somewhere within that provider’s
organization. Typically, she is required to log in to the provider through her
Web browser, after which she gets to see an appropriate interface for handling
her mail. However, Alice would prefer to use her own favorite mail client,
which is installed on her laptop. The core question is how to allow that mail
client to act on behalf of Alice? In other words, the mail client would need
to get access to Alice’s mailbox, and allow her to then retrieve new mail,
read mail, send mail, and so on. In essence, Alice would like to delegate her
access rights to the mail client, and in such a way that the mail client can also
automatically log in and do its work.
    Delegation of access rights is an important technique for implementing
protection in computer systems and distributed systems, in particular. The
basic idea is simple: by passing certain access rights from one process to
another, it becomes easier to distribute work between several processes without
adversely affecting the protection of resources. In the case of distributed
systems, processes may run on different machines and even within different
administrative domains. Delegation can avoid much overhead, as protection
can often be handled locally.
    There are several ways to implement delegation. The least favorable one
is to hand over the user credentials directly to an application. In fact, doing
so would be a bad idea: there is, in general, no reason to trust an application
or the machine it is running on. A much better and general approach, as
described by Neuman [1993] and implemented in the Kerberos system, is to
make use of a proxy. A proxy in the context of security in computer systems
is a token that allows its owner to operate with the same or restricted rights
and privileges as the subject that granted the token. A process (or user for
that matter) can create a proxy with at best the same rights and privileges it
has itself. If a process creates a new proxy based on one it currently has, the

derived proxy will have at least the same restrictions as the original one, and
possibly more.
    Before considering a general scheme for delegation, consider the following
two approaches. First, delegation is relatively simple if Alice knows everyone.
If she wants to delegate rights to Bob, she merely needs to construct a certifi-
cate saying “Alice says Bob has rights R,” such as [A, B, R]A (i.e., the message
containing the identifiers A of Alice and B of Bob, along with the specified
access right R, and subsequently signed by Alice). If Bob wants to pass some
of these rights to Chuck, he will ask Chuck to contact Alice and ask her for an
appropriate certificate.
    In a second case, Alice can simply construct a certificate saying, “The
bearer of this certificate has rights R.” However, in this case, we need to
protect the certificate against illegal copying. Neuman’s scheme handles this
case, as well as avoiding the issue that Alice needs to know everyone to whom
rights have to be delegated. Note that in this case, she does trust Bob in
delegating rights to Chuck. In practice, this means that the user Alice trusts
the application to which she delegated some rights, to correctly and justifiably
delegate some of those rights to another application (she may not even be
aware of). One obvious way to prevent further delegation is to ensure that it
is not specified as part of Bob’s rights. The service that hands out a delegation
certificate for Bob, will check whether he actually is authorized to do so.
    A proxy in Neuman’s scheme has two parts, as illustrated in Figure 9.24.
Let A be the process that created the proxy. The first part of the proxy is
a set C = {R, PKproxy }, consisting of a set R of access rights that have been
delegated by A, along with a publicly known part of a secret that is used to
authenticate the holder of the certificate. We will explain the use of PKproxy
below. The certificate carries the signature sig(A, C) of A, to protect it against
modifications. The second part contains the other part of the secret, denoted
as SKproxy . It is essential that SKproxy is protected against disclosure when
delegating rights to another process.

Figure 9.24: The general structure of a proxy as used for delegation.

    Another way of looking at the proxy is as follows. If Alice wants to
delegate some of her rights to Bob, she makes a list of rights (R) that Bob
can exercise. By signing the list, she prevents Bob from tampering with it.
However, having only a signed list of rights is often not enough. If Bob would
like to exercise his rights, he may have to prove that he actually got the list

from Alice and did not, for example, steal it from someone else. Therefore,
Alice comes up with a very nasty question (PKproxy ) that only she knows the
answer to (SKproxy ). Anyone can easily verify the correctness of the answer
when given the question. The question is appended to the list before Alice
adds her signature.
    When delegating some of her rights, Alice gives the signed list of rights,
along with the nasty question, to Bob. She also gives Bob the answer, ensuring
that no one can intercept it. Bob now has a list of rights, signed by Alice,
which he can hand over to, say, Chuck, when necessary. Chuck will ask him
the nasty question at the bottom of the list. If Bob knows the answer to it,
Chuck will know that Alice had indeed delegated the listed rights to Bob.
    An important property of this scheme is that Alice need not be consulted.
In fact, Bob may decide to pass on (some of) the rights on the list to Dave. In
doing so, he will also tell Dave the answer to the question, so that Dave can
prove the list was handed over to him by someone entitled to it. Alice never
needs to know about Dave at all.
    A protocol for delegating and exercising rights is shown in Figure 9.25.
Assume that Alice and Bob share a secret key KA,B that can be used for
encrypting messages they send to each other. Then, Alice first sends Bob
the certificate [R, PKproxy ]A , signed by Alice. There is no need to encrypt this
message: it can be sent as plaintext. Only the private part of the secret needs
to be encrypted, shown as K A,B (SKproxy ) in message 1.

Figure 9.25: Using a proxy to delegate and prove ownership of access rights.
    Now suppose that Bob wants to carry out an operation at a specific server.
Also, assume that Alice is authorized to have that operation carried out, and
that she has delegated those rights to Bob. Therefore, Bob hands over his
credentials to the server in the form of the signed certificate [R, PKproxy ]A .
    At that point, the server will be able to verify that C has not been tampered
with: any modification to the list of rights, or the nasty question will be
noticed because both have been jointly signed by Alice. However, the server
does not know yet whether Bob is the rightful owner of the certificate. To
verify this, the server must use the secret that came with [R, PKproxy ]A . To that
end, the server sends Bob a nonce (which is just an arbitrarily chosen string)
N, encrypted with PKproxy . By decrypting PK proxy (N) and returning N, Bob
proves he knows the secret and is thus the rightful holder of the certificate.

  Note 9.6 (More information: OAuth (Open Authorization))
  Delegation is, in principle, fairly straightforward. Yet, it has already taken
  many years to come to a practical scheme that was acceptable by many players.
  Also, solutions that are designed by multiple parties coming from different
  organizations tend not to be examples of simplicity, to say the least. This is
  certainly true for Open Authorization, generally known as OAuth. Nevertheless,
  OAuth is by now an important delegation protocol used by many organizations
  including Amazon, Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and Twitter. Its main purpose
  is to grant an application access to resources that are normally accessible to a
  user only through a Web interface. A typical example is that of using a local mail
  client, which acts on behalf of its owner, as described previously.
      Let us take a closer look at the OAuth 2.1 framework, which distinguishes
  four different roles:
      • A resource owner, which is typically an end user, such as Alice who
        normally accesses her mail through her provider’s Web service.
      • A client, which is an application that one would like to act on behalf of the
        resource owner, such as an e-mail client.
      • A resource server, in practice forming some kind of Web interface through
        which a person like Alice would normally first authenticate herself after
        which she can access and manage her mail.
      • An authorization server, forming the core entity when it comes to handing
        out certificates to a client on behalf of a resource owner.
      The client application will have to be known at the authorization server
  through some separately executed registration process (which can also take place
  as part of the delegation process). The result is that the client receives its own,
  unique identifier, say cid. When Alice wants her application to operate on her
  behalf when it comes to a list R of rights, the application sends

                               Client: send [cid, R,H(S)]

  in which the hash of a temporary secret S is sent, computed with the hash
  function H. As its name suggests, the secret S is (for now) known only to the
  client application. In the message above, we omit some additional information,
  such as details of the hash function, as well as some other options.
      If Alice is not yet logged in to the authorization server, she will be required to
  do so and confirm that the client application is entitled to the rights as expressed
  by R. At that point, the client receives a temporary authorization code AC from
  the server, which it should use to get the final access token. The client then sends
  a request for that token:

                                Client: sends [cid, AC, S].

  By sending the secret S to the authorization server, the latter can check that it is
  dealing with the same client application as before, as it simply needs to compute
  H (S) that was sent with the previous message from that application. Note that
  by now, the authorization server has verified that Alice indeed wants to delegate

  access rights to the client. The client simply needs to prove that it is the same
  one that initiated the delegation request. If all is verified, the authorization server
  returns an access token AT to the client.
       It should be clear that an access token is precious data: it gives the client
  application the same rights as Alice would have when going directly to the
  resource server. Therefore, the access token is communicated through a secure
  channel, and is also stored securely on the machine hosting the client (such as
  Alice’s laptop). Likewise, one way or the other the client will have to authenticate
  itself, which is determined at registration time. There are different ways OAuth 2.1
  supports authentication, a simple one being the scheme by which the client has
  a private key and the server keeps the associated public key, as we explained
  previously, when discussing SSH.
       OAuth 2.1 distinguishes two types of access tokens. The first one is essentially
  just an identifier that the resource server can use to check the access rights of the
  client application. It does so by passing the token to the authorization server and
  retrieving those rights. This scheme requires that the resource server contacts the
  authorization server every time the client wants to perform an operation.
       The second type takes the form of a (signed) certificate: it contains all the
  access rights of the client as granted by Alice. Those rights will hold until the
  certificate expires (and indeed, with this type of access token, there is an associated
  expiration time).
       We have given a very concise description of OAuth 2.1, omitting many details
  and many of its options. The specification of OAuth 2.0 is found in [Hardt et al.,
  2012]. There are also several books that explain how to set up clients and servers
  so that they adhere to the framework (see, e.g., Parecki [2020] and Boyd [2012]).

9.5.4   Decentralized authorization: an example
So far, we have been discussing various authentication and authorization
solutions, of which many have in common that there is a centralized compo-
nent where permissions are checked and granted (or denied). For example,
Kerberos deploys a centralized authentication server and a centralized ticket-
granting service. Likewise, when dealing with delegation, a client application
generally needs to be registered at an authorization server to receive a capa-
bility to perform certain operations at a service, or that the service can check
the permissions at the authorization server. Each of these types of centralized
services will have been made robust through replication using protocols such
as Paxos or Byzantine Fault Tolerance. Also, using straightforward workload-
balancing schemes, we can relatively easily scale out servers. For example, we
may decide that all requests coming from applications with an ID less than
some value K go to server #1, while the requests from other applications go to
server #2.
    The situation becomes more difficult when we decentralize a service
across multiple administrative units, such as across different departments or

organizations. We then bump into the problem of administrative scalabil-
ity [Neuman, 1994]. In this section, we take a look at a scalable decentralized
authorization service, called WAVE, specifically developed to operate across
multiple organizations. WAVE is a good example of some of the things we
need to deal with when scaling out across administrative domains. Detailed
information on WAVE can be found in [Andersen, 2019; Andersen et al., 2019].

Graph-based authorization
Fundamental to the WAVE framework is the application of graph-based
authorization. In this scheme, a global, possibly worldwide directed graph
is maintained. Each vertex represents an entity that is capable of granting
or receiving permissions. For example, a vertex may represent Alice’s home
directory (where she has the right to, for example, create and delete files, and
set various permissions, including giving Bob access to some files). A vertex
could also represent a department in charge of a collection of applications, an
online cloud service that offers various resources, and so on. Each entity has a
collection of public keys, from which a hash is derived that serves as a means
to look up those keys. The collection of associated private keys is, of course,
kept secret by the party represented by the entity. The key pairs are used for
various protections and signatures that we describe below.
    Each directed edge represents a delegation of permissions from one entity
(the issuer) to another (the subject). For example, Alice can, as an issuer,
delegate specific file permissions to Bob, the subject. In WAVE, an edge
represents an attestation. Permissions are always granted on resources, such
as files, database (records), devices, and so on. An entity B gathers proof of its
right to operate on a resource owned by A by showing that there is a directed
path in the graph from A to B.
    To this end, WAVE uses a policy mechanism called an RTree, which stands
for resource tree. Keeping it simple, a resource is denoted by a URI such
as user-entity/music/albums/popular/band/. The first element in the URI is
particularly important: it identifies the entity responsible for the resource
and the one which is responsible for all permissions. Each resource has
an associated collection of permissions, which is part of an RTree. The
identification of a resource, a specification of granted permissions on that
resource, a duration for which the grant is valid, and possible restrictions on
further delegation add up to an RTree statement. An attestation will then
roughly consist of:

   • The hash of the issuer and that of the subject.
   • Identifiers of where information on issuer and subject can be found.
   • A set of RTree statements.
   • A signature of the issuer.

There is more related to an attestation, which we describe below. Andersen
[2019] shows that with these basic ingredients, graph-based authorization can
be used to emulate DAC and RBAC models.
   There are two important issues that need to be dealt with. First, the
graph needs to be stored and maintained in a scalable and fully decentralized
fashion. Second, delegating permissions is one thing, but letting the whole
world know that Alice delegated specific permissions to Bob is maybe not
such a good idea. In other words, there is data that needs to be protected. Let
us next look into these issues.

Decentralized storage
It is important to realize that the authorization service need, essentially,
store information only on resources and attestations. Moreover, there should
preferably be no reason at all to trust the storage: the less, the better. As we
stated before, there is increasingly more interest in using distributed systems
in which the individual participating parties need not be trusted. Instead, one
relies on the fact that the system ensures that the provided information can be
trusted. This is precisely what happens in distributed ledgers implemented
as blockchains. A similar reasoning is applied in WAVE: assuming that each
entity is responsible for its own resources, then the party represented by that
entity need not be trusted, as long as the information it provides is reliable.
In essence, only availability of relevant information is required. With this in
mind, Andersen [2019] formulated the following minimal requirements for
storage:

   1. Proof of monotonicity: A storage operates as an unforgeable append-
      only log.
   2. Proof of inclusion: When an object is added or retrieved, it must exist
      in storage.
   3. Proof of nonexistence: When an object does not exist, the storage should
      state so.
   4. Proof of nonequivocation: The storage offers the same view to every
      client.

Together, these requirements ensure the integrity of the global authorization
graph. Note that these requirements come very close to what blockchain-based
distributed ledgers offer.
    Assuming that these requirements can be met, we may also assume that
each entity offers its own local storage. In this way, scalability should, in
principle, be easy to realize as long as an application can indeed identify the
location where that entity’s information is stored. Including global identifiers
along with proper name resolution as provided through DNS should do the

trick. Of course, bundling multiple entities so that they make use of the same
physical storage may be required for reaching certain efficiency goals, yet it
should be clear that size scalability is not fundamentally hindered by letting
each entity have its own storage. We will subsequently speak of an entity
store.
    Again, keeping things simple, every entity store essentially maintains an
append-only operation log. Every time an object is appended to the log, it is
cryptographically bound to its predecessor, very much like the secure linking
in blockchains. In addition, the hash value of the appended object is securely
appended to a separate map log, which is subsequently returned to the client
performing the operation on the entity store.
    When a client wants to retrieve on object (such as an attestation), it provides
the entity store with the appropriate object identifier (namely its hash value)
and its most recent version of the map log. Suppose the object has indeed
been logged. The store will return (1) the object, (2) a proof that the object
existed in the operation log (by returning a chain of hashes), (3) that the hash
associated with the object is part of the map log, and (4) that the current map
log is consistent with the one the client provided. Along the same lines, if the
object does not exist, the store simply returns nil and proves that the object
was not in the operation log by demonstrating that the hash value can never
be part of the map log.
    Meanwhile, separate processes regularly audit an entity store by recon-
structing the operation log and checking its consistency with what is in the
store. The scheme we just described is incomplete. More information can be
found in [Andersen, 2019].

Data protection

Finally, let us see how data, and in particular attestations, can be protected.
Again, we concentrate on only the simplest case of WAVE, called structural
security. Assume A creates and attestation att for B. It appends the decryption
key SKatt
        A to the message, but not after encrypting it with an appropriate public
key PKattB (as we shall see shortly, adding the decryption key by A, and only
A, is strictly speaking not necessary):

                          A sends: PK Batt ([att|SKatt ]))
                                            | {z A }
                                                m1

    Let us now also assume that B creates an attestation att′ for C that is
derived from att. For example, if att allowed B to write to a specific file and
to pass on read permissions to others, B may allow C to read the file. No one
but A, B, and C should know about this: it is simply no one else’s business.
However, in order for C to read the file, it will have to prove it may do so.

When B creates att′ , it sends the following to C:
                                        ′
                        B sends: PKCatt ([att′ |m1 |SKatt ])
                                         |       {z B }
                                                 m2

Being able to decrypt this message, C will find att′ , m1 , and SKatt
                                                                    B . Having
   att
SKB , it can decrypt m1 revealing att. Note that there is no reason for either
A or B to be online: C has all the information it needs to prove it is allowed
to read the file. It should now also be clear that having A also send SKatt  A
is not necessary. We include it to show the systematic approach of chaining
attestations such that a node on a path can reveal all necessary attestations in
a reverse order. Note, by the way, that this scheme strongly resembles the way
that delegation is handled in Kerberos.

9.6     Monitoring
An important security aspect of any system is to check that policies are
sufficient, correctly implemented, and enforced. It would be naive to assume
that this is always the case. For this reason alone, it is important to keep track
of what is going on in a distributed system so that proper measures can be
taken when needed. A passive way of keeping track is to simply log special
events: when do users sign in to a system, when and which applications
access specific resources, and so on. Logging is important to understand what
to do after the fact, yet will not help when the damage has been done. In
this section, we take a closer look at an increasingly more important aspect
of monitoring for security, namely intrusion detection, which is all about
detecting unauthorized activities. As intrusion detection is often tied to a
single computer, we only briefly discuss the basics to subsequently concentrate
on distributed monitoring. We start our discussion by having a look at an
almost ubiquitous intrusion-detection system, namely firewalls.

9.6.1   Firewalls
Before we take a look at the basics of intrusion detection, consider a common
approach to ensuring that intruders stay out: using a firewall [Cheswick and
Bellovin, 2000; Zwicky et al., 2000]. Firewalls form one of the most often
used protection mechanisms in networked systems. Essentially, a firewall
disconnects any part of a distributed system from the outside world, as shown
in Figure 9.26. All outgoing, but especially all incoming packets are routed
through a special computer and inspected before they are passed through.
Unauthorized traffic is discarded and not allowed to continue. An important
issue is that the firewall itself should be heavily protected against any kind of
security threat: it should never fail. Equally important is that the rules that
prescribe what can pass through are consistent and establish what is intended.

Figure 9.26: A common implementation of a firewall.

As reported by Wool [2010] and Voronkov et al. [2017], properly configuring a
firewall is a considerable challenge.
     Firewalls essentially come in two different flavors that are often combined.
An important type of firewall is a packet-filtering gateway. This type of
firewall operates as a router and makes decisions whether to pass a network
packet based on the source and destination address as contained in the
packet’s header. Typically, the packet-filtering gateway shown on the outside
LAN in Figure 9.26 would protect against incoming packets, whereas the one
on the inside LAN would filter outgoing packets. For example, to protect an
internal Web server against requests from hosts that are not on the internal
network, a packet-filtering gateway could decide to drop all incoming packets
addressed to the Web server.
     More subtle is the situation in which a company’s network consists of
multiple local-area networks. Each LAN can be protected using a packet-
filtering gateway, which is configured to pass incoming traffic only if it
originated from a host on one of the other LANs. In this way, a private virtual
network can be set up.
     The other type of firewall is an application-level gateway. In contrast to a
packet-filtering gateway, which inspects only the header of network packets,
this type of firewall actually inspects the content of an incoming or outgoing
message. A typical example is a mail gateway that discards incoming or
outgoing mail exceeding a certain size. More sophisticated mail gateways
exist that are, for example, capable of filtering spam e-mail.
     Another example of an application-level gateway is one that allows external
access to a digital library server, but will supply only abstracts of documents.
If an external user wants more, an electronic payment protocol is started.
Users inside the firewall have direct access to the library service.
     A special kind of application-level gateway is what is known as a proxy
gateway. This type of firewall works as a front end to a specific kind of
application, and ensures that only those messages are passed that meet certain
criteria. Consider, for example, surfing the Web. Many Web pages contain

scripts or applets that are to be executed in a user’s browser. To prevent such
code to be downloaded to the inside LAN, all Web traffic could be directed
through a Web proxy gateway. This gateway accepts regular HTTP requests,
either from inside or outside the firewall. In other words, it appears to its
users as a normal Web server. However, it filters all incoming and outgoing
traffic, either by discarding certain requests and pages, or modifying pages
when they contain executable code.
    It should be clear that firewalls have important limitations when consid-
ered as a general-purpose security mechanism. As they operate on network
traffic, they generally cannot handle authentication and authorization for
specific resources. That also means that once an intruder has found a way
to bypass the rules of a firewall, all bets are off that the firewall can protect
the internal network. For example, if an attacker manages to take over an
account, all unauthorized accesses will go unnoticed by the firewall. Instead,
other detection mechanisms need to be in place to discover unusual or even
unauthorized behavior.

9.6.2   Intrusion detection: basics
Intrusion detection systems generally come in two flavors. In signature-
based intrusion detection systems (SIDS) patterns of known network-level
intrusions have been collected against which a new pattern is matched. If
there is a match, security operators are warned that an intrusion may be
taking place. Patterns typically consist of a (collection of) specific network
packets. What can easily complicate discovering patterns is when a pattern
spans a series of network packets, intertwined with regular traffic. Most
problematic with a SIDS is when no pattern is yet available, which typically
happens with new, unknown attacks, such as zero-day attacks: attacks based
on vulnerabilities that have not yet been made public [Bilge and Dumitraş,
2012]. The increase of zero-day attacks has rendered SIDS less useful.
    More important are the anomaly-based intrusion detection systems
(AIDS). As it name suggests, an AIDS assumes that we can model or extract
typical behavior to subsequently detect nontypical, or anomalous behavior.
Anomaly-based detection relies heavily on modern artificial-intelligence tech-
nologies, and notably machine learning. To this end, an AIDS will first have to
go through a training phase and collect data that reflects typical, nonmalicious
behavior. Once appropriate data sets have been collected and a detection
model has been constructed based on that data (such as decision trees, specific
neural networks, or classifiers), a test phase starts by taking new data and
letting the model decide on anomalies.
    An important problem with an AIDS is minimizing so-called false negatives:
flagging an anomaly as typical behavior. Doing so means that the model
is missing events that should have been reported to a security operator. To
minimize false negatives, many systems follow a pessimistic approach and

flag behavior as being anomalous, in turn leading to many false positives. The
result of many false positives is that security operators become weary of all
the alerts [Hassan et al., 2019]. Combatting the number of false positives
while still ensuring a very low number of false negatives has proven to be a
difficult challenge requiring advanced techniques (see, for example, van Ede
et al. [2022]).
    There is much more to say about intrusion detection systems. Khraisat
et al. [2019] provide a recent overview; a good introduction is provided by
Bhuyan et al. [2014].

9.6.3      Collaborative intrusion detection
When considering large-scale distributed systems, it is clear that there cannot
be a single point where monitoring can take place that allows to build a
complete picture of all events that may indicate that the system is under
attack. This is where a collaborative intrusion detection system (CIDS)
becomes relevant. In essence, a CIDS is a collection of intrusion detection
systems that share detections and analyses. Each of the IDS is considered to
be positioned somewhere in the system. How a CIDS can be organized is
discussed in [Vasilomanolakis et al., 2015], along with examples of existing
systems. Here, we concentrate on the effects of such organizations when it
comes to successfully detecting intrusions.
    To this end, and inspired by Cordero et al. [2015], consider a collection of
sensors that may be spread across a distributed system, each sensor measuring
data potentially related to intrusions. For example, a sensor may be one
that logs events related to a specific Web application, or one that captures
network traffic at a specific node in the system. We assume that sensors can,
in principle, not only collect data, but perform analyses and detect intrusions.
Sensors are grouped into communities. Each community has a community
head, which is responsible for collecting the data from the other members in
its community, as well as conducting analyses on that data and detecting any
intrusions. Communities may overlap: a sensor may be a member of multiple
communities, in which case it will also report to multiple community heads.
In a way, each community can be viewed as a single IDS.
    The basic idea is that community heads exchange information with each
other. If this does not happen, nor do any two communities have a sensor
in common, then we are simply dealing with a collection of isolated IDSs. A
common configuration is to let communities be disjunct, yet all community
heads report to the same, single entity, leading to what is known as a centralized
CIDS. More interesting is the configuration in which the community heads
are organized into some kind of peer-to-peer network, i.e., a distributed CIDS.
    Why is this setup interesting? As mentioned, from the perspective of
intrusion detection, it is important to minimize false negatives, while not
missing out on actual intrusions, that is, true positives. To be more specific, the

performance of an IDS is generally measured along the following metrics. We
denote by TP the true positives: detections that have been correctly flagged
as belonging to an intrusion. TN are true negatives: detections that have been
correctly flagged as belonging to authorized behavior. False positives (FP) are
detections that are incorrectly labeled as belonging to an intrusion, while false
negatives (FN) denote missed intrusion detections. The whole idea is then to
configure the sensors into communities such that accuracy and precision are
maximized, with:
                                               TP + TN
                 Accuracy:    ACC    =
                                          TP + TN + FP + FN

                                            TP
                 Precision:    PRE   =
                                          TP + FP
    An aspect that was further investigated in [Cordero et al., 2015] is to
have sensors be member of multiple communities. As a result, some sensors
may report their findings to multiple community heads. The question then
becomes how to configure the CIDS as a whole in terms of the number of
communities, their sizes, and the sensors reporting to multiple community
heads. One can expect that in a centralized setup (in particular, with just a
single community and all sensors reporting to a single, centralized entity),
accuracy and precision are best. This is indeed the case, but obviously, we
may have a serious scalability problem when dealing with a large system.
    In the experiments reported by Cordero et al. [2015], having large com-
munities tends to lead to higher accuracy and precision, whereas it is also
important to keep the total number of communities as low as scalability
permits. Accuracy and precision also benefit from having overlapping com-
munities, effectively meaning that sensor findings are considered by multiple
community heads, to be later combined into the final detections.
    To what extent the reported experiments are conclusive for other settings
remains to be seen. However, the approach does give a means to think about
how to organize a CIDS while taking scalability and performance into account.
Typically, running various experiments with different datasets will be needed
to find a satisfactory configuration.

9.7   Summary
Security plays an essential role in distributed systems. A distributed system
should provide the mechanisms that allow a variety of different security
policies to be enforced. Developing and properly applying those mechanisms
generally makes security a difficult engineering exercise.
    Secure distributed systems are built around at least five design principles:
(1) having fail-safe defaults, (2) offering designs and implementations that
are open, (3) providing a separation of privileges, (4) providing only those

privileges that are needed, and (5) minimizing redundancy of mechanisms
and their implementations. Furthermore, we see that it is important to provide
mechanisms at different layers in a distributed system, ranging from the lower
levels of operating systems to layers in which applications are running. In this
sense, understanding what exactly the trusted computing base entails of a
system is important, as this base that needs to meet all security requirements.
    Finally, and increasingly important, is that distributed systems provide
privacy where needed. Guaranteeing that privacy is protected is easier said
than done, but the fact that regulations are more firmly installed, such as the
GDPR, contributes to the awareness that systems should be designed and
developed with security and privacy built in from the start.
    Essential to realizing secure distributed systems is the understanding and
application of cryptography. Next to symmetric and asymmetric cryptosys-
tems, we see increasingly more cryptographic mechanisms come into practical
use due to efficient implementations. Notably homomorphic encryption
schemes and multiparty computations are gradually seeing their way into
distributed systems, mainly because they allow for untrusted third parties,
such as operating in the cloud, to do computations without having to reveal
sensitive data.
    One could argue that security in distributed systems largely boils down
to realizing authentication and authorization. Authentication deals with
verifying claim identities. Authorization deals with protecting resources in
such a way that only processes that have the proper access rights can actually
access and use those resources. Access control always take place after a
process has been authenticated. It is important to realize that having being
able to verify an identity is not enough for establishing trust.
    As distributed systems scale out to multiple organizations, we see a de-
mand for solutions that need to rely less on trusting the individual parties
involved in an application. This is one of the reasons why blockchain-based
systems have grown in popularity, yet whether blockchain-based solutions
can be taken as a general solution for handling lack of trust remains to be
seen. Often, simpler and more efficient application-specific solutions may do
the job, and perhaps even better.
    Besides cryptography, authentication, and authorization, it is important
to continuously monitor what is going on in a distributed system. Advances
in intrusion detection systems have led to using often advanced machine-
learning techniques for detecting anomalous behavior. An open question is
how such systems can be effectively scaled out to distributed settings.
    Many existing designs of distributed systems have incorporated security
and privacy as an afterthought, often also because one may easily think that
security and functionality demand a tradeoff to be made. However, there
is ample evidence that such a tradeoff is not necessary, provided security is
considered from the start of a design.

