                        GLOSSARY

BitTorrent: A distributed system for file sharing by which a file is partitioned
     into blocks and subsequently physically distributed among participants.
     A participant needs to copy and swap blocks with others (called tit-for-
     tat) to eventually gather all blocks to reconstruct the original file.

Blockchain: An append-only list of blocks of validated transactions. Each
     transaction and block can be replicated across all processes participating
     in the blockchain as they cannot be changed once published. The list is
     secured in the sense that any change to any transaction or block cannot
     go unnoticed.

Confidentiality: The property that information is disclosed only to authorized
     parties.

Consistency model (data centric): Describes what processes can expect con-
     cerning read and write operations from and to a logically shared data
     store that is physically distributed among the processes. In essence, a
     consistency model tells if and when local write operations are propa-
     gated to other processes, and the effects for local read operations.

Container: A special type of virtual machine, generally tailored to support
     only a specific operating system. A container provides an environment
     to an application suite, essentially mimicking the situation that this suite
     is being executed in isolation on a single machine. Where a virtual
     machine can host an operating system, a container can host only a suite
     of applications.

Critical region: A series of instructions to be executed by a process, which
      requires mutually exclusive access to specified resources.

Decentralized system: A networked computer system in which processes
    and resources are necessarily spread across multiple computers, usually
    caused by business constraints, lack of mutual trust, or geographical
    restrictions.

                                      665
666                                                                 GLOSSARY

Dependable system: A system that provides availability, reliability, safety,
    maintainability, confidentiality, and integrity.

Distributed system: A networked computer system in which processes and
     resources are sufficiently spread across multiple computers, usually to
     meet performance and dependability requirements.

Distribution transparency: The phenomenon by which a distributed system
     attempts to hide the fact that its processes and resources are physi-
     cally distributed across multiple computers, possibly separated by large
     distances.

Event matching: Typically occurs in publish-subscribe systems, where the
     publication of an event needs to be matched with all relevant subscrip-
     tions. A major problem is to support matching in a scalable manner.

Extensibility: Characterizes the extent to which a system can be extended
     (often without interrupting operations) with new functionality or com-
     ponents while avoiding affecting parts that are independent of those
     extensions.

Failure, error, fault: A system fails when it does not meet its specifications.
     A failure happens due to some error, such as a programming bug. The
     cause of an error is called a fault.

Fault tolerance: A system is fault tolerant when it can continue to provide its
      services according to specifications despite the presence of faults that
      influence its design, implementation, and execution.

Faults, errors, failures: A system is said to fail when it cannot meet its speci-
     fications. An error is a mistake that may need lead to a failure, such as a
     programming bug. A fault is the cause of an error.

Groupware: Distributed software to allow multiple users to collaborate from
    different locations through shared whiteboards, shared documents, etc.

Honest-but-curious: A server that behaves according to some protocol, but
    in the worst case keeps track of all the things it does.

Integrity: Ensures that alterations to the various assets of a system can be
     made only in an authorized way.

GLOSSARY                                                                    667

Interface Definition Language: A formal language for specifying the inter-
      faces to various components of a distributed system. An IDL is used
      to generate code for different programming langauges that can subse-
      quently be used to build applications making use of a component.

Interoperability: Characterizes the extent by which two implementations of
     systems or components from different manufacturers or development
     teams can co-exist and work together by merely relying on each other’s
     services as specified by their respective interfaces.

Leader-election algorithm: A distributed algorithm that is executed among
     a group of processes such that, in the end, one of these processes can be
     designated as the leader of the group.

Logical clock: A system in which a group of processes keeps account of in-
     ternal events, and also when messages are sent and received, to globally
     determine a consistent ordering of events.

Middleware: Software that constitutes a distributed system, implementing a
    myriad of mechanisms independent of any underlying system, as well
    as generally applicable for a wide range of applications.

Multiparty computation: The means for two or three parties to compute a
     value for which the data of those parties is needed, but without the need
     to actually share that data.

Open distributed system: A system that offers components that can easily
    be used by, or integrated into other systems. An open distributed system
    itself will often consist of components that originate from elsewhere.

Partial failure: A type of failure characteristic for a distributed system. Some
      process or resource, is not operating according to expectations, which, in
      turn, may have effects on other parts of the system. However, the system
      as a whole will continue to operate, albeit perhaps in unexpected ways.

Peer-sampling service: A service that operates in a potentially large dis-
     tributed system, returning a (seemingly) randomly chosen peer from all
     available peers.

Perspectives on distributed systems: Due to the fact that a distributed sys-
     tem must meet so many different functional and nonfunctional require-
     ments, which, in general, are mututal dependent, taking different per-
     spectives on distributed systems allows for a more focused study. We

668                                                                  GLOSSARY

      distinguish perspectives on architecture, processes, communication, co-
      ordination, naming, consistency and replication, fault tolerance, and
      security.

Pervasive system: Systems consisting of a myriad of devices that are intended
     to blend into our environment naturally. Typical devices include smart-
     phones, smart watches, specific sensors and actuators, camera’s, and so
     forth.

Portability: Characterizes to what extent an application developed for a dis-
     tributed system A can be executed, without modification, on a different
     distributed system B that implements the same interfaces as A.

Remote procedure call: A communication mechanism that essentially mim-
    icks local procedure calls, yet where the execution of the call takes place
    at a remote server. In general, jsut as with local procedure calls, the
    caller waits until the procedure has been carried out fully.

Scalability: Refers to the extent that a system can scale in terms of its size, in
     terms of how geographically dispersed its components can be without
     seriously negatively affecting performance, or the extent to which a
     system can span multiple administrative organizations.

Scaling up or out: Scaling up is the process by which a machine is equipped
     with more and often more powerful resources so that it can better
     accommodate performance-demanding applications. Scaling out is all
     about extending a networked computer system with more computers
     and subsequently distributing workloads across the extended set of
     computers.

Separating policy from mechanism: Where mechanisms in a distributed sys-
     tem facilitate basic functionalities, such as storage, communication,
     processes, and so on, policies describe how those facilities are used.
     In general, separating facilities from the way how they are used is a
     good design principle, yet may overly complicate the configuration of a
     system.

Software architecture: The organization of distributed systems in terms of
     software components and their interaction.

System architecture: The actual realization of a distributed system requires
     that software components are instantiated and placed on real machines.
     A system architecture is the final instantiation of a software architec-
     ture.

GLOSSARY                                                                   669

Transaction processing monitor: A TP monitor is one of the first general-
     purpose mechanisms built into middleware. It is service that follows a
     standard protocol for executing a number of subtransactions, such that
     (1) each subtransaction adheres to the ACID properties, but (2) also the
     collection of subtransactions meets the ACID requirements.

Trusted Computing Base: The set of all security mechanisms in a (distributed)
     computer system that are necessary and sufficient to enforce a security
     policy.

Vector clocks: A system implementing logical clocks such that the logical
     time at which an event took place can be used to conclude that an
     event indeed took place before another event, thus capturing a potential
     causality between events.

Virtual machine: In general, a system providing its own interface to operating
     systems and applications, and implementing that interface for a specific
     instruction set or operating system. As a consequence, migrating or
     porting code across different architectures or operating systems becomes
     easier as long as the target environment provides the same interface the
     virtual machine is offering.

Virtual processor: A counterpart of a physical processor developed in soft-
     ware, providing a context in which the set of instructions of the physical
     processor are executed. A thread provides a minimal context for concur-
     rent execution of instructions. An (operating system) process, in addition
     provides much stronger isolation guarantees between processes. For
     example, a process has its own, protected address space.

