Computer Architecture Formulas

1. CPU time = Instruction count ? Clock cycles per instruction ? Clock cycle time
2. X is n times faster than Y: n = Execution time Y / Execution time X = Performance X / Performance Y
                                   Execution time old                                                                        1
3. Amdahl’s Law: Speedupoverall = ------------------------------------------- = --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                        Fraction enhanced
                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                  Execution time new (#1 – Fraction                                                              ) +    ------------------------------------
                                                                                                               enhanced
                                                                                                                                        Speedup enhanced
                                                                                              2
4. Energydynamic                    1 / 2 ? Capacitive load ? Voltage

                                                                                             2
5. Power dynamic                   1 / 2 ? Capacitive load ? Voltage ? Frequency switched

6. Power static               Current static ? Voltage

7. Availability = Mean time to fail / (Mean time to fail + Mean time to repair)

                                                                                                                                N
8. Die yield = Wafer yield ? 1 / ( 1 + Defects per unit area ? Die area )

      where Wafer yield accounts for wafers that are so bad they need not be tested and N is a parameter called
      the process-complexity factor, a measure of manufacturing difficulty. N ranges from 11.5 to 15.5 in 2011.
9. Means—arithmetic (AM), weighted arithmetic (WAM), and geometric (GM):
                   n                                  n                                                n     n
     1
AM = ---                Time i WAM =                       Weight i ? Time i GM =                                Time i
     n
                 i =1                               i =1                                                   i=1

      where Timei is the execution time for the ith program of a total of n in the workload, Weighti is the
      weighting of the ith program in the workload.
10. Average memory-access time = Hit time + Miss rate ? Miss penalty
11. Misses per instruction = Miss rate ? Memory access per instruction
12. Cache index size: 2index = Cache size / (Block size ? Set associativity)
                                                                          Total Facility Power
13. Power Utilization Effectiveness (PUE) of a Warehouse Scale Computer = --------------------------------------------------
                                                                          IT Equipment Power

Rules of Thumb
1. Amdahl/Case Rule: A balanced computer system needs about 1 MB of main memory capacity and 1
   megabit per second of I/O bandwidth per MIPS of CPU performance.
2. 90/10 Locality Rule: A program executes about 90% of its instructions in 10% of its code.
3. Bandwidth Rule: Bandwidth grows by at least the square of the improvement in latency.
4. 2:1 Cache Rule: The miss rate of a direct-mapped cache of size N is about the same as a two-way set-
   associative cache of size N/2.
5. Dependability Rule: Design with no single point of failure.
6. Watt-Year Rule: The fully burdened cost of a Watt per year in a Warehouse Scale Computer in North
   America in 2011, including the cost of amortizing the power and cooling infrastructure, is about $2.
In Praise of Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach
Sixth Edition
“Although important concepts of architecture are timeless, this edition has been
thoroughly updated with the latest technology developments, costs, examples,
and references. Keeping pace with recent developments in open-sourced architec-
ture, the instruction set architecture used in the book has been updated to use the
RISC-V ISA.”
                             —from the foreword by Norman P. Jouppi, Google

“Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach is a classic that, like fine wine,
just keeps getting better. I bought my first copy as I finished up my undergraduate
degree and it remains one of my most frequently referenced texts today.”
                                       —James Hamilton, Amazon Web Service

“Hennessy and Patterson wrote the first edition of this book when graduate stu-
dents built computers with 50,000 transistors. Today, warehouse-size computers
contain that many servers, each consisting of dozens of independent processors
and billions of transistors. The evolution of computer architecture has been rapid
and relentless, but Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach has kept pace,
with each edition accurately explaining and analyzing the important emerging
ideas that make this field so exciting.”
                                              —James Larus, Microsoft Research

“Another timely and relevant update to a classic, once again also serving as a win-
dow into the relentless and exciting evolution of computer architecture! The new
discussions in this edition on the slowing of Moore's law and implications for
future systems are must-reads for both computer architects and practitioners
working on broader systems.”
                                  —Parthasarathy (Partha) Ranganathan, Google

“I love the ‘Quantitative Approach’ books because they are written by engineers,
for engineers. John Hennessy and Dave Patterson show the limits imposed by
mathematics and the possibilities enabled by materials science. Then they teach
through real-world examples how architects analyze, measure, and compromise
to build working systems. This sixth edition comes at a critical time: Moore’s
Law is fading just as deep learning demands unprecedented compute cycles.
The new chapter on domain-specific architectures documents a number of prom-
ising approaches and prophesies a rebirth in computer architecture. Like the
scholars of the European Renaissance, computer architects must understand our
own history, and then combine the lessons of that history with new techniques
to remake the world.”
                                                           —Cliff Young, Google
This page intentionally left blank
Computer Architecture
A Quantitative Approach
Sixth Edition
John L. Hennessy is a Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at Stanford
University, where he has been a member of the faculty since 1977 and was, from 2000 to
2016, its 10th President. He currently serves as the Director of the Knight-Hennessy Fellow-
ship, which provides graduate fellowships to potential future leaders. Hennessy is a Fellow of
the IEEE and ACM, a member of the National Academy of Engineering, the National Acad-
emy of Science, and the American Philosophical Society, and a Fellow of the American Acad-
emy of Arts and Sciences. Among his many awards are the 2001 Eckert-Mauchly Award for
his contributions to RISC technology, the 2001 Seymour Cray Computer Engineering Award,
and the 2000 John von Neumann Award, which he shared with David Patterson. He has also
received 10 honorary doctorates.
In 1981, he started the MIPS project at Stanford with a handful of graduate students. After
completing the project in 1984, he took a leave from the university to cofound MIPS Com-
puter Systems, which developed one of the first commercial RISC microprocessors. As of
2017, over 5 billion MIPS microprocessors have been shipped in devices ranging from video
games and palmtop computers to laser printers and network switches. Hennessy subse-
quently led the DASH (Director Architecture for Shared Memory) project, which prototyped
the first scalable cache coherent multiprocessor; many of the key ideas have been adopted
in modern multiprocessors. In addition to his technical activities and university responsibil-
ities, he has continued to work with numerous start-ups, both as an early-stage advisor and
an investor.
David A. Patterson became a Distinguished Engineer at Google in 2016 after 40 years as a
UC Berkeley professor. He joined UC Berkeley immediately after graduating from UCLA. He
still spends a day a week in Berkeley as an Emeritus Professor of Computer Science. His
teaching has been honored by the Distinguished Teaching Award from the University of
California, the Karlstrom Award from ACM, and the Mulligan Education Medal and Under-
graduate Teaching Award from IEEE. Patterson received the IEEE Technical Achievement
Award and the ACM Eckert-Mauchly Award for contributions to RISC, and he shared the IEEE
Johnson Information Storage Award for contributions to RAID. He also shared the IEEE John
von Neumann Medal and the C & C Prize with John Hennessy. Like his co-author, Patterson is
a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Computer History Museum,
ACM, and IEEE, and he was elected to the National Academy of Engineering, the National
Academy of Sciences, and the Silicon Valley Engineering Hall of Fame. He served on the
Information Technology Advisory Committee to the President of the United States, as chair
of the CS division in the Berkeley EECS department, as chair of the Computing Research
Association, and as President of ACM. This record led to Distinguished Service Awards from
ACM, CRA, and SIGARCH. He is currently Vice-Chair of the Board of Directors of the RISC-V
Foundation.
At Berkeley, Patterson led the design and implementation of RISC I, likely the first VLSI
reduced instruction set computer, and the foundation of the commercial SPARC architec-
ture. He was a leader of the Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks (RAID) project, which led
to dependable storage systems from many companies. He was also involved in the Network
of Workstations (NOW) project, which led to cluster technology used by Internet companies
and later to cloud computing. His current interests are in designing domain-specific archi-
tectures for machine learning, spreading the word on the open RISC-V instruction set archi-
tecture, and in helping the UC Berkeley RISELab (Real-time Intelligent Secure Execution).
                              Computer Architecture
                              A Quantitative Approach
                              Sixth Edition

                              John L. Hennessy
                              Stanford University

                              David A. Patterson
                              University of California, Berkeley

With Contributions by                                   Norman P. Jouppi
Krste Asanovi?c                                         Google
University of California, Berkeley                      Sheng Li
Jason D. Bakos                                          Intel Labs
University of South Carolina                            Naveen Muralimanohar
Robert P. Colwell                                       HP Labs
R&E Colwell & Assoc. Inc.                               Gregory D. Peterson
Abhishek Bhattacharjee                                  University of Tennessee
Rutgers University                                      Timothy M. Pinkston
Thomas M. Conte                                         University of Southern California
Georgia Tech                                            Parthasarathy Ranganathan
     Duato
Jose                                                    Google
Proemisa                                                David A. Wood
Diana Franklin                                          University of Wisconsin–Madison
University of Chicago                                   Cliff Young
David Goldberg                                          Google
eBay                                                    Amr Zaky
                                                        University of Santa Clara
Morgan Kaufmann is an imprint of Elsevier
50 Hampshire Street, 5th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions
policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright
Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other than
as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our
understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any
information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or methods they
should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional
responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any liability for
any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from
any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-0-12-811905-1

  For information on all Morgan Kaufmann publications
  visit our website at https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals

Publisher: Katey Birtcher
Acquisition Editor: Stephen Merken
Developmental Editor: Nate McFadden
Production Project Manager: Stalin Viswanathan
Cover Designer: Christian J. Bilbow
Typeset by SPi Global, India
To Andrea, Linda, and our four sons
This page intentionally left blank
Foreword
by Norman P. Jouppi, Google

Much of the improvement in computer performance over the last 40 years has been
provided by computer architecture advancements that have leveraged Moore’s
Law and Dennard scaling to build larger and more parallel systems. Moore’s
Law is the observation that the maximum number of transistors in an integrated
circuit doubles approximately every two years. Dennard scaling refers to the reduc-
tion of MOS supply voltage in concert with the scaling of feature sizes, so that as
transistors get smaller, their power density stays roughly constant. With the end of
Dennard scaling a decade ago, and the recent slowdown of Moore’s Law due to a
combination of physical limitations and economic factors, the sixth edition of the
preeminent textbook for our field couldn’t be more timely. Here are some reasons.
    First, because domain-specific architectures can provide equivalent perfor-
mance and power benefits of three or more historical generations of Moore’s
Law and Dennard scaling, they now can provide better implementations than
may ever be possible with future scaling of general-purpose architectures. And
with the diverse application space of computers today, there are many potential
areas for architectural innovation with domain-specific architectures. Second,
high-quality implementations of open-source architectures now have a much lon-
ger lifetime due to the slowdown in Moore’s Law. This gives them more oppor-
tunities for continued optimization and refinement, and hence makes them more
attractive. Third, with the slowing of Moore’s Law, different technology compo-
nents have been scaling heterogeneously. Furthermore, new technologies such as
2.5D stacking, new nonvolatile memories, and optical interconnects have been
developed to provide more than Moore’s Law can supply alone. To use these
new technologies and nonhomogeneous scaling effectively, fundamental design
decisions need to be reexamined from first principles. Hence it is important for
students, professors, and practitioners in the industry to be skilled in a wide range
of both old and new architectural techniques. All told, I believe this is the most
exciting time in computer architecture since the industrial exploitation of
instruction-level parallelism in microprocessors 25 years ago.
    The largest change in this edition is the addition of a new chapter on domain-
specific architectures. It’s long been known that customized domain-specific archi-
tectures can have higher performance, lower power, and require less silicon area
than general-purpose processor implementations. However when general-purpose

                                                                                  ix
x   ■   Foreword

                   processors were increasing in single-threaded performance by 40% per year (see
                   Fig. 1.11), the extra time to market required to develop a custom architecture vs.
                   using a leading-edge standard microprocessor could cause the custom architecture
                   to lose much of its advantage. In contrast, today single-core performance is
                   improving very slowly, meaning that the benefits of custom architectures will
                   not be made obsolete by general-purpose processors for a very long time, if ever.
                   Chapter 7 covers several domain-specific architectures. Deep neural networks
                   have very high computation requirements but lower data precision requirements –
                   this combination can benefit significantly from custom architectures. Two example
                   architectures and implementations for deep neural networks are presented: one
                   optimized for inference and a second optimized for training. Image processing
                   is another example domain; it also has high computation demands and benefits
                   from lower-precision data types. Furthermore, since it is often found in mobile
                   devices, the power savings from custom architectures are also very valuable.
                   Finally, by nature of their reprogrammability, FPGA-based accelerators can be
                   used to implement a variety of different domain-specific architectures on a single
                   device. They also can benefit more irregular applications that are frequently
                   updated, like accelerating internet search.
                       Although important concepts of architecture are timeless, this edition has been
                   thoroughly updated with the latest technology developments, costs, examples, and
                   references. Keeping pace with recent developments in open-sourced architecture,
                   the instruction set architecture used in the book has been updated to use the
                   RISC-V ISA.
                       On a personal note, after enjoying the privilege of working with John as a grad-
                   uate student, I am now enjoying the privilege of working with Dave at Google.
                   What an amazing duo!
            Contents

            Foreword                                                                    ix
            Preface                                                                   xvii
            Acknowledgments                                                           xxv

Chapter 1   Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
                 Case Studies and Exercises by Diana Franklin                          67

Chapter 2   Memory Hierarchy Design
            2.6   Putting It All Together: Memory Hierarchies in the ARM Cortex-A53
                  and Intel Core i7 6700                                              129

                                                                                        xi
xii   ■   Contents

                              Case Studies and Exercises by Norman P. Jouppi, Rajeev
                              Balasubramonian, Naveen Muralimanohar, and Sheng Li                 148

            Chapter 3   Instruction-Level Parallelism and Its Exploitation
                        3.8  Exploiting ILP Using Dynamic Scheduling, Multiple Issue, and
                             Speculation                                                          222
                        3.11 Multithreading: Exploiting Thread-Level Parallelism to Improve
                             Uniprocessor Throughput                                              242
                             Case Studies and Exercises by Jason D. Bakos and Robert P. Colwell   266

            Chapter 4   Data-Level Parallelism in Vector, SIMD, and GPU Architectures
                        4.7  Putting It All Together: Embedded Versus Server GPUs and
                             Tesla Versus Core i7                                                 346
                             Case Study and Exercises by Jason D. Bakos                           357

            Chapter 5   Thread-Level Parallelism
                                                                        Contents      ■   xiii

                 Case Studies and Exercises by Amr Zaky and David A. Wood                 446

Chapter 6   Warehouse-Scale Computers to Exploit Request-Level
            and Data-Level Parallelism
            6.2  Programming Models and Workloads for Warehouse-Scale
                 Computers                                                                471
                 Case Studies and Exercises by Parthasarathy Ranganathan                  519

Chapter 7   Domain-Specific Architectures
            7.4  Google’s Tensor Processing Unit, an Inference Data
                 Center Accelerator                                                       557
                 Case Studies and Exercises by Cliff Young                                606
xiv   ■   Contents

          Appendix A   Instruction Set Principles
                       A.1 Introduction                                                   A-2
                       A.2 Classifying Instruction Set Architectures                      A-3
                       A.3 Memory Addressing                                              A-7
                       A.4 Type and Size of Operands                                     A-13
                       A.5 Operations in the Instruction Set                             A-15
                       A.6 Instructions for Control Flow                                 A-16
                       A.7 Encoding an Instruction Set                                   A-21
                       A.8 Cross-Cutting Issues: The Role of Compilers                   A-24
                       A.9 Putting It All Together: The RISC-V Architecture              A-33
                       A.10 Fallacies and Pitfalls                                       A-42
                       A.11 Concluding Remarks                                           A-46
                       A.12 Historical Perspective and References                        A-47
                            Exercises by Gregory D. Peterson                             A-47

          Appendix B   Review of Memory Hierarchy
                       B.1   Introduction                                                 B-2
                       B.2   Cache Performance                                           B-15
                       B.3   Six Basic Cache Optimizations                               B-22
                       B.4   Virtual Memory                                              B-40
                       B.5   Protection and Examples of Virtual Memory                   B-49
                       B.6   Fallacies and Pitfalls                                      B-57
                       B.7   Concluding Remarks                                          B-59
                       B.8   Historical Perspective and References                       B-59
                             Exercises by Amr Zaky                                       B-60

          Appendix C   Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts
                       C.1  Introduction                                                  C-2
                       C.2  The Major Hurdle of Pipelining—Pipeline Hazards              C-10
                       C.3  How Is Pipelining Implemented?                               C-26
                       C.4  What Makes Pipelining Hard to Implement?                     C-37
                       C.5  Extending the RISC V Integer Pipeline to Handle Multicycle
                            Operations                                                   C-45
                       C.6 Putting It All Together: The MIPS R4000 Pipeline              C-55
                       C.7 Cross-Cutting Issues                                          C-65
                       C.8 Fallacies and Pitfalls                                        C-70
                       C.9 Concluding Remarks                                            C-71
                       C.10 Historical Perspective and References                        C-71
                            Updated Exercises by Diana Franklin                          C-71
                                                                Contents   ■   xv

             Online Appendices
Appendix D   Storage Systems
Appendix E   Embedded Systems
             by Thomas M. Conte
Appendix F   Interconnection Networks
             by Timothy M. Pinkston and Jos?e Duato
Appendix G   Vector Processors in More Depth
             by Krste Asanovic
Appendix H   Hardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC
Appendix I   Large-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications
Appendix J   Computer Arithmetic
             by David Goldberg
Appendix K   Survey of Instruction Set Architectures
Appendix L   Advanced Concepts on Address Translation
             by Abhishek Bhattacharjee
Appendix M   Historical Perspectives and References

             References                                                        R-1
             Index                                                             I-1
This page intentionally left blank
Preface

Why We Wrote This Book
Through six editions of this book, our goal has been to describe the basic principles
underlying what will be tomorrow’s technological developments. Our excitement
about the opportunities in computer architecture has not abated, and we echo what
we said about the field in the first edition: “It is not a dreary science of paper
machines that will never work. No! It’s a discipline of keen intellectual interest,
requiring the balance of marketplace forces to cost-performance-power, leading
to glorious failures and some notable successes.”
    Our primary objective in writing our first book was to change the way people
learn and think about computer architecture. We feel this goal is still valid and
important. The field is changing daily and must be studied with real examples
and measurements on real computers, rather than simply as a collection of defini-
tions and designs that will never need to be realized. We offer an enthusiastic wel-
come to anyone who came along with us in the past, as well as to those who are
joining us now. Either way, we can promise the same quantitative approach to, and
analysis of, real systems.
    As with earlier versions, we have strived to produce a new edition that will
continue to be as relevant for professional engineers and architects as it is for those
involved in advanced computer architecture and design courses. Like the first edi-
tion, this edition has a sharp focus on new platforms—personal mobile devices and
warehouse-scale computers—and new architectures—specifically, domain-
specific architectures. As much as its predecessors, this edition aims to demystify
computer architecture through an emphasis on cost-performance-energy trade-offs
and good engineering design. We believe that the field has continued to mature and
move toward the rigorous quantitative foundation of long-established scientific
and engineering disciplines.

                                                                                  xvii
xviii   ■   Preface

                      This Edition
                      The ending of Moore’s Law and Dennard scaling is having as profound effect on
                      computer architecture as did the switch to multicore. We retain the focus on the
                      extremes in size of computing, with personal mobile devices (PMDs) such as cell
                      phones and tablets as the clients and warehouse-scale computers offering cloud
                      computing as the server. We also maintain the other theme of parallelism in all
                      its forms: data-level parallelism (DLP) in Chapters 1 and 4, instruction-level par-
                      allelism (ILP) in Chapter 3, thread-level parallelism in Chapter 5, and request-
                      level parallelism (RLP) in Chapter 6.
                           The most pervasive change in this edition is switching from MIPS to the RISC-
                      V instruction set. We suspect this modern, modular, open instruction set may
                      become a significant force in the information technology industry. It may become
                      as important in computer architecture as Linux is for operating systems.
                           The newcomer in this edition is Chapter 7, which introduces domain-specific
                      architectures with several concrete examples from industry.
                           As before, the first three appendices in the book give basics on the RISC-V
                      instruction set, memory hierarchy, and pipelining for readers who have not read
                      a book like Computer Organization and Design. To keep costs down but still sup-
                      ply supplemental material that is of interest to some readers, available online at
                      https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780128119051
                      are nine more appendices. There are more pages in these appendices than there are
                      in this book!
                           This edition continues the tradition of using real-world examples to demonstrate
                      the ideas, and the “Putting It All Together” sections are brand new. The “Putting It All
                      Together” sections of this edition include the pipeline organizations and memory hier-
                      archies of the ARM Cortex A8 processor, the Intel core i7 processor, the NVIDIA
                      GTX-280 and GTX-480 GPUs, and one of the Google warehouse-scale computers.

                      Topic Selection and Organization
                      As before, we have taken a conservative approach to topic selection, for there are
                      many more interesting ideas in the field than can reasonably be covered in a treat-
                      ment of basic principles. We have steered away from a comprehensive survey of
                      every architecture a reader might encounter. Instead, our presentation focuses on
                      core concepts likely to be found in any new machine. The key criterion remains
                      that of selecting ideas that have been examined and utilized successfully enough
                      to permit their discussion in quantitative terms.
                          Our intent has always been to focus on material that is not available in equiv-
                      alent form from other sources, so we continue to emphasize advanced content
                      wherever possible. Indeed, there are several systems here whose descriptions can-
                      not be found in the literature. (Readers interested strictly in a more basic introduc-
                      tion to computer architecture should read Computer Organization and Design: The
                      Hardware/Software Interface.)
                                                                    Preface   ■   xix

An Overview of the Content
Chapter 1 includes formulas for energy, static power, dynamic power, integrated cir-
cuit costs, reliability, and availability. (These formulas are also found on the front
inside cover.) Our hope is that these topics can be used through the rest of the book.
In addition to the classic quantitative principles of computer design and performance
measurement, it shows the slowing of performance improvement of general-purpose
microprocessors, which is one inspiration for domain-specific architectures.
     Our view is that the instruction set architecture is playing less of a role today
than in 1990, so we moved this material to Appendix A. It now uses the RISC-V
architecture. (For quick review, a summary of the RISC-V ISA can be found on the
back inside cover.) For fans of ISAs, Appendix K was revised for this edition and
covers 8 RISC architectures (5 for desktop and server use and 3 for embedded use),
the 80?86, the DEC VAX, and the IBM 360/370.
     We then move onto memory hierarchy in Chapter 2, since it is easy to apply the
cost-performance-energy principles to this material, and memory is a critical
resource for the rest of the chapters. As in the past edition, Appendix B contains
an introductory review of cache principles, which is available in case you need it.
Chapter 2 discusses 10 advanced optimizations of caches. The chapter includes
virtual machines, which offer advantages in protection, software management,
and hardware management, and play an important role in cloud computing. In
addition to covering SRAM and DRAM technologies, the chapter includes new
material both on Flash memory and on the use of stacked die packaging for extend-
ing the memory hierarchy. The PIAT examples are the ARM Cortex A8, which is
used in PMDs, and the Intel Core i7, which is used in servers.
     Chapter 3 covers the exploitation of instruction-level parallelism in high-
performance processors, including superscalar execution, branch prediction
(including the new tagged hybrid predictors), speculation, dynamic scheduling,
and simultaneous multithreading. As mentioned earlier, Appendix C is a review
of pipelining in case you need it. Chapter 3 also surveys the limits of ILP. Like
Chapter 2, the PIAT examples are again the ARM Cortex A8 and the Intel Core
i7. While the third edition contained a great deal on Itanium and VLIW, this mate-
rial is now in Appendix H, indicating our view that this architecture did not live up
to the earlier claims.
     The increasing importance of multimedia applications such as games and video
processing has also increased the importance of architectures that can exploit data
level parallelism. In particular, there is a rising interest in computing using graph-
ical processing units (GPUs), yet few architects understand how GPUs really work.
We decided to write a new chapter in large part to unveil this new style of computer
architecture. Chapter 4 starts with an introduction to vector architectures, which
acts as a foundation on which to build explanations of multimedia SIMD instruc-
tion set extensions and GPUs. (Appendix G goes into even more depth on vector
architectures.) This chapter introduces the Roofline performance model and then
uses it to compare the Intel Core i7 and the NVIDIA GTX 280 and GTX 480 GPUs.
The chapter also describes the Tegra 2 GPU for PMDs.
xx   ■   Preface

                        Chapter 5 describes multicore processors. It explores symmetric and
                   distributed-memory architectures, examining both organizational principles and
                   performance. The primary additions to this chapter include more comparison of
                   multicore organizations, including the organization of multicore-multilevel
                   caches, multicore coherence schemes, and on-chip multicore interconnect. Topics
                   in synchronization and memory consistency models are next. The example is the
                   Intel Core i7. Readers interested in more depth on interconnection networks should
                   read Appendix F, and those interested in larger scale multiprocessors and scientific
                   applications should read Appendix I.
                        Chapter 6 describes warehouse-scale computers (WSCs). It was extensively
                   revised based on help from engineers at Google and Amazon Web Services. This
                   chapter integrates details on design, cost, and performance of WSCs that few archi-
                   tects are aware of. It starts with the popular MapReduce programming model
                   before describing the architecture and physical implementation of WSCs, includ-
                   ing cost. The costs allow us to explain the emergence of cloud computing, whereby
                   it can be cheaper to compute using WSCs in the cloud than in your local datacenter.
                   The PIAT example is a description of a Google WSC that includes information
                   published for the first time in this book.
                        The new Chapter 7 motivates the need for Domain-Specific Architectures
                   (DSAs). It draws guiding principles for DSAs based on the four examples of DSAs.
                   Each DSA corresponds to chips that have been deployed in commercial settings. We
                   also explain why we expect a renaissance in computer architecture via DSAs given
                   that single-thread performance of general-purpose microprocessors has stalled.
                        This brings us to Appendices A through M. Appendix A covers principles of
                   ISAs, including RISC-V, and Appendix K describes 64-bit versions of RISC V,
                   ARM, MIPS, Power, and SPARC and their multimedia extensions. It also includes
                   some classic architectures (80x86, VAX, and IBM 360/370) and popular embed-
                   ded instruction sets (Thumb-2, microMIPS, and RISC V C). Appendix H is related,
                   in that it covers architectures and compilers for VLIW ISAs.
                        As mentioned earlier, Appendix B and Appendix C are tutorials on basic cach-
                   ing and pipelining concepts. Readers relatively new to caching should read Appen-
                   dix B before Chapter 2, and those new to pipelining should read Appendix C before
                   Chapter 3.
                        Appendix D, “Storage Systems,” has an expanded discussion of reliability and
                   availability, a tutorial on RAID with a description of RAID 6 schemes, and rarely
                   found failure statistics of real systems. It continues to provide an introduction to
                   queuing theory and I/O performance benchmarks. We evaluate the cost, perfor-
                   mance, and reliability of a real cluster: the Internet Archive. The “Putting It All
                   Together” example is the NetApp FAS6000 filer.
                        Appendix E, by Thomas M. Conte, consolidates the embedded material in
                   one place.
                        Appendix F, on interconnection networks, is revised by Timothy M. Pinkston
                   and Jos?e Duato. Appendix G, written originally by Krste Asanovi?c, includes a
                   description of vector processors. We think these two appendices are some of
                   the best material we know of on each topic.
                                                                    Preface    ■   xxi

     Appendix H describes VLIW and EPIC, the architecture of Itanium.
     Appendix I describes parallel processing applications and coherence protocols
for larger-scale, shared-memory multiprocessing. Appendix J, by David Goldberg,
describes computer arithmetic.
     Appendix L, by Abhishek Bhattacharjee, is new and discusses advanced tech-
niques for memory management, focusing on support for virtual machines and
design of address translation for very large address spaces. With the growth in
clouds processors, these architectural enhancements are becoming more important.
     Appendix M collects the “Historical Perspective and References” from each
chapter into a single appendix. It attempts to give proper credit for the ideas in each
chapter and a sense of the history surrounding the inventions. We like to think of
this as presenting the human drama of computer design. It also supplies references
that the student of architecture may want to pursue. If you have time, we recom-
mend reading some of the classic papers in the field that are mentioned in these
sections. It is both enjoyable and educational to hear the ideas directly from the
creators. “Historical Perspective” was one of the most popular sections of prior
editions.

Navigating the Text
There is no single best order in which to approach these chapters and appendices,
except that all readers should start with Chapter 1. If you don’t want to read every-
thing, here are some suggested sequences:

■   Memory Hierarchy: Appendix B, Chapter 2, and Appendices D and M.
■   Instruction-Level Parallelism: Appendix C, Chapter 3, and Appendix H
■   Data-Level Parallelism: Chapters 4, 6, and 7, Appendix G
■   Thread-Level Parallelism: Chapter 5, Appendices F and I
■   Request-Level Parallelism: Chapter 6
■   ISA: Appendices A and K

Appendix E can be read at any time, but it might work best if read after the ISA and
cache sequences. Appendix J can be read whenever arithmetic moves you. You
should read the corresponding portion of Appendix M after you complete each
chapter.

Chapter Structure
The material we have selected has been stretched upon a consistent framework that
is followed in each chapter. We start by explaining the ideas of a chapter. These
ideas are followed by a “Crosscutting Issues” section, a feature that shows how the
ideas covered in one chapter interact with those given in other chapters. This is
xxii   ■   Preface

                     followed by a “Putting It All Together” section that ties these ideas together by
                     showing how they are used in a real machine.
                         Next in the sequence is “Fallacies and Pitfalls,” which lets readers learn from
                     the mistakes of others. We show examples of common misunderstandings and
                     architectural traps that are difficult to avoid even when you know they are lying
                     in wait for you. The “Fallacies and Pitfalls” sections is one of the most popular
                     sections of the book. Each chapter ends with a “Concluding Remarks” section.

                     Case Studies With Exercises
                     Each chapter ends with case studies and accompanying exercises. Authored by
                     experts in industry and academia, the case studies explore key chapter concepts
                     and verify understanding through increasingly challenging exercises. Instructors
                     should find the case studies sufficiently detailed and robust to allow them to create
                     their own additional exercises.
                         Brackets for each exercise (<chapter.section >) indicate the text sections of
                     primary relevance to completing the exercise. We hope this helps readers to avoid
                     exercises for which they haven’t read the corresponding section, in addition to pro-
                     viding the source for review. Exercises are rated, to give the reader a sense of the
                     amount of time required to complete an exercise:

                     [10] Less than 5 min (to read and understand)
                     [15] 5–15 min for a full answer
                     [20] 15–20 min for a full answer
                     [25] 1 h for a full written answer
                     [30] Short programming project: less than 1 full day of programming
                     [40] Significant programming project: 2 weeks of elapsed time
                     [Discussion] Topic for discussion with others

                         Solutions to the case studies and exercises are available for instructors who
                     register at textbooks.elsevier.com.

                     Supplemental Materials
                     A variety of resources are available online at https://www.elsevier.com/books/
                     computer-architecture/hennessy/978-0-12-811905-1, including the following:

                     ■   Reference appendices, some guest authored by subject experts, covering a
                         range of advanced topics
                     ■   Historical perspectives material that explores the development of the key ideas
                         presented in each of the chapters in the text
                                                                 Preface    ■   xxiii

■   Instructor slides in PowerPoint
■   Figures from the book in PDF, EPS, and PPT formats
■   Links to related material on the Web
■   List of errata

   New materials and links to other resources available on the Web will be added
on a regular basis.

Helping Improve This Book
Finally, it is possible to make money while reading this book. (Talk about cost per-
formance!) If you read the Acknowledgments that follow, you will see that we
went to great lengths to correct mistakes. Since a book goes through many print-
ings, we have the opportunity to make even more corrections. If you uncover any
remaining resilient bugs, please contact the publisher by electronic mail
(ca6bugs@mkp.com).
    We welcome general comments to the text and invite you to send them to a
separate email address at ca6comments@mkp.com.

Concluding Remarks
Once again, this book is a true co-authorship, with each of us writing half the chap-
ters and an equal share of the appendices. We can’t imagine how long it would have
taken without someone else doing half the work, offering inspiration when the task
seemed hopeless, providing the key insight to explain a difficult concept, supply-
ing over-the-weekend reviews of chapters, and commiserating when the weight of
our other obligations made it hard to pick up the pen.
    Thus, once again, we share equally the blame for what you are about to read.

                       John Hennessy ■ David Patterson
This page intentionally left blank
Acknowledgments

Although this is only the sixth edition of this book, we have actually created ten
different versions of the text: three versions of the first edition (alpha, beta, and
final) and two versions of the second, third, and fourth editions (beta and final).
Along the way, we have received help from hundreds of reviewers and users. Each
of these people has helped make this book better. Thus, we have chosen to list all of
the people who have made contributions to some version of this book.

Contributors to the Sixth Edition
Like prior editions, this is a community effort that involves scores of volunteers.
Without their help, this edition would not be nearly as polished.

Reviewers
Jason D. Bakos, University of South Carolina; Rajeev Balasubramonian, Univer-
sity of Utah; Jose Delgado-Frias, Washington State University; Diana Franklin,
The University of Chicago; Norman P. Jouppi, Google; Hugh C. Lauer, Worcester
Polytechnic Institute; Gregory Peterson, University of Tennessee; Bill Pierce,
Hood College; Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Google; William H. Robinson, Van-
derbilt University; Pat Stakem, Johns Hopkins University; Cliff Young, Google;
Amr Zaky, University of Santa Clara; Gerald Zarnett, Ryerson University;
Huiyang Zhou, North Carolina State University.

Members of the University of California-Berkeley Par Lab and RAD Lab who gave
frequent reviews of Chapters 1, 4, and 6 and shaped the explanation of GPUs and
WSCs: Krste Asanovi?c, Michael Armbrust, Scott Beamer, Sarah Bird, Bryan Catan-
zaro, Jike Chong, Henry Cook, Derrick Coetzee, Randy Katz, Yunsup Lee, Leo
Meyervich, Mark Murphy, Zhangxi Tan, Vasily Volkov, and Andrew Waterman.

Appendices
Krste Asanovi?c, University of California, Berkeley (Appendix G); Abhishek
Bhattacharjee, Rutgers University (Appendix L); Thomas M. Conte, North Caro-
lina State University (Appendix E); Jos?e Duato, Universitat Politècnica de

                                                                                xxv
xxvi   ■   Acknowledgments

                       València and Simula (Appendix F); David Goldberg, Xerox PARC (Appendix J);
                       Timothy M. Pinkston, University of Southern California (Appendix F).

                       Jos?e Flich of the Universidad Polit?ecnica de Valencia provided significant contri-
                       butions to the updating of Appendix F.

                       Case Studies With Exercises
                       Jason D. Bakos, University of South Carolina (Chapters 3 and 4); Rajeev Balasu-
                       bramonian, University of Utah (Chapter 2); Diana Franklin, The University of
                       Chicago (Chapter 1 and Appendix C); Norman P. Jouppi, Google, (Chapter 2);
                       Naveen Muralimanohar, HP Labs (Chapter 2); Gregory Peterson, University of
                       Tennessee (Appendix A); Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Google (Chapter 6); Cliff
                       Young, Google (Chapter 7); Amr Zaky, University of Santa Clara (Chapter 5
                       and Appendix B).

                       Jichuan Chang, Junwhan Ahn, Rama Govindaraju, and Milad Hashemi assisted in
                       the development and testing of the case studies and exercises for Chapter 6.

                       Additional Material
                       John Nickolls, Steve Keckler, and Michael Toksvig of NVIDIA (Chapter 4 NVI-
                       DIA GPUs); Victor Lee, Intel (Chapter 4 comparison of Core i7 and GPU); John
                       Shalf, LBNL (Chapter 4 recent vector architectures); Sam Williams, LBNL (Roof-
                       line model for computers in Chapter 4); Steve Blackburn of Australian National
                       University and Kathryn McKinley of University of Texas at Austin (Intel perfor-
                       mance and power measurements in Chapter 5); Luiz Barroso, Urs H€olzle, Jimmy
                       Clidaris, Bob Felderman, and Chris Johnson of Google (the Google WSC in
                       Chapter 6); James Hamilton of Amazon Web Services (power distribution and cost
                       model in Chapter 6).

                           Jason D. Bakos of the University of South Carolina updated the lecture slides
                       for this edition.

                           This book could not have been published without a publisher, of course. We
                       wish to thank all the Morgan Kaufmann/Elsevier staff for their efforts and support.
                       For this fifth edition, we particularly want to thank our editors Nate McFadden and
                       Steve Merken, who coordinated surveys, development of the case studies and exer-
                       cises, manuscript reviews, and the updating of the appendices.
                           We must also thank our university staff, Margaret Rowland and Roxana
                       Infante, for countless express mailings, as well as for holding down the fort at Stan-
                       ford and Berkeley while we worked on the book.
                           Our final thanks go to our wives for their suffering through increasingly early
                       mornings of reading, thinking, and writing.
                                                   Acknowledgments      ■   xxvii

Contributors to Previous Editions
Reviewers
George Adams, Purdue University; Sarita Adve, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign; Jim Archibald, Brigham Young University; Krste Asanovi?c, Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology; Jean-Loup Baer, University of Washington; Paul
Barr, Northeastern University; Rajendra V. Boppana, University of Texas, San
Antonio; Mark Brehob, University of Michigan; Doug Burger, University of
Texas, Austin; John Burger, SGI; Michael Butler; Thomas Casavant; Rohit Chan-
dra; Peter Chen, University of Michigan; the classes at SUNY Stony Brook, Car-
negie Mellon, Stanford, Clemson, and Wisconsin; Tim Coe, Vitesse
Semiconductor; Robert P. Colwell; David Cummings; Bill Dally; David Douglas;
Jos?e Duato, Universitat Politècnica de València and Simula; Anthony Duben,
Southeast Missouri State University; Susan Eggers, University of Washington;
Joel Emer; Barry Fagin, Dartmouth; Joel Ferguson, University of California, Santa
Cruz; Carl Feynman; David Filo; Josh Fisher, Hewlett-Packard Laboratories; Rob
Fowler, DIKU; Mark Franklin, Washington University (St. Louis); Kourosh Ghar-
achorloo; Nikolas Gloy, Harvard University; David Goldberg, Xerox Palo Alto
Research Center; Antonio González, Intel and Universitat Politècnica de Catalu-
nya; James Goodman, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Sudhanva Gurumurthi,
University of Virginia; David Harris, Harvey Mudd College; John Heinlein; Mark
Heinrich, Stanford; Daniel Helman, University of California, Santa Cruz; Mark D.
Hill, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Martin Hopkins, IBM; Jerry Huck,
Hewlett-Packard Laboratories; Wen-mei Hwu, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign; Mary Jane Irwin, Pennsylvania State University; Truman Joe; Norm
Jouppi; David Kaeli, Northeastern University; Roger Kieckhafer, University of
Nebraska; Lev G. Kirischian, Ryerson University; Earl Killian; Allan Knies, Pur-
due University; Don Knuth; Jeff Kuskin, Stanford; James R. Larus, Microsoft
Research; Corinna Lee, University of Toronto; Hank Levy; Kai Li, Princeton Uni-
versity; Lori Liebrock, University of Alaska, Fairbanks; Mikko Lipasti, University
of Wisconsin-Madison; Gyula A. Mago, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill; Bryan Martin; Norman Matloff; David Meyer; William Michalson, Worcester
Polytechnic Institute; James Mooney; Trevor Mudge, University of Michigan;
Ramadass Nagarajan, University of Texas at Austin; David Nagle, Carnegie Mel-
lon University; Todd Narter; Victor Nelson; Vojin Oklobdzija, University of Cal-
ifornia, Berkeley; Kunle Olukotun, Stanford University; Bob Owens,
Pennsylvania State University; Greg Papadapoulous, Sun Microsystems; Joseph
Pfeiffer; Keshav Pingali, Cornell University; Timothy M. Pinkston, University
of Southern California; Bruno Preiss, University of Waterloo; Steven Przybylski;
Jim Quinlan; Andras Radics; Kishore Ramachandran, Georgia Institute of Tech-
nology; Joseph Rameh, University of Texas, Austin; Anthony Reeves, Cornell
University; Richard Reid, Michigan State University; Steve Reinhardt, University
of Michigan; David Rennels, University of California, Los Angeles; Arnold L.
Rosenberg, University of Massachusetts, Amherst; Kaushik Roy, Purdue
xxviii   ■   Acknowledgments

                        University; Emilio Salgueiro, Unysis; Karthikeyan Sankaralingam, University of
                        Texas at Austin; Peter Schnorf; Margo Seltzer; Behrooz Shirazi, Southern Meth-
                        odist University; Daniel Siewiorek, Carnegie Mellon University; J. P. Singh, Prin-
                        ceton; Ashok Singhal; Jim Smith, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Mike Smith,
                        Harvard University; Mark Smotherman, Clemson University; Gurindar Sohi, Uni-
                        versity of Wisconsin-Madison; Arun Somani, University of Washington; Gene
                        Tagliarin, Clemson University; Shyamkumar Thoziyoor, University of Notre
                        Dame; Evan Tick, University of Oregon; Akhilesh Tyagi, University of North Car-
                        olina, Chapel Hill; Dan Upton, University of Virginia; Mateo Valero, Universidad
                        Polit?ecnica de Cataluña, Barcelona; Anujan Varma, University of California, Santa
                        Cruz; Thorsten von Eicken, Cornell University; Hank Walker, Texas A&M; Roy
                        Want, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center; David Weaver, Sun Microsystems;
                        Shlomo Weiss, Tel Aviv University; David Wells; Mike Westall, Clemson Univer-
                        sity; Maurice Wilkes; Eric Williams; Thomas Willis, Purdue University; Malcolm
                        Wing; Larry Wittie, SUNY Stony Brook; Ellen Witte Zegura, Georgia Institute of
                        Technology; Sotirios G. Ziavras, New Jersey Institute of Technology.

                        Appendices
                        The vector appendix was revised by Krste Asanovi?c of the Massachusetts Institute
                        of Technology. The floating-point appendix was written originally by David Gold-
                        berg of Xerox PARC.

                        Exercises
                        George Adams, Purdue University; Todd M. Bezenek, University of Wisconsin-
                        Madison (in remembrance of his grandmother Ethel Eshom); Susan Eggers;
                        Anoop Gupta; David Hayes; Mark Hill; Allan Knies; Ethan L. Miller, University
                        of California, Santa Cruz; Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Compaq Western Research
                        Laboratory; Brandon Schwartz, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Michael Scott;
                        Dan Siewiorek; Mike Smith; Mark Smotherman; Evan Tick; Thomas Willis.

                        Case Studies With Exercises
                        Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Remzi H. Arpaci-
                        Dusseau, University of Wisconsin-Madison; Robert P. Colwell, R&E Colwell &
                        Assoc., Inc.; Diana Franklin, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis
                        Obispo; Wen-mei W. Hwu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Norman
                        P. Jouppi, HP Labs; John W. Sias, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign;
                        David A. Wood, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

                        Special Thanks
                        Duane Adams, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency; Tom Adams; Sarita
                        Adve, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Anant Agarwal; Dave
                                                    Acknowledgments       ■   xxix

Albonesi, University of Rochester; Mitch Alsup; Howard Alt; Dave Anderson;
Peter Ashenden; David Bailey; Bill Bandy, Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency; Luiz Barroso, Compaq’s Western Research Lab; Andy Bechtolsheim; C.
Gordon Bell; Fred Berkowitz; John Best, IBM; Dileep Bhandarkar; Jeff Bier,
BDTI; Mark Birman; David Black; David Boggs; Jim Brady; Forrest Brewer;
Aaron Brown, University of California, Berkeley; E. Bugnion, Compaq’s Western
Research Lab; Alper Buyuktosunoglu, University of Rochester; Mark Callaghan;
Jason F. Cantin; Paul Carrick; Chen-Chung Chang; Lei Chen, University of Roch-
ester; Pete Chen; Nhan Chu; Doug Clark, Princeton University; Bob Cmelik; John
Crawford; Zarka Cvetanovic; Mike Dahlin, University of Texas, Austin; Merrick
Darley; the staff of the DEC Western Research Laboratory; John DeRosa; Lloyd
Dickman; J. Ding; Susan Eggers, University of Washington; Wael El-Essawy,
University of Rochester; Patty Enriquez, Mills; Milos Ercegovac; Robert Garner;
K. Gharachorloo, Compaq’s Western Research Lab; Garth Gibson; Ronald Green-
berg; Ben Hao; John Henning, Compaq; Mark Hill, University of Wisconsin-
Madison; Danny Hillis; David Hodges; Urs H€olzle, Google; David Hough; Ed
Hudson; Chris Hughes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Mark John-
son; Lewis Jordan; Norm Jouppi; William Kahan; Randy Katz; Ed Kelly; Richard
Kessler; Les Kohn; John Kowaleski, Compaq Computer Corp; Dan Lambright;
Gary Lauterbach, Sun Microsystems; Corinna Lee; Ruby Lee; Don Lewine;
Chao-Huang Lin; Paul Losleben, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency;
Yung-Hsiang Lu; Bob Lucas, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency;
Ken Lutz; Alan Mainwaring, Intel Berkeley Research Labs; Al Marston; Rich
Martin, Rutgers; John Mashey; Luke McDowell; Sebastian Mirolo, Trimedia Cor-
poration; Ravi Murthy; Biswadeep Nag; Lisa Noordergraaf, Sun Microsystems;
Bob Parker, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency; Vern Paxson, Center
for Internet Research; Lawrence Prince; Steven Przybylski; Mark Pullen, Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency; Chris Rowen; Margaret Rowland; Greg
Semeraro, University of Rochester; Bill Shannon; Behrooz Shirazi; Robert Shom-
ler; Jim Slager; Mark Smotherman, Clemson University; the SMT research group
at the University of Washington; Steve Squires, Defense Advanced Research Pro-
jects Agency; Ajay Sreekanth; Darren Staples; Charles Stapper; Jorge Stolfi; Peter
Stoll; the students at Stanford and Berkeley who endured our first attempts at cre-
ating this book; Bob Supnik; Steve Swanson; Paul Taysom; Shreekant Thakkar;
Alexander Thomasian, New Jersey Institute of Technology; John Toole, Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency; Kees A. Vissers, Trimedia Corporation;
Willa Walker; David Weaver; Ric Wheeler, EMC; Maurice Wilkes; Richard
Zimmerman.

                       John Hennessy ■ David Patterson
