       Case Studies and Exercises by Amr Zaky and David A. Wood              446
              5
                                 Thread-Level Parallelism

                                 The turning away from the conventional organization came in the
                                 middle 1960s, when the law of diminishing returns began to take
                                 effect in the effort to increase the operational speed of a computer.
                                 . . . Electronic circuits are ultimately limited in their speed of
                                 operation by the speed of light . . . and many of the circuits were
                                 already operating in the nanosecond range.
                                                                      W. Jack Bouknight et al.,
                                                                      The Illiac IV System (1972)

                                 We are dedicating all of our future product development to
                                 multicore designs. We believe this is a key inflection point for the
                                 industry.
                                                                  Intel President Paul Otellini,
                                                         describing Intel’s future direction at the
                                                                  Intel Developer Forum in 2005

                                 Since 2004 processor designers have increased core counts to
                                 exploit Moore’s Law scaling, rather than focusing on single-core
                                 performance. The failure of Dennard scaling, to which the shift to
                                 multicore parts is partially a response, may soon limit multicore
                                 scaling just as single-core scaling has been curtailed.
                                                                   Hadi Esmaeilzadeh, et al.,
                                                            Power Limitations and Dark Silicon
                                                       Challenge the Future of Multicore (2012)

Computer Architecture. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811905-1.00005-5
© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

               5.1       Introduction
                         As the quotations that open this chapter show, the view that advances in uniprocessor
                         architecture were nearing an end has been held by some researchers for many years.
                         Clearly, these views were premature; in fact, during the period of 1986–2003,
                         uniprocessor performance growth, driven by the microprocessor, was at its highest
                         rate since the first transistorized computers in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
                             Nonetheless, the importance of multiprocessors was growing throughout the
                         1990s as designers sought a way to build servers and supercomputers that achieved
                         higher performance than a single microprocessor, while exploiting the tremendous
                         cost-performance advantages of commodity microprocessors. As we discussed
                         in Chapters 1 and 3, the slowdown in uniprocessor performance arising from
                         diminishing returns in exploiting instruction-level parallelism (ILP) combined
                         with growing concern over power has led to a new era in computer architec-
                         ture—an era where multiprocessors play a major role from the low end to the high
                         end. The second quotation captures this clear inflection point.
                             This increased importance of multiprocessing reflects several major factors:

                         ■   The dramatically lower efficiencies in silicon and energy use that were encoun-
                             tered between 2000 and 2005 as designers attempted to find and exploit more
                             ILP, which turned out to be inefficient, since power and silicon costs grew
                             faster than performance. Other than ILP, the only scalable and general-purpose
                             way we know to increase performance faster than the basic technology allows
                             (from a switching perspective) is through multiprocessing.
                         ■   A growing interest in high-end servers as cloud computing and software-as-a-
                             service become more important.
                         ■   A growth in data-intensive applications driven by the availability of massive
                             amounts of data on the Internet.
                         ■   The insight that increasing performance on the desktop is less important
                             (outside of graphics, at least), either because current performance is acceptable
                             or because highly compute- and data-intensive applications are being done on
                             the cloud.
                         ■   An improved understanding of how to use multiprocessors effectively,
                             especially in server environments where there is significant inherent parallel-
                             ism, arising from large datasets (usually in the form of data parallelism),
                             “natural-world” parallelism (which occurs in scientific and engineering codes),
                             or parallelism among large numbers of independent requests (request-level
                             parallelism).
                         ■   The advantages of leveraging a design investment by replication rather than
                             unique design; all multiprocessor designs provide such leverage.

                              The third quotation reminds us that multicore may provide only limited possi-
                         bilities for scaling performance. The combination of Amdahl’s Law effects and the

end of Dennard scaling mean that the future of multicore may be limited, at least as
a method of scaling up the performance of single applications. We return to this
topic late in the chapter.
    In this chapter, we focus on exploiting thread-level parallelism (TLP). TLP
implies the existence of multiple program counters and thus is exploited primarily
through MIMDs. Although MIMDs have been around for decades, the movement of
thread-level parallelism to the forefront across the range of computing from embed-
ded applications to high-end severs is relatively recent. Likewise, the extensive use
of thread-level parallelism for a wide-range of general-purpose applications, versus
either transaction processing or scientific applications, is relatively new.
    Our focus in this chapter is on multiprocessors, which we define as computers
consisting of tightly coupled processors whose coordination and usage are typi-
cally controlled by a single operating system and that share memory through a
shared address space. Such systems exploit thread-level parallelism through two
different software models. The first is the execution of a tightly coupled set of
threads collaborating on a single task, which is typically called parallel processing.
The second is the execution of multiple, relatively independent processes that may
originate from one or more users, which is a form of request-level parallelism,
although at a much smaller scale than what we explore in the next chapter.
Request-level parallelism may be exploited by a single application running on
multiple processors, such as a database responding to queries, or multiple applica-
tions running independently, often called multiprogramming.
    The multiprocessors we examine in this chapter typically range in size from a
dual processor to dozens and sometimes hundreds of processors and communicate
and coordinate through the sharing of memory. Although sharing through memory
implies a shared address space, it does not necessarily mean there is a single
physical memory. Such multiprocessors include both single-chip systems with
multiple cores, known as multicore, and computers consisting of multiple chips,
each of which is typically a multicore. Many companies make such multiproces-
sors, including HP, Dell, Cisco, IBM, SGI, Lenovo, Oracle, Fujitsu, and many
others.
    In addition to true multiprocessors, we will return to the topic of multithread-
ing, a technique that supports multiple threads executing in an interleaved fashion
on a single multiple-issue processor. Many multicore processors also include
support for multithreading.
    In the next chapter, we consider ultrascale computers built from very large
numbers of processors, connected with networking technology (not necessarily
the same networking technology used to connect computers to the Internet) and
often called clusters; these large-scale systems are used for cloud computing
primarily with massive numbers of independent tasks being executed in parallel.
More recently, computationally intensive tasks that can be easily made parallel,
such as Search and certain machine learning algorithms have also made use of
clusters. When these clusters grow to tens of thousands of servers and beyond,
we call them warehouse-scale computers. Amazon, Google, Microsoft, and
Facebook all make warehouse-scale computers.

                             In addition to the multiprocessors we study here and the warehouse-scaled
                         systems of the next chapter, there are a range of special large-scale multiprocessor
                         systems, sometimes called multicomputers, which are less tightly coupled than the
                         multiprocessors examined in this chapter but usually more tightly coupled than the
                         warehouse-scale systems of the next chapter. The primary use for such multicom-
                         puters is in high-end scientific computation, although they are sometimes used for
                         commercial applications filling the niche between multiprocessors and warehouse-
                         scale computers. The Cray X series and IBM BlueGene are typical examples of
                         these multicomputers.
                             Many other books, such as Culler et al. (1999), cover such systems in detail.
                         Because of the large and changing nature of the field of multiprocessing (the just-
                         mentioned Culler et al. reference is over 1000 pages and discusses only multipro-
                         cessing!), we have chosen to focus our attention on what we believe is the
                         most important and general-purpose portions of the computing space. Appendix
                         I discusses some of the issues that arise in building such computers in the context
                         of large-scale scientific applications.
                             Our focus will be on multiprocessors with roughly 4–256 processor cores,
                         which might occupy anywhere from 4 to 16 separate chips. Such designs vastly
                         dominate in terms of both units and dollars. In large-scale multiprocessors, the
                         interconnection networks are a critical part of the design; Appendix F focuses
                         on that topic.

                         Multiprocessor Architecture: Issues and Approach
                         To take advantage of an MIMD multiprocessor with n processors, we must usually
                         have at least n threads or processes to execute; with multithreading, which is
                         present in most multicore chips today, that number is 2–4 times higher. The inde-
                         pendent threads within a single process are typically identified by the programmer
                         or created by the operating system (from multiple independent requests). At the
                         other extreme, a thread may consist of a few tens of iterations of a loop, generated
                         by a parallel compiler exploiting data parallelism in the loop. Although the amount
                         of computation assigned to a thread, called the grain size, is important in consid-
                         ering how to exploit thread-level parallelism efficiently, the important qualitative
                         distinction from instruction-level parallelism is that thread-level parallelism is
                         identified at a high level by the software system or programmer and that the threads
                         consist of hundreds to millions of instructions that may be executed in parallel.
                             Threads can also be used to exploit data-level parallelism, although the over-
                         head is usually higher than would be seen with an SIMD processor or with a GPU
                         (see Chapter 4). This overhead means that grain size must be sufficiently large to
                         exploit the parallelism efficiently. For example, although a vector processor or
                         GPU may be able to efficiently parallelize operations on short vectors, the resulting
                         grain size when the parallelism is split among many threads may be so small that
                         the overhead makes the exploitation of the parallelism prohibitively expensive in
                         an MIMD.

     Existing shared-memory multiprocessors fall into two classes, depending on
the number of processors involved, which in turn dictates a memory organization
and interconnect strategy. We refer to the multiprocessors by their memory orga-
nization because what constitutes a small or large number of processors continues
to change over time.
     The first group, which we call symmetric (shared-memory) multiprocessors
(SMPs), or centralized shared-memory multiprocessors, features small to moder-
ate numbers of cores, typically 32 or fewer. For multiprocessors with such small
processor counts, it is possible for the processors to share a single centralized mem-
ory that all processors have equal access to, thus the term symmetric. In multicore
chips, the memory is often shared in a centralized fashion among the cores; most
existing multicores are SMPs, but not all. (Note that some literature mistakenly
appears to use SMP to stand for Shared Memory Processor, but this usage is
erroneous.)
     Some multicores have nonuniform access to the outermost cache, a structure
called NUCA for Nonuniform Cache Access, and are thus are not truly SMPs, even
if they have a single main memory. The IBM Power8 has distributed L3 caches
with nonuniform access time to different addresses in L3.
     In multiprocessors consisting of multiple multicore chips, there are often sep-
arate memories for each multicore chip. Thus the memory is distributed rather
than centralized. As we will see later in the chapter, many designs with distrib-
uted memory have fast access to a local memory and much slower access to
remote memory; often the differences in access time to various remote memories
are small in comparison to the difference between the access times to the local
memory and to a remote memory. In such designs, the programmer and software
system need to be aware of whether accesses are to local or remote memory, but
may be able to ignore the distribution of accesses among remote memories.
Because an SMP approach becomes less attractive with a growing number of pro-
cessors, most of the very largest multiprocessors use some form of distributed
memory.
     SMP architectures are also sometimes called uniform memory access
(UMA) multiprocessors, arising from the fact that all processors have a uniform
latency from memory, even if the memory is organized into multiple banks.
Figure 5.1 shows what these multiprocessors look like. The architecture of
SMPs is the topic of Section 5.2, and we explain the approach in the context
of a multicore.
     The alternative design approach consists of multiprocessors with physically
distributed memory, called distributed shared memory (DSM). Figure 5.2
shows what these multiprocessors look like. To support larger processor counts,
memory must be distributed among the processors rather than centralized; oth-
erwise, the memory system would not be able to support the bandwidth
demands of a larger number of processors without incurring excessively long
access latency.
     With the rapid increase in processor performance and the associated increase in
a processor’s memory bandwidth requirements, the size of a multiprocessor for

                               Processor           Processor          Processor          Processor

                                 One or             One or             One or             One or
                                                                                                        Private
                               more levels        more levels        more levels        more levels
                                                                                                        caches
                                of cache           of cache           of cache           of cache

                                                        Shared cache

                                                          Main memory                 I/O system

Figure 5.1 Basic structure of a centralized shared-memory multiprocessor based on
                         a multicore chip. Multiple processor-cache subsystems share the same physical mem-
                         ory, typically with one level of shared cache on the multicore, and one or more levels of
                         private per-core cache. The key architectural property is the uniform access time to all of
                         the memory from all of the processors. In a multichip design, an interconnection net-
                         work links the processors and the memory, which may be one or more banks. In a single-
                         chip multicore, the interconnection network is simply the memory bus.

                         which distributed memory is preferred continues to shrink. The introduction of
                         multicore processors has meant that even some 2-chip multiprocessors, which
                         might have 16–64 processor cores, use distributed memory. The larger number
                         of processors also raises the need for a high-bandwidth interconnect, of which
                         we will see examples in Appendix F. Both directed networks (i.e., switches)
                         and indirect networks (typically multidimensional meshes) are used.
                             Distributing the memory among the nodes both increases the bandwidth and
                         reduces the latency to local memory. A DSM multiprocessor is also called a NUMA
                         (nonuniform memory access) because the access time depends on the location of a
                         data word in memory. The key disadvantages for a DSM are that communicating
                         data among processors becomes somewhat more complex and a DSM requires
                         more effort in the software to take advantage of the increased memory bandwidth

                Multicore                      Multicore                  Multicore                  Multicore
                  MP                             MP                         MP                         MP

       Memory               I/O       Memory               I/O   Memory               I/O   Memory               I/O

                                                      Interconnection network

        Memory              I/O       Memory               I/O   Memory               I/O   Memory               I/O

                Multicore                      Multicore                  Multicore                  Multicore
                  MP                             MP                         MP                         MP

Figure 5.2 The basic architecture of a distributed-memory multiprocessor in 2017 typically consists of a multi-
core multiprocessor chip with memory and possibly I/O attached and an interface to an interconnection network
that connects all the nodes. Each processor core shares the entire memory, although the access time to the local
memory attached to the core’s chip will be much faster than the access time to remote memories.

                                  afforded by distributed memories. Because most multicore-based multiprocessors
                                  with more than a few processor chips use distributed memory, we will explain the
                                  operation of distributed memory multiprocessors from this viewpoint.
                                      In both SMP and DSM architectures, communication among threads occurs
                                  through a shared address space, meaning that a memory reference can be made
                                  by any processor to any memory location, assuming it has the correct access rights.
                                  The term shared memory associated with both SMP and DSM refers to the fact that
                                  the address space is shared.
                                      In contrast, the clusters and warehouse-scale computers in the next chapter
                                  look like individual computers connected by a network, and the memory of one pro-
                                  cessor cannot be accessed by another processor without the assistance of software
                                  protocols running on both processors. In such designs, message-passing protocols
                                  are used to communicate data among processors.

                                  Challenges of Parallel Processing
                                  The application of multiprocessors ranges from running independent tasks with
                                  essentially no communication to running parallel programs where threads must
                                  communicate to complete the task. Two important hurdles, both explainable with
                                  Amdahl’s Law, make parallel processing challenging. To overcome these hurdles
                                  typically requires a comprehensive approach that addresses the choice of

                         algorithm and its implementation, the underlying programming language and sys-
                         tem, the operating system and its support functions, and the architecture and hard-
                         ware implementation. Although in many instances, one of these is a key
                         bottleneck, when scaling to a larger processor counts (approaching 100 or more),
                         often all aspects of the software and hardware need attention.
                             The first hurdle has to do with the limited parallelism available in programs,
                         and the second arises from the relatively high cost of communications. Limitations
                         in available parallelism make it difficult to achieve good speedups in any parallel
                         processor, as our first example shows.

             Example     Suppose you want to achieve a speedup of 80 with 100 processors. What fraction
                         of the original computation can be sequential?

               Answer    Recall from Chapter 1 that Amdahl’s Law is
                                                                             1
                                            Speedup ¼
                                                         Fractionenhanced
                                                                          + ð1 ? Fractionenhanced Þ
                                                         Speedupenhanced

                         For simplicity in this example, assume that the program operates in only two
                         modes: parallel with all processors fully used, which is the enhanced mode, or
                         serial with only one processor in use. With this simplification, the speedup in
                         enhanced mode is simply the number of processors, whereas the fraction of
                         enhanced mode is the time spent in parallel mode. Substituting into the previous
                         equation:
                                                                           1
                                                 80 ¼
                                                        Fractionparallel ?                     ?
                                                                        + 1 ? Fractionparallel
                                                             100

                         Simplifying this equation yields:
                                                                                    
                                 0:8 ? Fractionparallel + 80 ? 1 ? Fractionparallel ¼ 1
                                                        80 ? 79:2 ? Fractionparallel ¼ 1
                                                                                       80 ? 1
                                                                    Fractionparallel ¼
                                                                                        79:2
                                                                    Fractionparallel ¼ 0:9975

                         Thus, to achieve a speedup of 80 with 100 processors, only 0.25% of the
                         original computation can be sequential! Of course, to achieve linear speedup
                         (speedup of n with n processors), the entire program must usually be parallel
                         with no serial portions. In practice, programs do not just operate in fully
                         parallel or sequential mode, but often use less than the full complement of
                         the processors when running in parallel mode. Amdahl’s Law can be used
                         to analyze applications with varying amounts of speedup, as the next
                         example shows.

Example   Suppose we have an application running on a 100-processor multiprocessor,
          and assume that application can use 1, 50, or 100 processors. If we assume
          that 95% of the time we can use all 100 processors, how much of the remain-
          ing 5% of the execution time must employ 50 processors if we want a speedup
          of 80?

 Answer   We use Amdahl’s Law with more terms:
                                                          1
                    Speedup ¼
                                Fraction100 Fraction50
                                           +           + ð1 ? Fraction100 ? Fraction50 Þ
                                Speedup100 Speedup50

          Substituting in:
                                                        1
                              80 ¼
                                     0:95 Fraction50
                                         +           + ð1 ? 0:95 ? Fraction80 Þ
                                     100     50

          Simplifying:
                             0:76 + 1:6 ? Fraction50 + 4:0 ? 80 ? Fraction50 ¼ 1
                                        4:76 ? 78:4 ? Fraction50 ¼ 1
                                             Fraction50 ¼ 0:048

          If 95% of an application can use 100 processors perfectly, to get a speedup of 80,
          4.8% of the remaining time must be spent using 50 processors and only 0.2% can
          be serial!

              The second major challenge in parallel processing involves the large latency
          of remote access in a parallel processor. In existing shared-memory multipro-
          cessors, communication of data between separate cores may cost 35–50 clock
          cycles and among cores on separate chips anywhere from 100 clock cycles to as
          much as 300 or more clock cycles (for large-scale multiprocessors), depending
          on the communication mechanism, the type of interconnection network, and the
          scale of the multiprocessor. The effect of long communication delays is clearly
          substantial. Let’s consider a simple example.

Example   Suppose we have an application running on a 32-processor multiprocessor that has
          a 100 ns delay to handle a reference to a remote memory. For this application,
          assume that all the references except those involving communication hit in the
          local memory hierarchy, which is obviously optimistic. Processors are stalled
          on a remote request, and the processor clock rate is 4 GHz. If the base CPI (assum-
          ing that all references hit in the cache) is 0.5, how much faster is the multiprocessor
          if there is no communication versus if 0.2% of the instructions involve a remote
          communication reference?

               Answer    It is simpler to first calculate the clock cycles per instruction. The effective CPI for
                         the multiprocessor with 0.2% remote references is
                                       CPI ¼ Base CPI + Remote request rate ? Remote request cost

                                            ¼ 0:5 + 0:2% ? Remote request cost

                         The remote request cost is
                                                Remote access cost 100ns
                                                                  ¼        ¼ 400 cycles
                                                   Cycle time       0:25ns

                         Therefore we can compute the CPI:
                                                        CPI ¼ 0:5 + 0:20% ? 400
                                                             ¼ 1:3

                         The multiprocessor with all local references is 1.3/0.5 ¼ 2.6 times faster. In prac-
                         tice, the performance analysis is much more complex because some fraction of the
                         noncommunication references will miss in the local hierarchy and the remote
                         access time does not have a single constant value. For example, the cost of a remote
                         reference could be worse because contention caused by many references trying to
                         use the global interconnect can lead to increased delays, or the access time might be
                         better if memory were distributed and the access was to the local memory.
                             This problem could have also been analyzed using Amdahl’s Law, an exercise
                         we leave to the reader.

                              These problems—insufficient parallelism and long-latency remote communi-
                         cation—are the two biggest performance challenges in using multiprocessors.
                         The problem of inadequate application parallelism must be attacked primarily in
                         software with new algorithms that offer better parallel performance, as well as
                         by software systems that maximize the amount of time spent executing with the
                         full complement of processors. Reducing the impact of long remote latency can
                         be attacked both by the architecture and by the programmer. For example, we
                         can reduce the frequency of remote accesses with either hardware mechanisms,
                         such as caching shared data, or software mechanisms, such as restructuring the data
                         to make more accesses local. We can try to tolerate the latency by using multi-
                         threading (discussed later in this chapter) or by using prefetching (a topic we cover
                         extensively in Chapter 2).
                              Much of this chapter focuses on techniques for reducing the impact of long
                         remote communication latency. For example, Sections 5.2 through 5.4 discuss
                         how caching can be used to reduce remote access frequency, while maintaining
                         a coherent view of memory. Section 5.5 discusses synchronization, which, because
                         it inherently involves interprocessor communication and also can limit parallelism,
                         is a major potential bottleneck. Section 5.6 covers latency-hiding techniques and
                         memory consistency models for shared memory. In Appendix I, we focus primar-
                         ily on larger-scale multiprocessors that are used predominantly for scientific work.

      In that appendix, we examine the nature of such applications and the challenges of
      achieving speedup with dozens to hundreds of processors.

5.2   Centralized Shared-Memory Architectures
      The observation that the use of large, multilevel caches can substantially reduce the
      memory bandwidth demands of a processor is the key insight that motivates central-
      ized memory multiprocessors. Originally, these processors were all single-core and
      often took an entire board, and memory was located on a shared bus. With more
      recent, higher-performance processors, the memory demands have outstripped
      the capability of reasonable buses, and recent microprocessors directly connect
      memory to a single chip, which is sometimes called a backside or memory bus to
      distinguish it from the bus used to connect to I/O. Accessing a chip’s local memory
      whether for an I/O operation or for an access from another chip requires going
      through the chip that “owns” that memory. Thus access to memory is asymmetric:
      faster to the local memory and slower to the remote memory. In a multicore that
      memory is shared among all the cores on a single chip, but the asymmetric access
      to the memory of one multicore from the memory of another usually remains.
          Symmetric shared-memory machines usually support the caching of both
      shared and private data. Private data are used by a single processor, while shared
      data are used by multiple processors, essentially providing communication among
      the processors through reads and writes of the shared data. When a private item is
      cached, its location is migrated to the cache, reducing the average access time as
      well as the memory bandwidth required. Because no other processor uses the data,
      the program behavior is identical to that in a uniprocessor. When shared data are
      cached, the shared value may be replicated in multiple caches. In addition to the
      reduction in access latency and required memory bandwidth, this replication also
      provides a reduction in contention that may exist for shared data items that are
      being read by multiple processors simultaneously. Caching of shared data, how-
      ever, introduces a new problem: cache coherence.

      What Is Multiprocessor Cache Coherence?
      Unfortunately, caching shared data introduces a new problem. Because the view of
      memory held by two different processors is through their individual caches, the
      processors could end up seeing different values for the same memory location,
      as Figure 5.3 illustrates. This difficulty is generally referred to as the cache coher-
      ence problem. Notice that the coherence problem exists because we have both a
      global state, defined primarily by the main memory, and a local state, defined
      by the individual caches, which are private to each processor core. Thus, in a multi-
      core where some level of caching may be shared (e.g., an L3), although some levels
      are private (e.g., L1 and L2), the coherence problem still exists and must be solved.
          Informally, we could say that a memory system is coherent if any read of a data
      item returns the most recently written value of that data item. This definition,

                                    Cache contents for            Cache contents for           Memory contents for
Time    Event                          processor A                   processor B                  location X
0                                                                                                        1
1       Processor A reads X                   1                                                          1
2       Processor B reads X                   1                            1                             1
3       Processor A stores                    0                            1                             0
        0 into X

Figure 5.3 The cache coherence problem for a single memory location (X), read and written by two processors (A
and B). We initially assume that neither cache contains the variable and that X has the value 1. We also assume a write-
through cache; a write-back cache adds some additional but similar complications. After the value of X has been
written by A, A’s cache and the memory both contain the new value, but B’s cache does not, and if B reads the value
of X it will receive 1!

                              although intuitively appealing, is vague and simplistic; the reality is much more
                              complex. This simple definition contains two different aspects of memory system
                              behavior, both of which are critical to writing correct shared-memory programs.
                              The first aspect, called coherence, defines what values can be returned by a read.
                              The second aspect, called consistency, determines when a written value will be
                              returned by a read. Let’s look at coherence first.
                                  A memory system is coherent if

                              1. A read by processor P to location X that follows a write by P to X, with no writes
                                 of X by another processor occurring between the write and the read by P, always
                                 returns the value written by P.
                              2. A read by a processor to location X that follows a write by another processor to
                                 X returns the written value if the read and write are sufficiently separated in time
                                 and no other writes to X occur between the two accesses.
                              3. Writes to the same location are serialized; that is, two writes to the same
                                 location by any two processors are seen in the same order by all processors.
                                 For example, if the values 1 and then 2 are written to a location, processors
                                 can never read the value of the location as 2 and then later read it as 1.

                                  The first property simply preserves program order—we expect this property to
                              be true even in uniprocessors. The second property defines the notion of what it
                              means to have a coherent view of memory: if a processor could continuously read
                              an old data value, we would clearly say that memory was incoherent.
                                  The need for write serialization is more subtle, but equally important. Suppose
                              we did not serialize writes, and processor P1 writes location X followed by P2
                              writing location X. Serializing the writes ensures that every processor will see
                              the write done by P2 at some point. If we did not serialize the writes, it might
                              be the case that some processors could see the write of P2 first and then see the
                              write of P1, maintaining the value written by P1 indefinitely. The simplest way

to avoid such difficulties is to ensure that all writes to the same location are seen in
the same order; this property is called write serialization.
    Although the three properties just described are sufficient to ensure coherence,
the question of when a written value will be seen is also important. To see why,
observe that we cannot require that a read of X instantaneously see the value
written for X by some other processor. If, for example, a write of X on one
processor precedes a read of X on another processor by a very small time, it
may be impossible to ensure that the read returns the value of the data written, since
the written data may not even have left the processor at that point. The issue of
exactly when a written value must be seen by a reader is defined by a memory
consistency model—a topic discussed in Section 5.6.
    Coherence and consistency are complementary: Coherence defines the behav-
ior of reads and writes to the same memory location, while consistency defines the
behavior of reads and writes with respect to accesses to other memory locations.
For now, make the following two assumptions. First, a write does not complete
(and allow the next write to occur) until all processors have seen the effect of that
write. Second, the processor does not change the order of any write with respect to
any other memory access. These two conditions mean that, if a processor writes
location A followed by location B, any processor that sees the new value of B must
also see the new value of A. These restrictions allow the processor to reorder reads,
but forces the processor to finish a write in program order. We will rely on this
assumption until we reach Section 5.6, where we will see exactly the implications
of this definition, as well as the alternatives.

Basic Schemes for Enforcing Coherence
The coherence problem for multiprocessors and I/O, although similar in origin, has
different characteristics that affect the appropriate solution. Unlike I/O, where
multiple data copies are a rare event—one to be avoided whenever possible—a
program running on multiple processors will normally have copies of the same data
in several caches. In a coherent multiprocessor, the caches provide both migration
and replication of shared data items.
    Coherent caches provide migration because a data item can be moved to a local
cache and used there in a transparent fashion. This migration reduces both the
latency to access a shared data item that is allocated remotely and the bandwidth
demand on the shared memory.
    Because the caches make a copy of the data item in the local cache, coherent
caches also provide replication for shared data that are being read simultaneously.
Replication reduces both latency of access and contention for a read shared data
item. Supporting this migration and replication is critical to performance in acces-
sing shared data. Thus, rather than trying to solve the problem by avoiding it in
software, multiprocessors adopt a hardware solution by introducing a protocol
to maintain coherent caches.
    The protocols to maintain coherence for multiple processors are called cache
coherence protocols. Key to implementing a cache coherence protocol is tracking

                         the state of any sharing of a data block. The state of any cache block is kept using
                         status bits associated with the block, similar to the valid and dirty bits kept in a
                         uniprocessor cache. There are two classes of protocols in use, each of which uses
                         different techniques to track the sharing status:

                         ■   Directory based—The sharing status of a particular block of physical memory
                             is kept in one location, called the directory. There are two very different types
                             of directory-based cache coherence. In an SMP, we can use one centralized
                             directory, associated with the memory or some other single serialization point,
                             such as the outermost cache in a multicore. In a DSM, it makes no sense to have
                             a single directory because that would create a single point of contention and
                             make it difficult to scale to many multicore chips given the memory demands
                             of multicores with eight or more cores. Distributed directories are more com-
                             plex than a single directory, and such designs are the subject of Section 5.4.
                         ■   Snooping—Rather than keeping the state of sharing in a single directory, every
                             cache that has a copy of the data from a block of physical memory could track
                             the sharing status of the block. In an SMP, the caches are typically all acces-
                             sible via some broadcast medium (e.g., a bus connects the per-core caches to
                             the shared cache or memory), and all cache controllers monitor or snoop on the
                             medium to determine whether they have a copy of a block that is requested on a
                             bus or switch access. Snooping can also be used as the coherence protocol for a
                             multichip multiprocessor, and some designs support a snooping protocol on
                             top of a directory protocol within each multicore.

                              Snooping protocols became popular with multiprocessors using microproces-
                         sors (single-core) and caches attached to a single shared memory by a bus. The bus
                         provided a convenient broadcast medium to implement the snooping protocols.
                         Multicore architectures changed the picture significantly because all multicores
                         share some level of cache on the chip. Thus some designs switched to using direc-
                         tory protocols, since the overhead was small. To allow the reader to become fami-
                         liar with both types of protocols, we focus on a snooping protocol here and discuss
                         a directory protocol when we come to DSM architectures.

                         Snooping Coherence Protocols
                         There are two ways to maintain the coherence requirement described in the prior
                         section. One method is to ensure that a processor has exclusive access to a data item
                         before writing that item. This style of protocol is called a write invalidate protocol
                         because it invalidates other copies on a write. It is by far the most common pro-
                         tocol. Exclusive access ensures that no other readable or writable copies of an item
                         exist when the write occurs: all other cached copies of the item are invalidated.
                             Figure 5.4 shows an example of an invalidation protocol with write-back
                         caches in action. To see how this protocol ensures coherence, consider a write
                         followed by a read by another processor: because the write requires exclusive

                                          Contents of processor        Contents of processor        Contents of memory
Processor activity       Bus activity          A’s cache                    B’s cache                   location X
                                                                                                               0
Processor A reads X      Cache miss                   0                                                        0
                         for X
Processor B reads X      Cache miss                   0                            0                           0
                         for X
Processor A writes a     Invalidation                 1                                                        0
1 to X                   for X
Processor B reads X      Cache miss                   1                            1                           1
                         for X

Figure 5.4 An example of an invalidation protocol working on a snooping bus for a single cache block (X) with
write-back caches. We assume that neither cache initially holds X and that the value of X in memory is 0. The pro-
cessor and memory contents show the value after the processor and bus activity have both completed. A blank indi-
cates no activity or no copy cached. When the second miss by B occurs, processor A responds with the value
canceling the response from memory. In addition, both the contents of B’s cache and the memory contents of X
are updated. This update of memory, which occurs when a block becomes shared, simplifies the protocol, but it
is possible to track the ownership and force the write-back only if the block is replaced. This requires the introduction
of an additional status bit indicating ownership of a block. The ownership bit indicates that a block may be shared for
reads, but only the owning processor can write the block, and that processor is responsible for updating any other
processors and memory when it changes the block or replaces it. If a multicore uses a shared cache (e.g., L3), then all
memory is seen through the shared cache; L3 acts like the memory in this example, and coherency must be handled
for the private L1 and L2 caches for each core. It is this observation that led some designers to opt for a directory
protocol within the multicore. To make this work, the L3 cache must be inclusive; recall from Chapter 2, that a cache is
inclusive if any location in a higher level cache (L1 and L2 in this case) is also in L3. We return to the topic of inclusion
on page 423.

                               access, any copy held by the reading processor must be invalidated (thus the
                               protocol name). Therefore when the read occurs, it misses in the cache and is
                               forced to fetch a new copy of the data. For a write, we require that the writing
                               processor has exclusive access, preventing any other processor from being able
                               to write simultaneously. If two processors do attempt to write the same data simul-
                               taneously, one of them wins the race (we’ll see how we decide who wins shortly),
                               causing the other processor’s copy to be invalidated. For the other processor to
                               complete its write, it must obtain a new copy of the data, which must now contain
                               the updated value. Therefore this protocol enforces write serialization.
                                   The alternative to an invalidate protocol is to update all the cached copies of a
                               data item when that item is written. This type of protocol is called a write update or
                               write broadcast protocol. Because a write update protocol must broadcast all
                               writes to shared cache lines, it consumes considerably more bandwidth. For this
                               reason, virtually all recent multiprocessors have opted to implement a write
                               invalidate protocol, and we will focus only on invalidate protocols for the rest
                               of the chapter.

                         Basic Implementation Techniques
                         The key to implementing an invalidate protocol in a multicore is the use of the bus,
                         or another broadcast medium, to perform invalidates. In older multiple-chip mul-
                         tiprocessors, the bus used for coherence is the shared-memory access bus. In a
                         single-chip multicore, the bus can be the connection between the private caches
                         (L1 and L2 in the Intel i7) and the shared outer cache (L3 in the i7). To perform
                         an invalidate, the processor simply acquires bus access and broadcasts the address
                         to be invalidated on the bus. All processors continuously snoop on the bus, watch-
                         ing the addresses. The processors check whether the address on the bus is in their
                         cache. If so, the corresponding data in the cache are invalidated.
                             When a write to a block that is shared occurs, the writing processor must acquire
                         bus access to broadcast its invalidation. If two processors attempt to write shared
                         blocks at the same time, their attempts to broadcast an invalidate operation will
                         be serialized when they arbitrate for the bus. The first processor to obtain bus access
                         will cause any other copies of the block it is writing to be invalidated. If the proces-
                         sors were attempting to write the same block, the serialization enforced by the bus
                         would also serialize their writes. One implication of this scheme is that a write to a
                         shared data item cannot actually complete until it obtains bus access. All coherence
                         schemes require some method of serializing accesses to the same cache block, either
                         by serializing access to the communication medium or to another shared structure.
                             In addition to invalidating outstanding copies of a cache block that is being writ-
                         ten into, we also need to locate a data item when a cache miss occurs. In a write-
                         through cache, it is easy to find the recent value of a data item because all written
                         data are always sent to the memory, from which the most recent value of a data item
                         can always be fetched. (Write buffers can lead to some additional complexities and
                         must effectively be treated as additional cache entries.)
                             For a write-back cache, the problem of finding the most recent data value is
                         harder because the most recent value of a data item can be in a private cache rather
                         than in the shared cache or memory. Fortunately, write-back caches can use the same
                         snooping scheme both for cache misses and for writes: each processor snoops every
                         address placed on the shared bus. If a processor finds that it has a dirty copy of the
                         requested cache block, it provides that cache block in response to the read request
                         and causes the memory (or L3) access to be aborted. The additional complexity
                         comes from having to retrieve the cache block from another processor’s private
                         cache (L1 or L2), which can often take longer than retrieving it from L3. Because
                         write-back caches generate lower requirements for memory bandwidth, they can
                         support larger numbers of faster processors. As a result, all multicore processors
                         use write-back at the outermost levels of the cache, and we will examine the imple-
                         mentation of coherence with write-back caches.
                             The normal cache tags can be used to implement the process of snooping, and
                         the valid bit for each block makes invalidation easy to implement. Read misses,
                         whether generated by an invalidation or by some other event, are also straightfor-
                         ward because they simply rely on the snooping capability. For writes, we want to
                         know whether any other copies of the block are cached because, if there are no
                         other cached copies, then the write does not need to be placed on the bus in a

write-back cache. Not sending the write reduces both the time to write and the
required bandwidth.
     To track whether or not a cache block is shared, we can add an extra state bit
associated with each cache block, just as we have a valid bit and a dirty bit. By
adding a bit indicating whether the block is shared, we can decide whether a write
must generate an invalidate. When a write to a block in the shared state occurs, the
cache generates an invalidation on the bus and marks the block as exclusive. No
further invalidations will be sent by that core for that block. The core with the sole
copy of a cache block is normally called the owner of the cache block.
     When an invalidation is sent, the state of the owner’s cache block is changed
from shared to unshared (or exclusive). If another processor later requests this
cache block, the state must be made shared again. Because our snooping cache also
sees any misses, it knows when the exclusive cache block has been requested by
another processor and the state should be made shared.
     Every bus transaction must check the cache-address tags, which could poten-
tially interfere with processor cache accesses. One way to reduce this interference
is to duplicate the tags and have snoop accesses directed to the duplicate tags.
Another approach is to use a directory at the shared L3 cache; the directory indicates
whether a given block is shared and possibly which cores have copies. With the
directory information, invalidates can be directed only to those caches with copies
of the cache block. This requires that L3 must always have a copy of any data item in
L1 or L2, a property called inclusion, which we will return to in Section 5.7.

An Example Protocol
A snooping coherence protocol is usually implemented by incorporating a finite-
state controller in each core. This controller responds to requests from the proces-
sor in the core and from the bus (or other broadcast medium), changing the state of
the selected cache block, as well as using the bus to access data or to invalidate it.
Logically, you can think of a separate controller as being associated with each
block; that is, snooping operations or cache requests for different blocks can pro-
ceed independently. In actual implementations, a single controller allows multiple
operations to distinct blocks to proceed in interleaved fashion (i.e., one operation
may be initiated before another is completed, even though only one cache access or
one bus access is allowed at a time). Also, remember that, although we refer to a
bus in the following description, any interconnection network that supports a
broadcast to all the coherence controllers and their associated private caches can
be used to implement snooping.
    The simple protocol we consider has three states: invalid, shared, and modified.
The shared state indicates that the block in the private cache is potentially shared,
whereas the modified state indicates that the block has been updated in the private
cache; note that the modified state implies that the block is exclusive. Figure 5.5
shows the requests generated by a core (in the top half of the table) as well as
those coming from the bus (in the bottom half of the table). This protocol is for
a write-back cache but is easily changed to work for a write-through cache by rein-
terpreting the modified state as an exclusive state and updating the cache on writes

                             in the normal fashion for a write-through cache. The most common extension
                             of this basic protocol is the addition of an exclusive state, which describes a block
                             that is unmodified but held in only one private cache. We describe this and other
                             extensions on page 388.

                          State of           Type of
                          addressed          cache
Request       Source      cache block        action          Function and explanation
Read hit      Processor   Shared or          Normal hit      Read data in local cache.
                          modified
Read          Processor   Invalid            Normal miss     Place read miss on bus.
miss
Read          Processor   Shared             Replacement     Address conflict miss: place read miss on bus.
miss
Read          Processor   Modified           Replacement     Address conflict miss: write-back block; then place read
miss                                                         miss on bus.
Write hit     Processor   Modified           Normal hit      Write data in local cache.
Write hit     Processor   Shared             Coherence       Place invalidate on bus. These operations are often called
                                                             upgrade or ownership misses, because they do not fetch the
                                                             data but only change the state.
Write         Processor   Invalid            Normal miss     Place write miss on bus.
miss
Write         Processor   Shared             Replacement     Address conflict miss: place write miss on bus.
miss
Write         Processor   Modified           Replacement     Address conflict miss: write-back block; then place write
miss                                                         miss on bus.
Read          Bus         Shared             No action       Allow shared cache or memory to service read miss.
miss
Read          Bus         Modified           Coherence       Attempt to read shared data: place cache block on bus,
miss                                                         write-back block, and change state to shared.
Invalidate    Bus         Shared             Coherence       Attempt to write shared block; invalidate the block.
Write         Bus         Shared             Coherence       Attempt to write shared block; invalidate the cache block.
miss
Write         Bus         Modified           Coherence       Attempt to write block that is exclusive elsewhere; write-
miss                                                         back the cache block and make its state invalid in the local
                                                             cache.

Figure 5.5 The cache coherence mechanism receives requests from both the core’s processor and the shared bus
and responds to these based on the type of request, whether it hits or misses in the local cache, and the state of
the local cache block specified in the request. The fourth column describes the type of cache action as normal hit or
miss (the same as a uniprocessor cache would see), replacement (a uniprocessor cache replacement miss), or coher-
ence (required to maintain cache coherence); a normal or replacement action may cause a coherence action depend-
ing on the state of the block in other caches. For read, misses, write misses, or invalidates snooped from the bus, an
action is required only if the read or write addresses match a block in the local cache and the block is valid.

                                                               When an invalidate or a write miss is placed on the bus, any cores whose pri-
                                                           vate caches have copies of the cache block invalidate it. For a write miss in a write-
                                                           back cache, if the block is exclusive in just one private cache, that cache also writes
                                                           back the block; otherwise, the data can be read from the shared cache or memory.
                                                               Figure 5.6 shows a finite-state transition diagram for a single private cache
                                                           block using a write invalidation protocol and a write-back cache. For simplicity,
                                                           the three states of the protocol are duplicated to represent transitions based on

                                                                                      CPU read hit
                                                                                                                                                  Write miss for this block

                                                                                                                                                         Invalidate for
                                                                                  Shared                                                                   this block
      Invalid                  CPU read                                         (read only)                                                                                         Shared
                                                                                                                          Invalid
                               Place read miss on bus                                                                                                                             (read only)

                                                                                                     CPU
                                                                                  k
                                                                               oc

                                                                                                     read                                                                                            CPU
                                                                           bl

                                                                             e

                CPU write                                                                                                                                                                            read
                                                                         rit

                                                                                                     miss
                                                                        ck

                                                                        w

                                                                                                                                                                     tr
                                                                     ba

                                                                                                                                                                                                     miss
                                                                     U

                                                                                                                              Write-back block;

                                                                                                                                                                ss bo
        miss on bus

                                                                   P
        Place write

                                                                  e-

                                                                                         Place read

                                                                                                                               abort memory
                                                               us

                                                                                                                                                              ce ; a
                                                                C
                                                              rit

                                                              s
                                                              b

                                                                                                                                                            ac k
                                                                                         miss on bus
                                                            W

                                                           bu
                                                            s

                                                                                                                                                           y oc
                                                            s
                                                          on

                                                         bu

                                                                                                                                   access
                                                is is

                                                                                                                                                         or bl
                                              m m
                                                      on
                                                        s

                                           lid iss

                                                      n
                                                     is

                                                                                                                                                     em ck
                                                   te
                                                   o
                                                  m

                                                   s
                                                 m

                                        rit wri
                                                 e

                                                                                                                                                   m -ba
                           ad

                                              at
                                              d

                                             U
                                       a

                                                                                                                                                       e
                          re

                                            e
                                    re

                                  ac CP

                                                                                                                                                   rit
                                       va
                      PU

                                                                                                                                                  W
                                e

                                      w
                                     in
                               ac

                                                                                                             Write miss
                      C

                                    e
                           Pl

                                     e
                                 ac

                                                                                                             for this block
                               Pl
                               Pl

                                                                                                                                                  Read miss
                                                                                                                                                  for this block          Cache state transitions based
                                               Cache state transitions
      Exclusive                                based on requests from CPU                                                Exclusive                                        on requests from the bus
     (read/write)                                                                                                       (read/write)

                                            CPU write miss

                                            Write-back cache block
                                            Place write miss on bus
 CPU write hit
 CPU read hit

Figure 5.6 A write invalidate, cache coherence protocol for a private write-back cache showing the states and
state transitions for each block in the cache. The cache states are shown in circles, with any access permitted by the
local processor without a state transition shown in parentheses under the name of the state. The stimulus causing a
state change is shown on the transition arcs in regular type, and any bus actions generated as part of the state tran-
sition are shown on the transition arc in bold. The stimulus actions apply to a block in the private cache, not to a
specific address in the cache. Thus a read miss to a block in the shared state is a miss for that cache block but
for a different address. The left side of the diagram shows state transitions based on actions of the processor asso-
ciated with this cache; the right side shows transitions based on operations on the bus. A read miss in the exclusive or
shared state and a write miss in the exclusive state occur when the address requested by the processor does not
match the address in the local cache block. Such a miss is a standard cache replacement miss. An attempt to write
a block in the shared state generates an invalidate. Whenever a bus transaction occurs, all private caches that contain
the cache block specified in the bus transaction take the action dictated by the right half of the diagram. The protocol
assumes that memory (or a shared cache) provides data on a read miss for a block that is clean in all local caches. In
actual implementations, these two sets of state diagrams are combined. In practice, there are many subtle variations
on invalidate protocols, including the introduction of the exclusive unmodified state, as to whether a processor or
memory provides data on a miss. In a multicore chip, the shared cache (usually L3, but sometimes L2) acts as the
equivalent of memory, and the bus is the bus between the private caches of each core and the shared cache, which
in turn interfaces to the memory.

                         processor requests (on the left, which corresponds to the top half of the table in
                         Figure 5.5), as opposed to transitions based on bus requests (on the right, which
                         corresponds to the bottom half of the table in Figure 5.5). Boldface type is used
                         to distinguish the bus actions, as opposed to the conditions on which a state tran-
                         sition depends. The state in each node represents the state of the selected private
                         cache block specified by the processor or bus request.
                              All of the states in this cache protocol would be needed in a uniprocessor cache,
                         where they would correspond to the invalid, valid (and clean), and dirty states.
                         Most of the state changes indicated by arcs in the left half of Figure 5.6 would
                         be needed in a write-back uniprocessor cache, with the exception being the inval-
                         idate on a write hit to a shared block. The state changes represented by the arcs in
                         the right half of Figure 5.6 are needed only for coherence and would not appear at
                         all in a uniprocessor cache controller.
                              As mentioned earlier, there is only one finite-state machine per cache, with
                         stimuli coming either from the attached processor or from the bus. Figure 5.7
                         shows how the state transitions in the right half of Figure 5.6 are combined
                         with those in the left half of the figure to form a single state diagram for each
                         cache block.
                              To understand why this protocol works, observe that any valid cache block is
                         either in the shared state in one or more private caches or in the exclusive state in
                         exactly one cache. Any transition to the exclusive state (which is required for a
                         processor to write to the block) requires an invalidate or write miss to be placed
                         on the bus, causing all local caches to make the block invalid. In addition, if some
                         other local cache had the block in exclusive state, that local cache generates a write-
                         back, which supplies the block containing the desired address. Finally, if a read
                         miss occurs on the bus to a block in the exclusive state, the local cache with the
                         exclusive copy changes its state to shared.
                              The actions in gray in Figure 5.7, which handle read and write misses on the
                         bus, are essentially the snooping component of the protocol. One other property
                         that is preserved in this protocol, and in most other protocols, is that any memory
                         block in the shared state is always up to date in the outer shared cache (L2 or L3, or
                         memory if there is no shared cache), which simplifies the implementation. In fact, it
                         does not matter whether the level out from the private caches is a shared cache or
                         memory; the key is that all accesses from the cores go through that level.
                              Although our simple cache protocol is correct, it omits a number of complica-
                         tions that make the implementation much trickier. The most important of these is
                         that the protocol assumes that operations are atomic—that is, an operation can be
                         done in such a way that no intervening operation can occur. For example, the
                         protocol described assumes that write misses can be detected, acquire the
                         bus, and receive a response as a single atomic action. In reality this is not true.
                         In fact, even a read miss might not be atomic; after detecting a miss in the L2
                         of a multicore, the core must arbitrate for access to the bus connecting to the shared
                         L3. Nonatomic actions introduce the possibility that the protocol can deadlock,
                         meaning that it reaches a state where it cannot continue. We will explore these
                         complications later in this section and when we examine DSM designs.

                                                                                                                                             CPU
                                                                                                                                             read
                                                                                      Write miss for this block                              hit

                                                                                          Invalidate for this block
                                                                                                                                            Shared
                                   Invalid                                           CPU read                                             (read only)
                                                                                     Place read miss on bus

                                                                                                                      s
                                                                                                                   bu

                                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                          oc
                                                                                                                on
                                                                                                                                                        CPU

                                                                                                                        bl

                                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                             s

                                                                                                                                  rit
                                                                                                           is

                                                                                                                     ck
                                                               CPU write                                                                                read

                                                                                                                               w
                                     Place write miss on bus

                                                                                                         m

                                                                                                                    a

                                                                                                                          PU
                                                                                                                 -b
                                                                                                      d
                                                                                                                                                        miss

                                                                                                     a

                                                                                                               e

                                                                                                                          C
                                                                                                  re

                                                                                                            rit
                Write-back block

                                                                                                           W
                                                                                               e
                                                                                             ac
                                                                                                                                                 Place read

                                                                                                       k
                                                                                          pl

                                                                                                      oc
                                                                                  s                                                              miss on bus

                                                                                         ;

                                                                                                                             s
                                                                                                                        on s
                                                                                is

                                                                                                  bl
                                                                                      ta

                                                                                                                s

                                                                                                                          bu
                                                                                                                    is mis
                                                                                                             bu
                                                                                 da
                                                                             m

                                                                                                  r
                                                                                               fo
                                                                        ad

                                                                                                         on

                                                                                                                 e rite
                                                                             ck

                                                                                             s
                                                                      re

                                                                                          is

                                                                                                                      s
                                                                                                      e
                                                                           ba

                                                                                                                   w
                                                                                       m

                                                                                                   at

                                                                                                                  m
                                                                 PU

                                                                                                             PU
                                                                      e-

                                                                                                  id
                                                                                   a  d
                                                                  rit

                                                                                                  l
                                                                C

                                                                                               va

                                                                                                                  rit
                                                                                Re

                                                                                                           C
                                                                 W

                                                                                                                 w
                                                                                             in

                                                                                                              e
                                                                                          e

                                                                                                           ac
                                                                                      ac

                                                                                                         Pl
                                                                                     Pl
    Write miss
    for block

                                    Exclusive
                                   (read/write)
                                                                                                 CPU write miss
CPU write hit
CPU read hit
                                                                                                 Write-back data
                                                                                                 Place write miss on bus

Figure 5.7 Cache coherence state diagram with the state transitions induced by the
local processor shown in black and by the bus activities shown in gray. As in
Figure 5.6, the activities on a transition are shown in bold.

    With multicore processors, the coherence among the processor cores is all
implemented on chip, using either a snooping or simple central directory protocol.
Many multiprocessor chips, including the Intel Xeon and AMD Opteron, support
multichip multiprocessors that could be built by connecting a high-speed interface
already incorporated in the chip. These next-level interconnects are not just exten-
sions of the shared bus, but use a different approach for interconnecting multicores.
    A multiprocessor built with multiple multicore chips will usually have a
distributed memory architecture and will need an interchip coherency mechanism
above and beyond the one within the chip. In most cases, some form of directory
scheme is used.

                         Extensions to the Basic Coherence Protocol
                         The coherence protocol we have just described is a simple three-state protocol and
                         is often referred to by the first letter of the states, making it a MSI (Modified,
                         Shared, Invalid) protocol. There are many extensions of this basic protocol, which
                         we mention in the captions of figures in this section. These extensions are created
                         by adding additional states and transactions that optimize certain behaviors, pos-
                         sibly resulting in improved performance. Two of the most common extensions are

                         1. MESI adds the state Exclusive to the basic MSI protocol, yielding four states
                            (Modified, Exclusive, Shared, and Invalid). The exclusive state indicates that
                            a cache block is resident in only a single cache but is clean. If a block is in
                            the E state, it can be written without generating any invalidates, which optimizes
                            the case where a block is read by a single cache before being written by that
                            same cache. Of course, when a read miss to a block in the E state occurs,
                            the block must be changed to the S state to maintain coherence. Because all
                            subsequent accesses are snooped, it is possible to maintain the accuracy of this
                            state. In particular, if another processor issues a read miss, the state is changed
                            from exclusive to shared. The advantage of adding this state is that a subsequent
                            write to a block in the exclusive state by the same core need not acquire bus
                            access or generate an invalidate, since the block is known to be exclusively
                            in this local cache; the processor merely changes the state to modified. This state
                            is easily added by using the bit that encodes the coherent state as an exclusive
                            state and using the dirty bit to indicate that a bock is modified. The Intel i7 uses
                            a variant of a MESI protocol, called MESIF, which adds a state (Forward) to
                            designate which sharing processor should respond to a request. It is designed
                            to enhance performance in distributed memory organizations.
                         2. MOESI adds the state Owned to the MESI protocol to indicate that the associ-
                            ated block is owned by that cache and out-of-date in memory. In MSI and MESI
                            protocols, when there is an attempt to share a block in the Modified state, the
                            state is changed to Shared (in both the original and newly sharing cache), and
                            the block must be written back to memory. In a MOESI protocol, the block can
                            be changed from the Modified to Owned state in the original cache without
                            writing it to memory. Other caches, which are newly sharing the block, keep
                            the block in the Shared state; the O state, which only the original cache holds,
                            indicates that the main memory copy is out of date and that the designated cache
                            is the owner. The owner of the block must supply it on a miss, since memory
                            is not up to date and must write the block back to memory if it is replaced.
                            The AMD Opteron processor family uses the MOESI protocol.

                             The next section examines the performance of these protocols for our parallel
                         and multiprogrammed workloads; the value of these extensions to a basic protocol
                         will be clear when we examine the performance. But, before we do that, let’s take
                         a brief look at the limitations on the use of a symmetric memory structure and a
                         snooping coherence scheme.

          Limitations in Symmetric Shared-Memory Multiprocessors and
          Snooping Protocols
          As the number of processors in a multiprocessor grows, or as the memory demands
          of each processor grow, any centralized resource in the system can become a
          bottleneck. For multicores, a single shared bus became a bottleneck with only a
          few cores. As a result, multicore designs have gone to higher bandwidth intercon-
          nection schemes, as well as multiple, independent memories to allow larger num-
          bers of cores. The multicore chips we examine in Section 5.8 use three different
          approaches:

          1. The IBM Power8, which has up to 12 processors in a single multicore, uses
             8 parallel buses that connect the distributed L3 caches and up to 8 separate
             memory channels.
          2. The Xeon E7 uses three rings to connect up to 32 processors, a distributed
             L3 cache, and two or four memory channels (depending on the configu-
             ration).
          3. The Fujitsu SPARC64 X + uses a crossbar to connect a shared L2 to up to 16
             cores and multiple memory channels.

          The SPARC64 X + is a symmetric organization with uniform access time. The
          Power8 has nonuniform access time for both L3 and memory. Although the
          uncontended access time differences among memory addresses within a single
          Power8 multicore are not large, with contention for memory, the access time
          differences can become significant even within one chip. The Xeon E7 can
          operate as if access times were uniform; in practice, software systems usually
          organize memory so that the memory channels are associated with a subset of
          the cores.
              Snooping bandwidth at the caches can also become a problem because every
          cache must examine every miss, and having additional interconnection bandwidth
          only pushes the problem to the cache. To understand this problem, consider the
          following example.

Example   Consider an 8-processor multicore where each processor has its own L1 and L2
          caches, and snooping is performed on a shared bus among the L2 caches. Assume
          the average L2 request, whether for a coherence miss or other miss, is 15 cycles.
          Assume a clock rate of 3.0 GHz, a CPI of 0.7, and a load/store frequency of 40%.
          If our goal is that no more than 50% of the L2 bandwidth is consumed by coherence
          traffic, what is the maximum coherence miss rate per processor?

 Answer   Start with an equation for the number of cache cycles that can be used (where CMR
          is the coherence miss rate):

                                                                  Clock rate          3:0Ghz
                                  Cache cycles available ¼                          ¼        ¼ 0:1 ? 109
                                                             Cycles per request ? 2     30

                                  Cache cycles available ¼ Memory references=clock=processor ? Clock rate

                                                               processor count ? CMR

                                                             0:4
                                                        ¼        ? 3:0GHz ? 8 ? CMR ¼ 13:7 ? 109 ? CMR
                                                             0:7
                                                              0:1
                                                  CMR ¼           ¼ 0:0073 ¼ 0:73%
                                                             13:7

                         This means that the coherence miss rate must be 0.73% or less. In the next section,
                         we will see several applications with coherence miss rates in excess of 1%. Alter-
                         natively, if we assume that CMR can be 1%, then we could support just under 6
                         processors. Clearly, even small multicores will require a method for scaling snoop
                         bandwidth.

                         There are several techniques for increasing the snoop bandwidth:

                         1. As mentioned earlier, the tags can be duplicated. This doubles the effective
                            cache-level snoop bandwidth. If we assume that half the coherence requests
                            do not hit on a snoop request and the cost of the snoop request is only 10 cycles
                            (versus 15), then we can cut the average cost of a CMR to 12.5 cycles. This
                            reduction allows the coherence miss rate to be 0.88, or alternatively to support
                            one additional processor (7 versus 6).
                         2. If the outermost cache on a multicore (typically L3) is shared, we can distribute
                            that cache so that each processor has a portion of the memory and handles
                            snoops for that portion of the address space. This approach, used by the
                            IBM 12-core Power8, leads to a NUCA design, but effectively scales the snoop
                            bandwidth at L3 by the number of processors. If there is a snoop hit in L3, then
                            we must still broadcast to all L2 caches, which must in turn snoop their contents.
                            Since L3 is acting as a filter on the snoop requests, L3 must be inclusive.
                         3. We can place a directory at the level of the outermost shared cache (say, L3).
                            L3 acts as a filter on snoop requests and must be inclusive. The use of a directory
                            at L3 means that we need not snoop or broadcast to all the L2 caches, but
                            only those that the directory indicates may have a copy of the block. Just as L3
                            may be distributed, the associated directory entries may also be distributed. This
                            approach is used in the Intel Xeon E7 series, which supports from 8 to 32 cores.

                         Figure 5.8 shows how a multicore with a distributed cache system, such as that
                         used in schemes 2 or 3, might look. If additional multicore chips were added to
                         form a larger multiprocessor, an off-chip network would needed, as well as a
                         method to extend the coherence mechanisms (as we will see in Section 5.8).

          Processor           Processor        Processor           Processor

           One or             One or            One or               One or
         more levels        more levels       more levels          more levels
          of private         of private        of private           of private
            cache              cache             cache                cache

           Bank 0              Bank 1            Bank 2                Bank 3
           shared              shared            shared                shared
           cache               cache             cache                 cache

                                  Interconnection network

                                 Memory                   I/O system

Figure 5.8 A single-chip multicore with a distributed cache. In current designs, the
distributed shared cache is usually L3, and levels L1 and L2 are private. There are typ-
ically multiple memory channels (2–8 in today’s designs). This design is NUCA, since the
access time to L3 portions varies with faster access time for the directly attached core.
Because it is NUCA, it is also NUMA.

     The AMD Opteron represents another intermediate point in the spectrum
between a snooping and a directory protocol. Memory is directly connected to each
multicore chip, and up to four multicore chips can be connected. The system is a
NUMA because local memory is somewhat faster. The Opteron implements its
coherence protocol using the point-to-point links to broadcast up to three other
chips. Because the interprocessor links are not shared, the only way a processor
can know when an invalid operation has completed is by an explicit acknowledg-
ment. Thus the coherence protocol uses a broadcast to find potentially shared cop-
ies, like a snooping protocol, but uses the acknowledgments to order operations,
like a directory protocol. Because local memory is only somewhat faster than
remote memory in the Opteron implementation, some software treats the Opteron
multiprocessor as having uniform memory access.
     In Section 5.4, we examine directory-based protocols, which eliminate the
need for broadcast to all caches on a miss. Some multicore designs use directories

                         within the multicore (Intel Xeon E7), while others add directories when scaling
                         beyond a multicore. Distributed directories eliminate the need for a single point
                         to serialize all accesses (typically a single shared bus in a snooping scheme),
                         and any scheme that removes the single point of serialization must deal with many
                         of the same challenges as a distributed directory scheme.

                         Implementing Snooping Cache Coherence
                         The devil is in the details.
                                                                                       Classic proverb

                         When we wrote the first edition of this book in 1990, our final “Putting It All
                         Together” was a 30-processor, single-bus multiprocessor using snoop-based cohe-
                         rence; the bus had a capacity of just over 50 MiB/s, which would not be enough bus
                         bandwidth to support even one core of an Intel i7 in 2017! When we wrote the
                         second edition of this book in 1995, the first cache coherence multiprocessors with
                         more than a single bus had recently appeared, and we added an appendix descri-
                         bing the implementation of snooping in a system with multiple buses. In 2017,
                         every multicore multiprocessor system that supports 8 or more cores uses an inter-
                         connect other than a single bus, and designers must face the challenge of imple-
                         menting snooping (or a directory scheme) without the simplification of a bus to
                         serialize events.
                             As we observed on page 386, the major complication in actually implement-
                         ing the snooping coherence protocol we have described is that write and
                         upgrade misses are not atomic in any recent multiprocessor. The steps of detect-
                         ing a write or upgrade miss, communicating with the other processors and
                         memory, getting the most recent value for a write miss and ensuring that any
                         invalidates are processed, and updating the cache cannot be done as though they
                         took a single cycle.
                             In a multicore with a single bus, these steps can be made effectively atomic by
                         arbitrating for the bus to the shared cache or memory first (before changing the
                         cache state) and not releasing the bus until all actions are complete. How can
                         the processor know when all the invalidates are complete? In early designs, a single
                         line was used to signal when all necessary invalidates had been received and were
                         being processed. Following that signal, the processor that generated the miss could
                         release the bus, knowing that any required actions would be completed before any
                         activity related to the next miss. By holding the bus exclusively during these steps,
                         the processor effectively made the individual steps atomic.
                             In a system without a single, central bus, we must find some other method of
                         making the steps in a miss atomic. In particular, we must ensure that two processors
                         that attempt to write the same block at the same time, a situation which is called a
                         race, are strictly ordered: one write is processed and precedes before the next is
                         begun. It does not matter which of two writes in a race wins the race, just that there
                         be only a single winner whose coherence actions are completed first. In a multicore

      using multiple buses, races can be eliminated if each block of memory is associated
      with only a single bus, ensuring that two attempts to access the same block must be
      serialized by that common bus. This property, together with the ability to restart the
      miss handling of the loser in a race, are the keys to implementing snooping cache
      coherence without a bus. We explain the details in Appendix I.
          It is possible to combine snooping and directories, and several designs use
      snooping within a multicore and directories among multiple chips or a combination
      of directories at one cache level and snooping at another level.

5.3   Performance of Symmetric Shared-Memory
      Multiprocessors
      In a multicore using a snooping coherence protocol, several different phenomena
      combine to determine performance. In particular, the overall cache performance is
      a combination of the behavior of uniprocessor cache miss traffic and the traffic
      caused by communication, which results in invalidations and subsequent cache
      misses. Changing t he processor count, cache size, and block size can affect these
      two components of the miss rate in different ways, leading to overall system behav-
      ior that is a combination of the two effects.
           Appendix B breaks the uniprocessor miss rate into the three C’s classification
      (capacity, compulsory, and conflict) and provides insight into both application
      behavior and potential improvements to the cache design. Similarly, the misses that
      arise from interprocessor communication, which are often called coherence misses,
      can be broken into two separate sources.
           The first source is the true sharing misses that arise from the communication of
      data through the cache coherence mechanism. In an invalidation-based protocol,
      the first write by a processor to a shared cache block causes an invalidation to
      establish ownership of that block. Additionally, when another processor attempts
      to read a modified word in that cache block, a miss occurs and the resultant block is
      transferred. Both these misses are classified as true sharing misses because they
      directly arise from the sharing of data among processors.
           The second effect, called false sharing, arises from the use of an invalidation-
      based coherence algorithm with a single valid bit per cache block. False sharing
      occurs when a block is invalidated (and a subsequent reference causes a miss)
      because some word in the block, other than the one being read, is written into.
      If the word written into is actually used by the processor that received the inval-
      idate, then the reference was a true sharing reference and would have caused a miss
      independent of the block size. If, however, the word being written and the word
      read are different and the invalidation does not cause a new value to be commu-
      nicated, but only causes an extra cache miss, then it is a false sharing miss. In a false
      sharing miss, the block is shared, but no word in the cache is actually shared, and
      the miss would not occur if the block size were a single word. The following exam-
      ple makes the sharing patterns clear.

             Example     Assume that words z1 and z2 are in the same cache block, which is in the shared
                         state in the caches of both P1 and P2. Assuming the following sequence of events,
                         identify each miss as a true sharing miss, a false sharing miss, or a hit. Any miss
                         that would occur if the block size were one word is designated a true sharing miss.

                                      Time                     P1                          P2
                                      1                        Write z1
                                      2                                                    Read z2
                                      3                        Write z1
                                      4                                                    Write z2
                                      5                        Read z2

               Answer    Here are the classifications by time step:

                         1. This event is a true sharing miss, since z1 is in the shared state in P2 and needs to
                            be invalidated from P2.
                         2. This event is a false sharing miss, since z2 was invalidated by the write of z1 in
                            P1, but that value of z1 is not used in P2.
                         3. This event is a false sharing miss, since the block containing z1 is marked
                            shared due to the read in P2, but P2 did not read z1. The cache block containing
                            z1 will be in the shared state after the read by P2; a write miss is required to
                            obtain exclusive access to the block. In some protocols, this will be handled
                            as an upgrade request, which generates a bus invalidate, but does not transfer
                            the cache block.
                         4. This event is a false sharing miss for the same reason as step 3.
                         5. This event is a true sharing miss, since the value being read was written by P2.

                         Although we will see the effects of true and false sharing misses in commercial
                         workloads, the role of coherence misses is more significant for tightly coupled
                         applications that share significant amounts of user data. We examine their effects
                         in detail in Appendix I when we consider the performance of a parallel scientific
                         workload.

                         A Commercial Workload
                         In this section, we examine the memory system behavior of a 4-processor shared-
                         memory multiprocessor when running an online transaction processing workload.
                         The study we examine was done with a 4-processor Alpha system in 1998, but it
                         remains the most comprehensive and insightful study of the performance of a mul-
                         tiprocessor for such workloads. We will focus on understanding the multiprocessor
                         cache activity, and particularly the behavior in L3, where much of the traffic is
                         coherence-related.

Cache level          Characteristic                  Alpha 21164                                   Intel i7
L1                   Size                           8 KB I/8 KB D                             32 KB I/32 KB D
                     Associativity                   Direct-mapped                            8-way I/8-way D
                     Block size                           32 B                                      64 B
                     Miss penalty                           7                                         10
L2                   Size                                96 KB                                     256 KB
                     Associativity                       3-way                                      8-way
                     Block size                           32 B                                      64 B
                     Miss penalty                          21                                         35
L3                   Size                     2 MiB (total 8 MiB unshared)          2 MiB per core (8 MiB total shared)
                     Associativity                   Direct-mapped                                 16-way
                     Block size                           64 B                                      64 B
                     Miss penalty                          80                                       ?100

Figure 5.9 The characteristics of the cache hierarchy of the Alpha 21164 used in this study and the Intel i7.
Although the sizes are larger and the associativity is higher on the i7, the miss penalties are also higher, so the behav-
ior may differ only slightly. Both systems have a high penalty (125 cycles or more) for a transfer required from a private
cache. A key difference is that L3 is shared in the i7 versus four separate, unshared caches in the Alpha server.

                                  The results were collected either on an AlphaServer 4100 or using a configur-
                              able simulator modeled after the AlphaServer 4100. Each processor in the Alpha-
                              Server 4100 is an Alpha 21164, which issues up to four instructions per clock and
                              runs at 300 MHz. Although the clock rate of the Alpha processor in this system is
                              considerably slower than processors in systems designed in 2017, the basic struc-
                              ture of the system, consisting of a four-issue processor and a three-level cache hier-
                              archy, is very similar to the multicore Intel i7 and other processors, as shown in
Figure 5.9. Rather than focus on the performance details, we consider data that
                              looks at the simulated L3 behavior for L3 caches varying from 2 to 8 MiB per
                              processor.
                                  Although the original study considered three different workloads, we focus our
                              attention on the online transaction-processing (OLTP) workload modeled after
                              TPC-B (which has memory behavior similar to its newer cousin TPC-C, described
                              in Chapter 1) and using Oracle 7.3.2 as the underlying database. The workload con-
                              sists of a set of client processes that generate requests and a set of servers that han-
                              dle them. The server processes consume 85% of the user time, with the remaining
                              going to the clients. Although the I/O latency is hidden by careful tuning and
                              enough requests to keep the processor busy, the server processes typically block
                              for I/O after about 25,000 instructions. Overall, 71% of the execution time is spent
                              in user mode, 18% in the operating system, and 11% idle, primarily waiting for I/O.
                              Of the commercial applications studied, the OLTP application stresses the memory
                              system the hardest and shows significant challenges even when evaluated with
                              much larger L3 caches. For example, on the AlphaServer, the processors are stalled

                                                                   100
                                                                    90                              Idle
                                                                                                    PAL code
                                                                    80                              Memory access

                                       Normalized execution time
                                                                                                    L2/L3 cache access
                                                                    70                              Instruction execution

                                                                    60
                                                                    50
                                                                   40
                                                                   30
                                                                   20
                                                                   10
                                                                    0
                                                                         1        2       4     8
                                                                             L3 cache size (MB)

Figure 5.10 The relative performance of the OLTP workload as the size of the L3
                         cache, which is set as two-way set associative, grows from 1 to 8 MiB. The idle time
                         also grows as cache size is increased, reducing some of the performance gains. This
                         growth occurs because, with fewer memory system stalls, more server processes are
                         needed to cover the I/O latency. The workload could be retuned to increase the com-
                         putation/communication balance, holding the idle time in check. The PAL code is a set
                         of sequences of specialized OS-level instructions executed in privileged mode; an exam-
                         ple is the TLB miss handler.

                         for approximately 90% of the cycles with memory accesses occupying almost half
                         the stall time and L2 misses 25% of the stall time.
                              We start by examining the effect of varying the size of the L3 cache. In these
                         studies, the L3 cache is varied from 1 to 8 MiB per processor; at 2 MiB per pro-
                         cessor, the total size of L3 is equal to that of the Intel i7 6700. In the case of the i7,
                         however, the cache is shared, which provides both some advantages and disadvan-
                         tages. It is unlikely that the shared 8 MiB cache will outperform separate L3 caches
                         with a total size of 16 MiB. Figure 5.10 shows the effect of increasing the cache
                         size, using two-way set associative caches, which reduces the large number of con-
                         flict misses. The execution time is improved as the L3 cache grows because of the
                         reduction in L3 misses. Surprisingly, almost all of the gain occurs in going from 1
                         to 2 MiB (or 4 to 8 MiB of total cache for the four processors). There is little addi-
                         tional gain beyond that, despite the fact that cache misses are still a cause of sig-
                         nificant performance loss with 2 MiB and 4 MiB caches. The question is, Why?
                              To better understand the answer to this question, we need to determine what
                         factors contribute to the L3 miss rate and how they change as the L3 cache grows.
                         Figure 5.11 shows these data, displaying the number of memory access cycles con-
                         tributed per instruction from five sources. The two largest sources of L3 memory
                         access cycles with a 1 MiB L3 are instruction and capacity/conflict misses. With a
                         larger L3, these two sources shrink to be minor contributors. Unfortunately, the

                                                 3.25
                                                   3
                                                 2.75                  Instruction
                                                                       Capacity/conflict
                                                  2.5

                 Memory cycles per instruction
                                                                       Compulsory
                                                 2.25                  False sharing
                                                                       True sharing
                                                   2
                                                 1.75
                                                  1.5
                                                 1.25
                                                   1
                                                 0.75
                                                  0.5
                                                 0.25
                                                   0
                                                        1    2          4         8
                                                            Cache size (MB)

Figure 5.11 The contributing causes of memory access cycle shift as the cache size is
increased. The L3 cache is simulated as two-way set associative.

compulsory, false sharing, and true sharing misses are unaffected by a larger L3.
Thus, at 4 and 8 MiB, the true sharing misses generate the dominant fraction of the
misses; the lack of change in true sharing misses leads to the limited reductions in
the overall miss rate when increasing the L3 cache size beyond 2 MiB.
     Increasing the cache size eliminates most of the uniprocessor misses while
leaving the multiprocessor misses untouched. How does increasing the processor
count affect different types of misses? Figure 5.12 shows these data assuming a
base configuration with a 2 MiB, two-way set associative L3 cache (the same
effective per processor cache size as the i7 but with less associativity). As we might
expect, the increase in the true sharing miss rate, which is not compensated for by
any decrease in the uniprocessor misses, leads to an overall increase in the memory
access cycles per instruction.
     The final question we examine is whether increasing the block size—which
should decrease the instruction and cold miss rate and, within limits, also reduce
the capacity/conflict miss rate and possibly the true sharing miss rate—is helpful
for this workload. Figure 5.13 shows the number of misses per 1000 instructions as
the block size is increased from 32 to 256 bytes. Increasing the block size from 32
to 256 bytes affects four of the miss rate components:

■   The true sharing miss rate decreases by more than a factor of 2, indicating some
    locality in the true sharing patterns.

                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                 Instruction
                                                                                                                 Capacity/conflict
                                                                                                                 Compulsory
                                                                                                      2.5        False sharing
                                                                                                                 True sharing

                                                                      Memory cycles per instruction
                                                                                                       2

                                                                                                      1.5

                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                      0.5

                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                  1        2     4       6        8
                                                                                                                           Processor count

Figure 5.12 The contribution to memory access cycles increases as processor count
                         increases primarily because of increased true sharing. The compulsory misses slightly
                         increase because each processor must now handle more compulsory misses.

                                                                     16
                                                                     15                                                                          Instruction
                                                                     14                                                                          Capacity/conflict
                                                                                                                                                 Compulsory
                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                 False sharing
                                                                     12                                                                          True sharing
                                      Misses per 1000 instructions

                                                                     11
                                                                     10
                                                                      9
                                                                      8
                                                                      7
                                                                      6
                                                                      5
                                                                      4
                                                                      3
                                                                      2
                                                                      1
                                                                      0
                                                                                                            32         64        128       256
                                                                                                                        Block size (bytes)

Figure 5.13 The number of misses per 1000 instructions drops steadily as the block
                         size of the L3 cache is increased, making a good case for an L3 block size of at least
                         128 bytes. The L3 cache is 2 MiB, two-way set associative.

■   The compulsory miss rate significantly decreases, as we would expect.
■   The conflict/capacity misses show a small decrease (a factor of 1.26 compared
    to a factor of 8 increase in block size), indicating that the spatial locality is not
    high in the uniprocessor misses that occur with L3 caches larger than 2 MiB.
■   The false sharing miss rate, although small in absolute terms, nearly doubles.

     The lack of a significant effect on the instruction miss rate is startling. If there
were an instruction-only cache with this behavior, we would conclude that the spa-
tial locality is very poor. In the case of mixed L2 and L3 caches, other effects such
as instruction-data conflicts may also contribute to the high instruction cache miss
rate for larger blocks. Other studies have documented the low spatial locality in the
instruction stream of large database and OLTP workloads, which have lots of short
basic blocks and special-purpose code sequences. Based on these data, the miss
penalty for a larger block size L3 to perform as well as the 32-byte block size
L3 can be expressed as a multiplier on the 32-byte block size penalty.

                                      Miss penalty relative to 32-byte
             Block size                     block miss penalty
             64 bytes                                1.19
             128 bytes                               1.36
             256 bytes                               1.52

    With modern DDR SDRAMs that make block access fast, these numbers are
attainable, especially at the 64 byte (the i7 block size) and the 128 byte block size.
Of course, we must also worry about the effects of the increased traffic to memory
and possible contention for the memory with other cores. This latter effect may
easily negate the gains obtained from improving the performance of a single
processor.

A Multiprogramming and OS Workload
Our next study is a multiprogrammed workload consisting of both user activity and
OS activity. The workload used is two independent copies of the compile phases of
the Andrew benchmark, a benchmark that emulates a software development envi-
ronment. The compile phase consists of a parallel version of the UNIX “make”
command executed using eight processors. The workload runs for 5.24 seconds
on eight processors, creating 203 processes and performing 787 disk requests
on three different file systems. The workload is run with 128 MiB of memory,
and no paging activity takes place.
    The workload has three distinct phases: compiling the benchmarks, which
involves substantial compute activity; installing the object files in a library; and
removing the object files. The last phase is completely dominated by I/O, and only
two processes are active (one for each of the runs). In the middle phase, I/O also

                         plays a major role, and the processor is largely idle. The overall workload is much
                         more system- and I/O-intensive than the OLTP workload.
                             For the workload measurements, we assume the following memory and I/O
                         systems:

                         ■   Level 1 instruction cache—32 KB, two-way set associative with a 64-byte
                             block, 1 clock cycle hit time.
                         ■   Level 1 data cache—32 KB, two-way set associative with a 32-byte block, 1
                             clock cycle hit time. Our focus is on examining the behavior in the Level 1 data
                             cache, in contrast to the OLTP study, which focused on the L3 cache.
                         ■   Level 2 cache—1 MiB unified, two-way set associative with a 128-byte block,
                             10 clock cycle hit time.
                         ■   Main memory—Single memory on a bus with an access time of 100 clock
                             cycles.
                         ■   Disk system—Fixed-access latency of 3 ms (less than normal to reduce
                             idle time).

                             Figure 5.14 shows how the execution time breaks down for the eight processors
                         using the parameters just listed. Execution time is broken down into four
                         components:

                         1. Idle—Execution in the kernel mode idle loop
                         2. User—Execution in user code
                         3. Synchronization—Execution or waiting for synchronization variables
                         4. Kernel—Execution in the OS that is neither idle nor in synchronization access

                            This multiprogramming workload has a significant instruction cache perfor-
                         mance loss, at least for the OS. The instruction cache miss rate in the OS for a
                         64-byte block size, two-way set associative cache varies from 1.7% for a 32 KB

                                           User         Kernel       Synchronization       Processor idle
                                         execution     execution          wait            (waiting for I/O)
                         Instructions       27%           3%               1%                   69%
                         executed
                         Execution          27%           7%               2%                   64%
                         time

Figure 5.14 The distribution of execution time in the multiprogrammed parallel
                         “make” workload. The high fraction of idle time is due to disk latency when only
                         one of the eight processors is active. These data and the subsequent measurements
                         for this workload were collected with the SimOS system (Rosenblum et al., 1995).
                         The actual runs and data collection were done by M. Rosenblum, S. Herrod, and
                         E. Bugnion of Stanford University.

cache to 0.2% for a 256 KB cache. User-level instruction cache misses are roughly
one-sixth of the OS rate, across the variety of cache sizes. This partially accounts
for the fact that, although the user code executes nine times as many instructions as
the kernel, those instructions take only about four times as long as the smaller num-
ber of instructions executed by the kernel.

Performance of the Multiprogramming and OS Workload
In this section, we examine the cache performance of the multiprogrammed work-
load as the cache size and block size are changed. Because of differences between
the behavior of the kernel and that of the user processes, we keep these two com-
ponents separate. Remember, though, that the user processes execute more than
eight times as many instructions, so the overall miss rate is determined primarily
by the miss rate in user code, which as we will see, is often one-fifth of the kernel
miss rate.
    Although the user code executes more instructions, the behavior of the oper-
ating system can cause more cache misses than the user processes for two reasons
beyond larger code size and lack of locality. First, the kernel initializes all pages
before allocating them to a user, which significantly increases the compulsory
component of the kernel’s miss rate. Second, the kernel actually shares data and
thus has a nontrivial coherence miss rate. In contrast, user processes cause coher-
ence misses only when the process is scheduled on a different processor, and this
component of the miss rate is small. This is a major difference between a multi-
programmed workload and one like the OLTP workload.
    Figure 5.15 shows the data miss rate versus data cache size and versus block
size for the kernel and user components. Increasing the data cache size affects the
user miss rate more than it affects the kernel miss rate. Increasing the block size has
beneficial effects for both miss rates because a larger fraction of the misses arise
from compulsory and capacity, both of which can be potentially improved with
larger block sizes. Because coherence misses are relatively rarer, the negative
effects of increasing block size are small. To understand why the kernel and user
processes behave differently, we can look at how the kernel misses behave.
    Figure 5.16 shows the variation in the kernel misses versus increases in cache
size and in block size. The misses are broken into three classes: compulsory misses,
coherence misses (from both true and false sharing), and capacity/conflict misses
(which include misses caused by interference between the OS and the user process
and between multiple user processes). Figure 5.16 confirms that, for the kernel ref-
erences, increasing the cache size reduces only the uniprocessor capacity/conflict
miss rate. In contrast, increasing the block size causes a reduction in the compulsory
miss rate. The absence of large increases in the coherence miss rate as block size is
increased means that false sharing effects are probably insignificant, although such
misses may be offsetting some of the gains from reducing the true sharing misses.
    If we examine the number of bytes needed per data reference, as in Figure 5.17,
we see that the kernel has a higher traffic ratio that grows with block size. It is easy
to see why this occurs: when going from a 16-byte block to a 128-byte block, the
              7%                                                                                10%

                                                                                                9%
              6%
                                                 Kernel miss rate                               8%
              5%                                                                                7%
                                                                                                6%
  Miss rate

                                                                                    Miss rate
              4%
                                                                                                5%
              3%                                                                                                       Kernel miss rate
                                                                                                4%

              2%                                                                                3%
                                                                                                2%
              1%                                                                                           User miss rate
                                                   User miss rate                               1%
              0%                                                                                0%
                   32                    64            128                    256                     16    32             64             128
                                          Cache size (KB)                                                   Block size (bytes)

Figure 5.15 The data miss rates for the user and kernel components behave differently for increases in the L1
data cache size (on the left) versus increases in the L1 data cache block size (on the right). Increasing the L1 data
cache from 32 to 256 KB (with a 32-byte block) causes the user miss rate to decrease proportionately more than the
kernel miss rate: the user-level miss rate drops by almost a factor of 3, whereas the kernel-level miss rate drops by a
factor of only 1.3. At the largest size, the L1 is closer to the size of L2 in a modern multicore processors. Thus the data
indicates that the kernel miss rate will still be significant in an L2 cache. The miss rate for both user and kernel com-
ponents drops steadily as the L1 block size is increased (while keeping the L1 cache at 32 KB). In contrast to the effects
of increasing the cache size, increasing the block size improves the kernel miss rate more significantly (just under a
factor of 4 for the kernel references when going from 16-byte to 128-byte blocks versus just under a factor of 3 for the
user references).

                                    7%                                      10%
                                                                                                              Capacity/conflict
                                                                            9%                                Coherence
                                    6%
                                                                            8%                                Compulsory
                                    5%                                      7%
                        Miss rate

                                                                Miss rate

                                    4%                                      6%
                                                                            5%
                                    3%
                                                                            4%
                                    2%                                      3%
                                                                            2%
                                    1%
                                                                            1%
                                    0%                                      0%
                                          32 64 128 256                             16 32 64 128
                                          Cache size (KB)                           Block size (bytes)

Figure 5.16 The components of the kernel data miss rate change as the L1 data cache size is increased from 32 to
256 KB, when the multiprogramming workload is run on eight processors. The compulsory miss rate component
stays constant because it is unaffected by cache size. The capacity component drops by more than a factor of 2,
whereas the coherence component nearly doubles. The increase in coherence misses occurs because the probability
of a miss being caused by an invalidation increases with cache size, since fewer entries are bumped due to capacity.
As we would expect, the increasing block size of the L1 data cache substantially reduces the compulsory miss rate in
the kernel references. It also has a significant impact on the capacity miss rate, decreasing it by a factor of 2.4 over the
range of block sizes. The increased block size has a small reduction in coherence traffic, which appears to stabilize at
64 bytes, with no change in the coherence miss rate in going to 128-byte lines. Because there are no significant reduc-
tions in the coherence miss rate as the block size increases, the fraction of the miss rate caused by coherence grows
from about 7% to about 15%.

                                                  3.5
                                                                              Kernel traffic

               Memory traffic measured as bytes
                                                  3.0

                                                  2.5

                     per data reference
                                                  2.0

                                                  1.5

                                                  1.0
                                                                                  User traffic
                                                  0.5

                                                  0.0
                                                        16   32              64             128
                                                             Block size (bytes)

Figure 5.17 The number of bytes needed per data reference grows as block size is
increased for both the kernel and user components. It is interesting to compare this
chart with the data on scientific programs shown in Appendix I.

miss rate drops by about 3.7, but the number of bytes transferred per miss increases
by 8, so the total miss traffic increases by just over a factor of 2. The user program
also more than doubles as the block size goes from 16 to 128 bytes, but it starts out
at a much lower level.
    For the multiprogrammed workload, the OS is a much more demanding user of
the memory system. If more OS or OS-like activity is included in the workload, and
the behavior is similar to what was measured for this workload, it will become very
difficult to build a sufficiently capable memory system. One possible route to
improving performance is to make the OS more cache-aware through either better
programming environments or through programmer assistance. For example, the
OS reuses memory for requests that arise from different system calls. Despite the
fact that the reused memory will be completely overwritten, the hardware, not rec-
ognizing this, will attempt to preserve coherency and the possibility that some por-
tion of a cache block may be read, even if it is not. This behavior is analogous to the
reuse of stack locations on procedure invocations. The IBM Power series has sup-
port to allow the compiler to indicate this type of behavior on procedure invoca-
tions, and the newest AMD processors have similar support. It is harder to detect
such behavior by the OS, and doing so may require programmer assistance, but the
payoff is potentially even greater.
    OS and commercial workloads pose tough challenges for multiprocessor mem-
ory systems, and unlike scientific applications, which we examine in Appendix I,
they are less amenable to algorithmic or compiler restructuring. As the number of
cores increases, predicting the behavior of such applications is likely to get more
difficult. Emulation or simulation methodologies that allow the simulation of tens

                         to hundreds of cores with large applications (including operating systems) will be
                         crucial to maintaining an analytical and quantitative approach to design.

               5.4       Distributed Shared-Memory and Directory-Based
                         Coherence
                         As we saw in Section 5.2, a snooping protocol requires communication with all
                         caches on every cache miss, including writes of potentially shared data. The
                         absence of any centralized data structure that tracks the state of the caches is both
                         the fundamental advantage of a snooping-based scheme, since it allows it to be
                         inexpensive, as well as its Achilles’ heel when it comes to scalability.
                             For example, consider a multiprocessor consisting of four 4-core multicores
                         capable of sustaining one data reference per clock and a 4 GHz clock. From the
                         data in Section I.5 in Appendix I, we can see that the applications may require
                         4–170 GiB/s of memory bus bandwidth. The maximum memory bandwidth sup-
                         ported by the i7 with two DDR4 memory channels is 34 GiB/s. If several i7 multi-
                         core processors shared the same memory system, they would easily swamp it. In
                         the last few years, the development of multicore processors forced all designers to
                         shift to some form of distributed memory to support the bandwidth demands of the
                         individual processors.
                             We can increase the memory bandwidth and interconnection bandwidth by dis-
                         tributing the memory, as shown in Figure 5.2 on page 373; this immediately sep-
                         arates local memory traffic from remote memory traffic, reducing the bandwidth
                         demands on the memory system and on the interconnection network. Unless we
                         eliminate the need for the coherence protocol to broadcast on every cache miss,
                         distributing the memory will gain us little.
                             As we mentioned earlier, the alternative to a snooping-based coherence proto-
                         col is a directory protocol. A directory keeps the state of every block that may be
                         cached. Information in the directory includes which caches (or collections of
                         caches) have copies of the block, whether it is dirty, and so on. Within a multicore
                         with a shared outermost cache (say, L3), it is easy to implement a directory scheme:
                         simply keep a bit vector of the size equal to the number of cores for each L3 block.
                         The bit vector indicates which private L2 caches may have copies of a block in L3,
                         and invalidations are sent only to those caches. This works perfectly for a single
                         multicore if L3 is inclusive, and this scheme is the one used in the Intel i7.
                             The solution of a single directory used in a multicore is not scalable, even
                         though it avoids broadcast. The directory must be distributed, but the distribution
                         must be done in a way that the coherence protocol knows where to find the direc-
                         tory information for any cached block of memory. The obvious solution is to dis-
                         tribute the directory along with the memory so that different coherence requests
                         can go to different directories, just as different memory requests go to different
                         memories. If the information is maintained at an outer cache, like L3, which is mul-
                         tibanked, the directory information can be distributed with the different cache
                         banks, effectively increasing the bandwidth.

                Multicore                 Multicore                 Multicore                 Multicore
                processor                 processor                 processor                 processor
                + caches                  + caches                  + caches                  + caches

         Memory             I/O    Memory             I/O    Memory             I/O    Memory             I/O

        Directory                 Directory                 Directory                 Directory

                                                Interconnection network

        Directory                 Directory                 Directory                 Directory

         Memory             I/O    Memory             I/O    Memory
                                                             Memory             I/O    Memory             I/O

                Multicore                 Multicore                 Multicore                 Multicore
                processor                 processor                 processor                 processor
                + caches                  + caches                  + caches                  + caches

Figure 5.18 A directory is added to each node to implement cache coherence in a distributed-memory multi-
processor. In this case, a node is shown as a single multicore chip, and the directory information for the associated
memory may reside either on or off the multicore. Each directory is responsible for tracking the caches that share the
memory addresses of the portion of memory in the node. The coherence mechanism will handle both the mainte-
nance of the directory information and any coherence actions needed within the multicore node.

                                  A distributed directory retains the characteristic that the sharing status of a
                              block is always in a single known location. This property, together with the main-
                              tenance of information that says what other nodes may be caching the block, is
                              what allows the coherence protocol to avoid broadcast. Figure 5.18 shows how
                              our distributed-memory multiprocessor looks with the directories added to
                              each node.
                                  The simplest directory implementations associate an entry in the directory with
                              each memory block. In such implementations, the amount of information is pro-
                              portional to the product of the number of memory blocks (where each block is
                              the same size as the L2 or L3 cache block) times the number of nodes, where a
                              node is a single multicore processor or a small collection of processors that imple-
                              ments coherence internally. This overhead is not a problem for multiprocessors
                              with less than a few hundred processors (each of which might be a multicore)
                              because the directory overhead with a reasonable block size will be tolerable.
                              For larger multiprocessors, we need methods to allow the directory structure to
                              be efficiently scaled, but only supercomputer-sized systems need to worry
                              about this.

                         Directory-Based Cache Coherence Protocols: The Basics
                         Just as with a snooping protocol, there are two primary operations that a directory
                         protocol must implement: handling a read miss and handling a write to a shared,
                         clean cache block. (Handling a write miss to a block that is currently shared is a
                         simple combination of these two.) To implement these operations, a directory must
                         track the state of each cache block. In a simple protocol, these states could be the
                         following:

                         ■   Shared—One or more nodes have the block cached, and the value in memory is
                             up to date (as well as in all the caches).
                         ■   Uncached—No node has a copy of the cache block.
                         ■   Modified—Exactly one node has a copy of the cache block, and it has written
                             the block, so the memory copy is out of date. The processor is called the owner
                             of the block.

                             In addition to tracking the state of each potentially shared memory block, we
                         must track which nodes have copies of that block because those copies will need to
                         be invalidated on a write. The simplest way to do this is to keep a bit vector for each
                         memory block. When the block is shared, each bit of the vector indicates whether
                         the corresponding processor chip (which is likely a multicore) has a copy of that
                         block. We can also use the bit vector to keep track of the owner of the block when
                         the block is in the exclusive state. For efficiency reasons, we also track the state of
                         each cache block at the individual caches.
                             The states and transitions for the state machine at each cache are identical to
                         what we used for the snooping cache, although the actions on a transition are
                         slightly different. The processes of invalidating and locating an exclusive copy
                         of a data item are different because they both involve communication between
                         the requesting node and the directory and between the directory and one or more
                         remote nodes. In a snooping protocol, these two steps are combined through the
                         use of a broadcast to all the nodes.
                             Before we see the protocol state diagrams, it is useful to examine a catalog of
                         the message types that may be sent between the processors and the directories for
                         the purpose of handling misses and maintaining coherence. Figure 5.19 shows the
                         types of messages sent among nodes. The local node is the node where a request
                         originates. The home node is the node where the memory location and the directory
                         entry of an address reside. The physical address space is statically distributed, so
                         the node that contains the memory and directory for a given physical address is
                         known. For example, the high-order bits may provide the node number, whereas
                         the low-order bits provide the offset within the memory on that node. The local
                         node may also be the home node. The directory must be accessed when the home
                         node is the local node because copies may exist in yet a third node, called a remote
                         node.

Message                                   Message
type         Source        Destination    contents     Function of this message
Read miss    Local cache   Home           P, A         Node P has a read miss at address A; request data and make P a
                           directory                   read sharer.
Write        Local cache   Home           P, A         Node P has a write miss at address A; request data and make P
miss                       directory                   the exclusive owner.
Invalidate   Local cache   Home           A            Request to send invalidates to all remote caches that are
                           directory                   caching the block at address A.
Invalidate   Home          Remote         A            Invalidate a shared copy of data at address A.
             directory     cache
Fetch        Home          Remote         A            Fetch the block at address A and send it to its home directory;
             directory     cache                       change the state of A in the remote cache to shared.
Fetch/       Home          Remote         A            Fetch the block at address A and send it to its home directory;
invalidate   directory     cache                       invalidate the block in the cache.
Data         Home          Local cache    D            Return a data value from the home memory.
value        directory
reply
Data         Remote        Home           A, D         Write back a data value for address A.
write-       cache         directory
back

Figure 5.19 The possible messages sent among nodes to maintain coherence, along with the source and des-
tination node, the contents (where P 5 requesting node number, A 5 requested address, and D 5 data contents),
and the function of the message. The first three messages are requests sent by the local node to the home. The
fourth through sixth messages are messages sent to a remote node by the home when the home needs the data
to satisfy a read or write miss request. Data value replies are used to send a value from the home node back to the
requesting node. Data value write-backs occur for two reasons: when a block is replaced in a cache and must be
written back to its home memory, and also in reply to fetch or fetch/invalidate messages from the home. Writing
back the data value whenever the block becomes shared simplifies the number of states in the protocol because
any dirty block must be exclusive and any shared block is always available in the home memory.

                                A remote node is the node that has a copy of a cache block, whether exclusive
                            (in which case it is the only copy) or shared. A remote node may be the same as
                            either the local node or the home node. In such cases, the basic protocol does not
                            change, but interprocessor messages may be replaced with intraprocessor
                            messages.
                                In this section, we assume a simple model of memory consistency. To mini-
                            mize the type of messages and the complexity of the protocol, we make an assump-
                            tion that messages will be received and acted upon in the same order they are sent.
                            This assumption may not be true in practice and can result in additional compli-
                            cations, some of which we address in Section 5.6 when we discuss memory con-
                            sistency models. In this section, we use this assumption to ensure that invalidates
                            sent by a node are honored before new messages are transmitted, just as we
                            assumed in the discussion of implementing snooping protocols. As we did in
                            the snooping case, we omit some details necessary to implement the coherence

                         protocol. In particular, the serialization of writes and knowing that the invalidates
                         for a write have completed are not as simple as in the broadcast-based snooping
                         mechanism. Instead, explicit acknowledgments are required in response to write
                         misses and invalidate requests. We discuss these issues in more detail in
                         Appendix I.

                         An Example Directory Protocol
                         The basic states of a cache block in a directory-based protocol are exactly like those
                         in a snooping protocol, and the states in the directory are also analogous to those we
                         showed earlier. Thus we can start with simple state diagrams that show the state tran-
                         sitions for an individual cache block and then examine the state diagram for the direc-
                         tory entry corresponding to each block in memory. As in the snooping case, these
                         state transition diagrams do not represent all the details of a coherence protocol; how-
                         ever, the actual controller is highly dependent on a number of details of the multi-
                         processor (message delivery properties, buffering structures, and so on). In this
                         section, we present the basic protocol state diagrams. The knotty issues involved
                         in implementing these state transition diagrams are examined in Appendix I.
                              Figure 5.20 shows the protocol actions to which an individual cache responds.
                         We use the same notation as in the last section, with requests coming from outside
                         the node in gray and actions in bold. The state transitions for an individual cache
                         are caused by read misses, write misses, invalidates, and data fetch requests;
                         Figure 5.20 shows these operations. An individual cache also generates read miss,
                         write miss, and invalidate messages that are sent to the home directory. Read and
                         write misses require data value replies, and these events wait for replies before
                         changing state. Knowing when invalidates complete is a separate problem and
                         is handled separately.
                              The operation of the state transition diagram for a cache block in Figure 5.20 is
                         essentially the same as it is for the snooping case: the states are identical, and the
                         stimulus is almost identical. The write miss operation, which was broadcast on the
                         bus (or other network) in the snooping scheme, is replaced by the data fetch and
                         invalidate operations that are selectively sent by the directory controller. Like the
                         snooping protocol, any cache block must be in the exclusive state when it is writ-
                         ten, and any shared block must be up to date in memory. In many multicore pro-
                         cessors, the outermost level in the processor cache is shared among the cores (as is
                         the L3 in the Intel i7, the AMD Opteron, and the IBM Power7), and hardware at
                         that level maintains coherence among the private caches of each core on the same
                         chip, using either an internal directory or snooping. Thus the on-chip multicore
                         coherence mechanism can be used to extend coherence among a larger set of pro-
                         cessors simply by interfacing to the outermost shared cache. Because this interface
                         is at L3, contention between the processor and coherence requests is less of an
                         issue, and duplicating the tags could be avoided.
                              In a directory-based protocol, the directory implements the other half of the
                         coherence protocol. A message sent to a directory causes two different types of

                                                                                                                                                 CPU read hit

                                                                                                                              Invalidate

                                                                                                                                                     Shared
                                                    Invalid                                 CPU read
                                                                                                                                                   (read only)
                                                                                            Send read miss message

                                                                                                                                                     ck
                                                                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                                                                               CPU

                                                                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                                                     hi
                                                                                                                                                    is

                                                                                                                                                 ba
                                                                                                                                                m

                                                                                                                                               ge
                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                      Send write miss message
                                                                                                                                                               read

                                                                                                                                              rit
                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                CPU write

                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                             d

                                                                                                                                           sa
                                                                                                                                           w
                                                                                                                                          rit
                                                                                                                                         ea
                                                                                                                                                               miss

                                                                                                                                        es
                                                                                                                                       PU
                                                                                                                                        w
                                                                                                                                       ;r

                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                   ck

                                                                                                                                     C
                                                                                                                                                            Read miss
                                  Data write-back

                                                                                                                                   at

                                                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                                                ba

                                                                                                                                 D

                                                                                                                                is
                                                                                                                               e

                                                                                                                              m
                                                                                                                             e-

                                                                                                                            ag
                                                                                                                          rit

                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                   at ss

                                                                                                                         s

                                                                                                                        rit
                                                                                                                       w

                                                                                                                      es
                                                                                                                D mi

                                                                                                                      w
                                                                                                                     a

                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                   ch

                                                                                                                 nd
                                                                                                                 ad

                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                               e t
                                                                                    re

                                                                                                             Se
                                                                                                              at
                                                                                                             F
                                                                                                          lid
                                                                                PU

                                                                                                       va
                                                                                C

                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                    in

                                                                                                    is
                                                                                                  m
                                                                                                n d

                                                                                                e
                                                                                           Se

                                                                                            rit
                                                                                          w

                     Fetch
                                                                                       PU

                     invalidate
                                                                                     C

                                                      Modified
                                                    (read/write)
                                                                                                            CPU write miss
                CPU write hit
                CPU read hit
                                                                                                            Data write-back
                                                                                                            Write miss

Figure 5.20 State transition diagram for an individual cache block in a directory-based system. Requests by the
local processor are shown in black, and those from the home directory are shown in gray. The states are identical to
those in the snooping case, and the transactions are very similar, with explicit invalidate and write-back requests
replacing the write misses that were formerly broadcast on the bus. As we did for the snooping controller, we assume
that an attempt to write a shared cache block is treated as a miss; in practice, such a transaction can be treated as an
ownership request or upgrade request and can deliver ownership without requiring that the cache block be fetched.

                                actions: updating the directory state and sending additional messages to satisfy the
                                request. The states in the directory represent the three standard states for a block;
                                unlike in a snooping scheme, however, the directory state indicates the state of all
                                the cached copies of a memory block, rather than for a single cache block.
                                    The memory block may be uncached by any node, cached in multiple nodes
                                and readable (shared), or cached exclusively and writable in exactly one node.
                                In addition to the state of each block, the directory must track the set of nodes that
                                have a copy of a block; we use a set called Sharers to perform this function. In
                                multiprocessors with fewer than 64 nodes (each of which may represent four to
                                eight times as many processors), this set is typically kept as a bit vector. Directory

                                                                                     Data value reply;
                                                                                      Sharers = {P}                                    Shared
                                        Uncached
                                                                                                                                     (read only)
                                                                                           Read miss

                                                                                                                                 }
                                                                                                                              {P

                                                                                                                             ss
                                                                                                                            +

                                                                                                                     y mi
                                                                                                                          s
                                                                                                                        er

                                                                                                                   pl e
                                                                Write miss                                                              Read

                                                                                                                 re rit
                                                                                                                      ar

                                                                                                               e W
                                                                                                                   Sh
                                                                                                                                        miss

                                                                                                                 =
                                            Data value reply;

                                                                                                               s
                                                                                                            er

                                                                                                            lu
                                             Sharers = {P}

                                                                                                         ar

                                                                                                         va
                                                                                                                               Data value reply
                         Sharers = {}

                                                                                                      Sh

                                                                                                      ta
                                                                                                                            Sharers = Sharers + {P}

                                                                                                  da
                                                                                                   y;
                                                                                                pl

                                                                                               };
                                                                                             re

                                                                                            {P
                                                                                      va s
                                                                                           e

                                                                                          =
                                                                                 at mis
                                                                                        lu

                                                                                        s
                                                                                     er
                                                                              ;d d

                                                                                   ar
                                                                           ch Rea

                                                                                   a

                                                                                Sh
                                                                             e;
                                                                          at
                                                                   t

                                                                      lid
                                                                Fe

                  Data
                                                                   va
                                                                 In

               write-back

                                             Exclusive
                                            (read/write)

                                                                                 Write       Fetch/invalidate
                                                                                 miss        Data value reply
                                                                                             Sharers = {P}

Figure 5.21 The state transition diagram for the directory has the same states and structure as the transition
diagram for an individual cache. All actions are in gray because they are all externally caused. Bold indicates the
action taken by the directory in response to the request.

                                        requests need to update the set Sharers and also read the set to perform
                                        invalidations.
                                            Figure 5.21 shows the actions taken at the directory in response to messages
                                        received. The directory receives three different requests: read miss, write miss,
                                        and data write-back. The messages sent in response by the directory are shown
                                        in bold, and the updating of the set Sharers is shown in bold italics. Because all
                                        the stimulus messages are external, all actions are shown in gray. Our simplified
                                        protocol assumes that some actions are atomic, such as requesting a value and
                                        sending it to another node; a realistic implementation cannot use this assumption.
                                            To understand these directory operations, let’s examine the requests received
                                        and actions taken state by state. When a block is in the uncached state, the copy in
                                        memory is the current value, so the only possible requests for that block are

                                        ■            Read miss—The requesting node is sent the requested data from memory, and
                                                     the requester is made the only sharing node. The state of the block is
                                                     made shared.

■   Write miss—The requesting node is sent the value and becomes the sharing
    node. The block is made exclusive to indicate that the only valid copy is
    cached. Sharers indicates the identity of the owner.

When the block is in the shared state, the memory value is up to date, so the same
two requests can occur:

■   Read miss—The requesting node is sent the requested data from memory, and
    the requesting node is added to the sharing set.
■   Write miss—The requesting node is sent the value. All nodes in the set Sharers
    are sent invalidate messages, and the Sharers set is to contain the identity of the
    requesting node. The state of the block is made exclusive.

When the block is in the exclusive state, the current value of the block is held in a
cache on the node identified by the set Sharers (the owner), so there are three pos-
sible directory requests:

■   Read miss—The owner is sent a data fetch message, which causes the state of
    the block in the owner’s cache to transition to shared and causes the owner to
    send the data to the directory, where it is written to memory and sent back to the
    requesting processor. The identity of the requesting node is added to the set
    Sharers, which still contains the identity of the processor that was the owner
    (since it still has a readable copy).
■   Data write-back—The owner is replacing the block and therefore must write it
    back. This write-back makes the memory copy up to date (the home directory
    essentially becomes the owner), the block is now uncached, and the Sharers set
    is empty.
■   Write miss—The block has a new owner. A message is sent to the old owner,
    causing the cache to invalidate the block and send the value to the directory,
    from which it is sent to the requesting node, which becomes the new owner.
    Sharers is set to the identity of the new owner, and the state of the block remains
    exclusive.

     This state transition diagram in Figure 5.21 is a simplification, just as it was in
the snooping cache case. In the case of a directory, as well as a snooping scheme
implemented with a network other than a bus, our protocols will need to deal with
nonatomic memory transactions. Appendix I explores these issues in depth.
     The directory protocols used in real multiprocessors contain additional optimi-
zations. In particular, in this protocol when a read or write miss occurs for a block
that is exclusive, the block is first sent to the directory at the home node. From there
it is stored into the home memory and also sent to the original requesting node.
Many of the protocols in use in commercial multiprocessors forward the data from
the owner node to the requesting node directly (as well as performing the write-
back to the home). Such optimizations often add complexity by increasing the pos-
sibility of deadlock and by increasing the types of messages that must be handled.

                             Implementing a directory scheme requires solving most of the same challenges
                         we discussed for snooping protocols. There are, however, new and additional prob-
                         lems, which we describe in Appendix I. In Section 5.8, we briefly describe how mod-
                         ern multicores extend coherence beyond a single chip. The combinations of
                         multichip coherence and multicore coherence include all four possibilities of snoop-
                         ing/snooping (AMD Opteron), snooping/directory, directory/snooping, and direc-
                         tory/directory! Many multiprocessors have chosen some form of snooping within
                         a single chip, which is attractive if the outermost cache is shared and inclusive,
                         and directories across multiple chips. Such an approach simplifies implementation
                         because only the processor chip, rather than an individual core, need be tracked.

               5.5       Synchronization: The Basics
                         Synchronization mechanisms are typically built with user-level software routines
                         that rely on hardware-supplied synchronization instructions. For smaller multipro-
                         cessors or low-contention situations, the key hardware capability is an uninterrup-
                         tible instruction or instruction sequence capable of atomically retrieving and
                         changing a value. Software synchronization mechanisms are then constructed
                         using this capability. In this section, we focus on the implementation of lock
                         and unlock synchronization operations. Lock and unlock can be used straightfor-
                         wardly to create mutual exclusion, as well as to implement more complex synchro-
                         nization mechanisms.
                             In high-contention situations, synchronization can become a performance bot-
                         tleneck because contention introduces additional delays and because latency is
                         potentially greater in such a multiprocessor. We discuss how the basic synchroni-
                         zation mechanisms of this section can be extended for large processor counts in
                         Appendix I.

                         Basic Hardware Primitives
                         The key ability we require to implement synchronization in a multiprocessor is a
                         set of hardware primitives with the ability to atomically read and modify a memory
                         location. Without such a capability, the cost of building basic synchronization
                         primitives will be too high and will increase as the processor count increases. There
                         are a number of alternative formulations of the basic hardware primitives, all of
                         which provide the ability to atomically read and modify a location, together with
                         some way to tell whether the read and write were performed atomically. These
                         hardware primitives are the basic building blocks that are used to build a wide vari-
                         ety of user-level synchronization operations, including things such as locks and
                         barriers. In general, architects do not expect users to employ the basic hardware
                         primitives, but instead expect that the primitives will be used by system program-
                         mers to build a synchronization library, a process that is often complex and tricky.
                         Let’s start with one such hardware primitive and show how it can be used to build
                         some basic synchronization operations.

     One typical operation for building synchronization operations is the atomic
exchange, which interchanges a value in a register for a value in memory. To see
how to use this to build a basic synchronization operation, assume that we want to
build a simple lock where the value 0 is used to indicate that the lock is free and 1
is used to indicate that the lock is unavailable. A processor tries to set the lock by doing
an exchange of 1, which is in a register, with the memory address corresponding to
the lock. The value returned from the exchange instruction is 1 if some other
processor had otherwise already claimed access and 0. In the latter case, the value
is also changed to 1, preventing any competing exchange from also retrieving a 0.
     For example, consider two processors that each try to do the exchange simul-
taneously: This race is broken because exactly one of the processors will perform
the exchange first, returning 0, and the second processor will return 1 when it does
the exchange. The key to using the exchange (or swap) primitive to implement syn-
chronization is that the operation is atomic: the exchange is indivisible, and two
simultaneous exchanges will be ordered by the write serialization mechanisms.
It is impossible for two processors trying to set the synchronization variable in this
manner to both determine they have simultaneously set the variable.
     There are a number of other atomic primitives that can be used to implement
synchronization. They all have the key property that they read and update a memory
value in such a manner that we can tell whether the two operations executed atom-
ically. One operation, present in many older multiprocessors, is test-and-set, which
tests a value and sets it if the value passes the test. For example, we could define an
operation that tested for 0 and set the value to 1, which can be used in a fashion sim-
ilar to how we used atomic exchange. Another atomic synchronization primitive is
fetch-and-increment: it returns the value of a memory location and atomically incre-
ments it. By using the value 0 to indicate that the synchronization variable is
unclaimed, we can use fetch-and-increment, just as we used exchange. There are
other uses of operations like fetch-and-increment, which we will see shortly.
     Implementing a single atomic memory operation introduces some challenges
because it requires both a memory read and a write in a single, uninterruptible
instruction. This requirement complicates the implementation of coherence
because the hardware cannot allow any other operations between the read and
the write, and yet must not deadlock.
     An alternative is to have a pair of instructions where the second instruction
returns a value from which it can be deduced whether the pair of instructions
was executed as though the instructions were atomic. The pair of instructions is
effectively atomic if it appears as though all other operations executed by any pro-
cessor occurred before or after the pair. Thus, when an instruction pair is effec-
tively atomic, no other processor can change the value between the instruction
pair. This is the approach used in the MIPS processors and in RISC V.
     In RISC V, the pair of instructions includes a special load called a load
reserved (also called load linked or load locked) and a special store called a store
conditional. Load reserved loads the contents of memory given by rs1 into rd and
creates a reservation on that memory address. Store conditional stores the value in
rs2 into the memory address given by rs1. If the reservation of the load is broken by

                         a write to the same memory location, the store conditional fails and writes a non-
                         zero to rd; if it succeeds, the store conditional writes 0. If the processor does a con-
                         text switch between the two instructions, then the store conditional always fails.
                             These instructions are used in sequence, and because the load reserved returns
                         the initial value and the store conditional returns 0 only if it succeeds, the following
                         sequence implements an atomic exchange on the memory location specified by the
                         contents of x1 with the value in x4:
                             try:         mov        x3,x4    ;mov exchange value
                                          lr         x2,x1    ;load reserved from
                                          sc         x3,0(x1) ;store conditional
                                          bnez       x3,try   ;branch store fails
                                          mov        x4,x2    ;put load value in x4
                         At the end of this sequence, the contents of x4 and the memory location specified
                         by x1 have been atomically exchanged. Anytime a processor intervenes and
                         modifies the value in memory between the lr and sc instructions, the sc returns
                         0 in x3, causing the code sequence to try again.
                             An advantage of the load reserved/store conditional mechanism is that it can be
                         used to build other synchronization primitives. For example, here is an atomic
                         fetch-and-increment:
                             try:         lr        x2,x1           ;load reserved 0(x1)
                                          addi      x3,x2,1         ;increment
                                          sc        x3,0(x1)        ;store conditional
                                          bnez      x3,try          ;branch store fails
                              These instructions are typically implemented by keeping track of the address
                         specified in the lr instruction in a register, often called the reserved register. If
                         an interrupt occurs, or if the cache block matching the address in the link register
                         is invalidated (e.g., by another sc), the link register is cleared. The sc instruction
                         simply checks that its address matches that in the reserved register. If so, the sc suc-
                         ceeds; otherwise, it fails. Because the store conditional will fail after either another
                         attempted store to the load reserved address or any exception, care must be taken in
                         choosing what instructions are inserted between the two instructions. In particular,
                         only register-register instructions can safely be permitted; otherwise, it is possible to
                         create deadlock situations where the processor can never complete the sc. In addi-
                         tion, the number of instructions between the load reserved and the store conditional
                         should be small to minimize the probability that either an unrelated event or a com-
                         peting processor causes the store conditional to fail frequently.

                         Implementing Locks Using Coherence
                         Once we have an atomic operation, we can use the coherence mechanisms of a
                         multiprocessor to implement spin locks—locks that a processor continuously tries
                         to acquire, spinning around a loop until it succeeds. Spin locks are used when pro-
                         grammers expect the lock to be held for a very short amount of time and when they
                         want the process of locking to be low latency when the lock is available. Because

spin locks tie up the processor waiting in a loop for the lock to become free, they are
inappropriate in some circumstances.
    The simplest implementation, which we would use if there were no cache
coherence, would be to keep the lock variables in memory. A processor could con-
tinually try to acquire the lock using an atomic operation, say, atomic exchange,
and test whether the exchange returned the lock as free. To release the lock, the
processor simply stores the value 0 to the lock. Here is the code sequence to lock
a spin lock whose address is in x1. It uses EXCH as a macro for the atomic
exchange sequence from page 414:
                  addi x2,R0,#1
    lockit:       EXCH x2,0(x1)                 ;atomic exchange
                  bnez x2,lockit                ;already locked?
     If our multiprocessor supports cache coherence, we can cache the locks using
the coherence mechanism to maintain the lock value coherently. Caching locks has
two advantages. First, it allows an implementation where the process of “spinning”
(trying to test and acquire the lock in a tight loop) could be done on a local cached
copy rather than requiring a global memory access on each attempt to acquire the
lock. The second advantage comes from the observation that there is often locality
in lock accesses; that is, the processor that used the lock last will use it again in the
near future. In such cases, the lock value may reside in the cache of that processor,
greatly reducing the time to acquire the lock.
     Obtaining the first advantage—being able to spin on a local cached copy rather
than generating a memory request for each attempt to acquire the lock—requires a
change in our simple spin procedure. Each attempt to exchange in the preceding
loop requires a write operation. If multiple processors are attempting to get the
lock, each will generate the write. Most of these writes will lead to write misses
because each processor is trying to obtain the lock variable in an exclusive state.
     Thus we should modify our spin lock procedure so that it spins by doing reads
on a local copy of the lock until it successfully sees that the lock is available. Then
it attempts to acquire the lock by doing a swap operation. A processor first reads the
lock variable to test its state. A processor keeps reading and testing until the value
of the read indicates that the lock is unlocked. The processor then races against all
other processes that were similarly “spin waiting” to see which can lock the var-
iable first. All processes use a swap instruction that reads the old value and stores a
1 into the lock variable. The single winner will see the 0, and the losers will see a 1
that was placed there by the winner. (The losers will continue to set the variable to
the locked value, but that doesn’t matter.) The winning processor executes the code
after the lock and, when finished, stores a 0 into the lock variable to release the
lock, which starts the race all over again. Here is the code to perform this spin lock
(remember that 0 is unlocked and 1 is locked):
    lockit:       ld   x2,0(x1)               ;load of lock
                  bnez x2,lockit              ;not available-spin
                  addi x2,R0,#1               ;load locked value
                  EXCH x2,0(x1)               ;swap
                  bnez x2,lockit              ;branch if lock wasn’t 0

                                                                  Coherence
                                                                  state of lock at
Step    P0           P1                     P2                    end of step          Bus/directory activity
1       Has lock     Begins spin, testing   Begins spin,          Shared               Cache misses for P1 and P2 satisfied
                     if lock ¼ 0            testing if lock ¼ 0                        in either order. Lock state becomes
                                                                                       shared.
2       Set lock     (Invalidate            (Invalidate           Exclusive (P0)       Write invalidate of lock variable
        to 0         received)              received)                                  from P0.
3                    Cache miss             Cache miss            Shared               Bus/directory services P2 cache
                                                                                       miss; write-back from P0; state
                                                                                       shared.
4                    (Waits while bus/      Lock ¼ 0 test         Shared               Cache miss for P2 satisfied.
                     directory busy)        succeeds
5                    Lock ¼ 0               Executes swap,        Shared               Cache miss for P1 satisfied.
                                            gets cache miss
6                    Executes swap,         Completes swap:       Exclusive (P2)       Bus/directory services P2 cache
                     gets cache miss        returns 0 and sets                         miss; generates invalidate; lock is
                                            lock ¼ 1                                   exclusive.
7                    Swap completes         Enter critical        Exclusive (P1)       Bus/directory services P1 cache
                     and returns 1, and     section                                    miss; sends invalidate and generates
                     sets lock ¼ 1                                                     write-back from P2.
8                    Spins, testing if                                                 None
                     lock ¼ 0

Figure 5.22 Cache coherence steps and bus traffic for three processors, P0, P1, and P2. This figure assumes write
invalidate coherence. P0 starts with the lock (step 1), and the value of the lock is 1 (i.e., locked); it is initially exclu-
sive and owned by P0 before step 1 begins. P0 exits and unlocks the lock (step 2). P1 and P2 race to see which reads
the unlocked value during the swap (steps 3–5). P2 wins and enters the critical section (steps 6 and 7), while P1’s
attempt fails, so it starts spin waiting (steps 7 and 8). In a real system, these events will take many more than 8 clock
ticks because acquiring the bus and replying to misses take much longer. Once step 8 is reached, the process can
repeat with P2, eventually getting exclusive access and setting the lock to 0.

                                    Let’s examine how this “spin lock” scheme uses the cache coherence mecha-
                                nisms. Figure 5.22 shows the processor and bus or directory operations for multiple
                                processes trying to lock a variable using an atomic swap. Once the processor with
                                the lock stores a 0 into the lock, all other caches are invalidated and must fetch the
                                new value to update their copy of the lock. One such cache gets the copy of the
                                unlocked value (0) first and performs the swap. When the cache miss of other pro-
                                cessors is satisfied, they find that the variable is already locked, so they must return
                                to testing and spinning.
                                    This example shows another advantage of the load reserved/store conditional
                                primitives: the read and write operations are explicitly separated. The load reserved
                                need not cause any bus traffic. This fact allows the following simple code
                                sequence, which has the same characteristics as the optimized version using
                                exchange (x1 has the address of the lock, the lr has replaced the LD, and the
                                sc has replaced the EXCH):

         lockit:       lr   x2,0(x1)              ;load reserved
                       bnez x2,lockit             ;not available-spin
                       addi x2,R0,#1              ;locked value
                       sc   x2,0(x1)              ;store
                       bnez x2,lockit             ;branch if store fails
      The first branch forms the spinning loop; the second branch resolves races when
      two processors see the lock available simultaneously.

5.6   Models of Memory Consistency: An Introduction
      Cache coherence ensures that multiple processors see a consistent view of mem-
      ory. It does not answer the question of how consistent the view of memory must be.
      By “how consistent,” we are really asking when a processor must see a value that
      has been updated by another processor. Because processors communicate through
      shared variables (used both for data values and for synchronization), the question
      boils down to this: In what order must a processor observe the data writes of
      another processor? Because the only way to “observe the writes of another proces-
      sor” is through reads, the question becomes what properties must be enforced
      among reads and writes to different locations by different processors?
          Although the question of how consistent memory must be seems simple, it is
      remarkably complicated, as we can see with a simple example. Here are two code
      segments from processes P1 and P2, shown side by side:
            P1:            A = 0;               P2:      B = 0;
                           .....                         .....
                           A = 1;                        B = 1;
            L1:            if (B == 0)...       L2:      if (A == 0)...
      Assume that the processes are running on different processors, and that locations A
      and B are originally cached by both processors with the initial value of 0. If writes
      always take immediate effect and are immediately seen by other processors, it will
      be impossible for both IF statements (labeled L1 and L2) to evaluate their condi-
      tions as true, since reaching the IF statement means that either A or B must have
      been assigned the value 1. But suppose the write invalidate is delayed, and the
      processor is allowed to continue during this delay. Then it is possible that both
      P1 and P2 have not seen the invalidations for B and A (respectively) before they
      attempt to read the values. The question now is should this behavior be allowed,
      and, if so, under what conditions?
          The most straightforward model for memory consistency is called sequential
      consistency. Sequential consistency requires that the result of any execution be the
      same as though the memory accesses executed by each processor were kept in
      order and the accesses among different processors were arbitrarily interleaved.
      Sequential consistency eliminates the possibility of some nonobvious execution
      in the previous example because the assignments must be completed before the
      IF statements are initiated.

                             The simplest way to implement sequential consistency is to require a processor
                         to delay the completion of any memory access until all the invalidations caused by
                         that access are completed. Of course, it is equally effective to delay the next mem-
                         ory access until the previous one is completed. Remember that memory consis-
                         tency involves operations among different variables: the two accesses that must
                         be ordered are actually to different memory locations. In our example, we must
                         delay the read of A or B (A == 0 or B == 0) until the previous write has completed
                         (B = 1 or A = 1). Under sequential consistency, we cannot, for example, simply
                         place the write in a write buffer and continue with the read.
                             Although sequential consistency presents a simple programming paradigm, it
                         reduces potential performance, especially in a multiprocessor with a large number
                         of processors or long interconnect delays, as we can see in the following example.

             Example     Suppose we have a processor where a write miss takes 50 cycles to establish own-
                         ership, 10 cycles to issue each invalidate after ownership is established, and 80
                         cycles for an invalidate to complete and be acknowledged once it is issued. Assum-
                         ing that four other processors share a cache block, how long does a write miss stall
                         the writing processor if the processor is sequentially consistent? Assume that the
                         invalidates must be explicitly acknowledged before the coherence controller
                         knows they are completed. Suppose we could continue executing after obtaining
                         ownership for the write miss without waiting for the invalidates; how long would
                         the write take?

               Answer    When we wait for invalidates, each write takes the sum of the ownership time plus
                         the time to complete the invalidates. Because the invalidates can overlap, we need
                         only worry about the last one, which starts 10 + 10 + 10 + 10 ¼ 40 cycles after own-
                         ership is established. Therefore the total time for the write is 50 + 40 + 80 ¼ 170
                         cycles. In comparison, the ownership time is only 50 cycles. With appropriate write
                         buffer implementations, it is even possible to continue before ownership is
                         established.

                         To provide better performance, researchers and architects have explored two dif-
                         ferent routes. First, they developed ambitious implementations that preserve
                         sequential consistency but use latency-hiding techniques to reduce the penalty;
                         we discuss these in Section 5.7. Second, they developed less restrictive memory
                         consistency models that allow for faster hardware. Such models can affect how
                         the programmer sees the multiprocessor, so before we discuss these less restrictive
                         models, let’s look at what the programmer expects.

                         The Programmer’s View
                         Although the sequential consistency model has a performance disadvantage, from
                         the viewpoint of the programmer, it has the advantage of simplicity. The challenge

is to develop a programming model that is simple to explain and yet allows a high-
performance implementation.
     One such programming model that allows us to have a more efficient imple-
mentation is to assume that programs are synchronized. A program is synchronized
if all accesses to shared data are ordered by synchronization operations. A data ref-
erence is ordered by a synchronization operation if, in every possible execution, a
write of a variable by one processor and an access (either a read or a write) of that
variable by another processor are separated by a pair of synchronization opera-
tions, one executed after the write by the writing processor and one executed before
the access by the second processor. Cases where variables may be updated without
ordering by synchronization are called data races because the execution outcome
depends on the relative speed of the processors, and like races in hardware design,
the outcome is unpredictable, which leads to another name for synchronized pro-
grams: data-race-free.
     As a simple example, consider a variable being read and updated by two dif-
ferent processors. Each processor surrounds the read and update with a lock and an
unlock, both to ensure mutual exclusion for the update and to ensure that the read is
consistent. Clearly, every write is now separated from a read by the other processor
by a pair of synchronization operations: one unlock (after the write) and one lock
(before the read). Of course, if two processors are writing a variable with no inter-
vening reads, then the writes must also be separated by synchronization operations.
     It is a broadly accepted observation that most programs are synchronized. This
observation is true primarily because, if the accesses were unsynchronized, the
behavior of the program would likely be unpredictable because the speed of exe-
cution would determine which processor won a data race and thus affect the results
of the program. Even with sequential consistency, reasoning about such programs
is very difficult.
     Programmers could attempt to guarantee ordering by constructing their own
synchronization mechanisms, but this is extremely tricky, can lead to buggy pro-
grams, and may not be supported architecturally, meaning that they may not work
in future generations of the multiprocessor. Instead, almost all programmers will
choose to use synchronization libraries that are correct and optimized for the mul-
tiprocessor and the type of synchronization.
     Finally, the use of standard synchronization primitives ensures that even if the
architecture implements a more relaxed consistency model than sequential consis-
tency, a synchronized program will behave as though the hardware implemented
sequential consistency.

Relaxed Consistency Models: The Basics and
Release Consistency
The key idea in relaxed consistency models is to allow reads and writes to complete
out of order, but to use synchronization operations to enforce ordering so that a
synchronized program behaves as though the processor were sequentially

                         consistent. There are a variety of relaxed models that are classified according to
                         what read and write orderings they relax. We specify the orderings by a set of rules
                         of the form X ! Y, meaning that operation X must complete before operation Y is
                         done. Sequential consistency requires maintaining all four possible orderings:
                         R ! W, R ! R, W ! R, and W ! W. The relaxed models are defined by the subset
                         of four orderings they relax:

                         1. Relaxing only the W ! R ordering yields a model known as total store ordering
                            or processor consistency. Because this model retains ordering among writes,
                            many programs that operate under sequential consistency operate under this
                            model, without additional synchronization.
                         2. Relaxing both the W ! R ordering and the W ! W ordering yields a model
                            known as partial store order.
                         3. Relaxing all four orderings yields a variety of models including weak ordering,
                            the PowerPC consistency model, and release consistency, the RISC V
                            consistency model.

                         By relaxing these orderings, the processor may obtain significant performance
                         advantages, which is the reason that RISC V, ARMv8, as well as the C++ and
                         C language standards chose release consistency as the model.
                             Release consistency distinguishes between synchronization operations that
                         are used to acquire access to a shared variable (denoted SA) and those that
                         release an object to allow another processor to acquire access (denoted SR).
                         Release consistency is based on the observation that in synchronized programs,
                         an acquire operation must precede a use of shared data, and a release operation
                         must follow any updates to shared data and also precede the time of the next
                         acquire. This property allows us to slightly relax the ordering by observing that
                         a read or write that precedes an acquire need not complete before the acquire,
                         and also that a read or write that follows a release need not wait for the release.
                         Thus the orderings that are preserved involve only SA and SR, as shown in
                         Figure 5.23; as the example in Figure 5.24 shows, this model imposes the few-
                         est orders of the five models.
                             Release consistency provides one of the least restrictive models that is easily
                         checkable and ensures that synchronized programs will see a sequentially consis-
                         tent execution. Although most synchronization operations are either an acquire or a
                         release (an acquire normally reads a synchronization variable and atomically
                         updates it, and a release usually just writes it), some operations, such as a barrier,
                         act as both an acquire and a release and cause the ordering to be equivalent to weak
                         ordering. Although synchronization operations always ensure that previous writes
                         have completed, we may want to guarantee that writes are completed without an
                         identified synchronization operation. In such cases, an explicit instruction, called
                         FENCE in RISC V, is used to ensure that all previous instructions in that thread
                         have completed, including completion of all memory writes and associated inval-
                         idates. For more information about the complexities, implementation issues, and

                                                           Ordinary
Model                     Used in                          orderings            Synchronization orderings
Sequential consistency    Most machines as an              R ! R, R ! W,        S ! W, S ! R, R ! S, W ! S, S ! S
                          optional mode                    W ! R, W ! W
Total store order or      IBMS/370, DEC VAX,               R ! R, R ! W,        S ! W, S ! R, R ! S, W ! S, S ! S
processor consistency     SPARC                            W!W
Partial store order       SPARC                            R ! R, R ! W         S ! W, S ! R, R ! S, W ! S, S ! S
Weak ordering             PowerPC                                               S ! W, S ! R, R ! S, W ! S, S ! S
Release consistency       MIPS, RISC V, Armv8, C,                               SA ! W, SA ! R, R ! SR, W ! SR,
                          and C++ specifications                                SA ! SA, SA ! SR, SR ! SA, SR ! SR

Figure 5.23 The orderings imposed by various consistency models are shown for both ordinary accesses and
synchronization accesses. The models grow from most restrictive (sequential consistency) to least restrictive (release
consistency), allowing increased flexibility in the implementation. The weaker models rely on fences created by syn-
chronization operations, as opposed to an implicit fence at every memory operation. SA and SR stand for acquire and
release operations, respectively, and are needed to define release consistency. If we were to use the notation SA and
SR for each S consistently, each ordering with one S would become two orderings (e.g., S ! W becomes SA ! W,
SR ! W), and each S ! S would become the four orderings shown in the last line of the bottom-right table entry.

        Sequential           TSO (total store         PSO (partial         Weak ordering                Release
        consistency            order) or              store order)                                    consistency
                               processor
                              consistency
              =A                     =A                     =A                    =A                   =A

            B=                     B=                     B=                     B=                  B=

         acquire (S);           acquire (S);           acquire (S);           acquire (S);           acquire (S);

            C=                    C=                      C=                    C=                     C=

                                       =D                      =D                                          =D
              =D                                                                      =D

         release (S);           release (S);           release (S);          release (S);            release (S);

            E=                     E=                     E=                    E=                     E=

            F=                    F=                      F=                    F=                     F=

Figure 5.24 These examples of the five consistency models discussed in this section show the reduction in the
number of orders imposed as the models become more relaxed. Only the minimum orders are shown with arrows.
Orders implied by transitivity, such as the write of C before the release of S in the sequential consistency model or the
acquire before the release in weak ordering or release consistency, are not shown.

                         performance potential from relaxed models, we highly recommend the excellent
                         tutorial by Adve and Gharachorloo (1996).

               5.7       Cross-Cutting Issues
                         Because multiprocessors redefine many system characteristics (e.g., performance
                         assessment, memory latency, and the importance of scalability), they introduce
                         interesting design problems that cut across the spectrum, affecting both hardware
                         and software. In this section, we give several examples related to the issue of mem-
                         ory consistency. We then examine the performance gained when multithreading is
                         added to multiprocessing.

                         Compiler Optimization and the Consistency Model
                         Another reason for defining a model for memory consistency is to specify the range
                         of legal compiler optimizations that can be performed on shared data. In explicitly
                         parallel programs, unless the synchronization points are clearly defined and the pro-
                         grams are synchronized, the compiler cannot interchange a read and a write of two
                         different shared data items because such transformations might affect the semantics
                         of the program. This restriction prevents even relatively simple optimizations, such
                         as register allocation of shared data, because such a process usually interchanges
                         reads and writes. In implicitly parallelized programs—for example, those written
                         in High Performance Fortran (HPF)—programs must be synchronized and the
                         synchronization points are known, so this issue does not arise. Whether compilers
                         can get significant advantage from more relaxed consistency models remains an
                         open question, both from a research viewpoint and from a practical viewpoint,
                         where the lack of uniform models is likely to retard progress on deploying compilers.

                         Using Speculation to Hide Latency in Strict
                         Consistency Models
                         As we saw in Chapter 3, speculation can be used to hide memory latency. It can
                         also be used to hide latency arising from a strict consistency model, giving much of
                         the benefit of a relaxed memory model. The key idea is for the processor to use
                         dynamic scheduling to reorder memory references, letting them possibly execute
                         out of order. Executing the memory references out of order may generate violations
                         of sequential consistency, which might affect the execution of the program. This
                         possibility is avoided by using the delayed commit feature of a speculative proces-
                         sor. Assume the coherency protocol is based on invalidation. If the processor
                         receives an invalidation for a memory reference before the memory reference is
                         committed, the processor uses speculation recovery to back out of the computation
                         and restart with the memory reference whose address was invalidated.
                             If the reordering of memory requests by the processor yields an execution order
                         that could result in an outcome that differs from what would have been seen under

sequential consistency, the processor will redo the execution. The key to using this
approach is that the processor need only guarantee that the result would be the same
as if all accesses were completed in order, and it can achieve this by detecting when
the results might differ. The approach is attractive because the speculative restart
will rarely be triggered. It will be triggered only when there are unsynchronized
accesses that actually cause a race (Gharachorloo et al., 1992).
     Hill (1998) advocated the combination of sequential or processor consistency
together with speculative execution as the consistency model of choice. His argu-
ment has three parts. First, an aggressive implementation of either sequential con-
sistency or processor consistency will gain most of the advantage of a more relaxed
model. Second, such an implementation adds very little to the implementation cost
of a speculative processor. Third, such an approach allows the programmer to rea-
son using the simpler programming models of either sequential or processor con-
sistency. The MIPS R10000 design team had this insight in the mid-1990s and
used the R10000’s out-of-order capability to support this type of aggressive imple-
mentation of sequential consistency.
     One open question is how successful compiler technology will be in optimizing
memory references to shared variables. The state of optimization technology and
the fact that shared data are often accessed via pointers or array indexing have lim-
ited the use of such optimizations. If this technology were to become available and
lead to significant performance advantages, compiler writers would want to be able
to take advantage of a more relaxed programming model. This possibility and the
desire to keep the future as flexible as possible led the RISC V designers to opt for
release consistency, after a long series of debates.

Inclusion and Its Implementation
All multiprocessors use multilevel cache hierarchies to reduce both the demand on
the global interconnect and the latency of cache misses. If the cache also provides
multilevel inclusion—every level of cache hierarchy is a subset of the level farther
away from the processor—then we can use the multilevel structure to reduce the
contention between coherence traffic and processor traffic that occurs when snoops
and processor cache accesses must contend for the cache. Many multiprocessors
with multilevel caches enforce the inclusion property, although recent multiproces-
sors with smaller L1 caches and different block sizes have sometimes chosen not to
enforce inclusion. This restriction is also called the subset property because each
cache is a subset of the cache below it in the hierarchy.
    At first glance, preserving the multilevel inclusion property seems trivial. Con-
sider a two-level example: Any miss in L1 either hits in L2 or generates a miss in
L2, causing it to be brought into both L1 and L2. Likewise, any invalidate that hits
in L2 must be sent to L1, where it will cause the block to be invalidated if it exists.
    The catch is what happens when the block sizes of L1 and L2 are different.
Choosing different block sizes is quite reasonable, since L2 will be much larger
and have a much longer latency component in its miss penalty, and thus will want

                         to use a larger block size. What happens to our “automatic” enforcement of inclu-
                         sion when the block sizes differ? A block in L2 represents multiple blocks in L1,
                         and a miss in L2 causes the replacement of data that is equivalent to multiple L1
                         blocks. For example, if the block size of L2 is four times that of L1, then a miss in
                         L2 will replace the equivalent of four L1 blocks. Let’s consider a detailed example.

             Example     Assume that L2 has a block size four times that of L1. Show how a miss for an
                         address that causes a replacement in L1 and L2 can lead to violation of the inclu-
                         sion property.

               Answer    Assume that L1 and L2 are direct-mapped and that the block size of L1 is b bytes
                         and the block size of L2 is 4b bytes. Suppose L1 contains two blocks with starting
                         addresses x and x + b and that x mod 4b ¼ 0, meaning that x also is the starting
                         address of a block in L2; then that single block in L2 contains the L1 blocks x,
                         x + b, x + 2b, and x + 3b. Suppose the processor generates a reference to block y that
                         maps to the block containing x in both caches and thus misses. Because L2 missed,
                         it fetches 4b bytes and replaces the block containing x, x + b, x + 2b, and x + 3b,
                         while L1 takes b bytes and replaces the block containing x. Because L1 still con-
                         tains x + b, but L2 does not, the inclusion property no longer holds.

                              To maintain inclusion with multiple block sizes, we must probe the higher
                         levels of the hierarchy when a replacement is done at the lower level to ensure that
                         any words replaced in the lower level are invalidated in the higher-level caches;
                         different levels of associativity create the same sort of problems. Baer and
                         Wang (1988) described the advantages and challenges of inclusion in detail,
                         and in 2017 most designers have opted to implement inclusion, often by settling
                         on one block size for all levels in the cache. For example, the Intel i7 uses inclusion
                         for L3, meaning that L3 always includes the contents of all of L2 and L1. This
                         decision allows the i7 to implement a straightforward directory scheme at L3
                         and to minimize the interference from snooping on L1 and L2 to those circum-
                         stances where the directory indicates that L1 or L2 have a cached copy. The
                         AMD Opteron, in contrast, makes L2 inclusive of L1 but has no such restriction
                         for L3. It uses a snooping protocol, but only needs to snoop at L2 unless there is a
                         hit, in which case a snoop is sent to L1.

                         Performance Gains From Multiprocessing and Multithreading
                         In this section, we briefly look at a study of the effectiveness of using multithread-
                         ing on a multicore processor, the IBM Power5; we will return to this topic in the
                         next section, when we examine the performance of the Intel i7. The IBM Power5 is
                         a dual-core that supports simultaneous multithreading (SMT); its basic architecture
                         is very similar to the more recent Power8 (which we examine in the next section),
                         but it has only two cores per processor.

                       wupwise
                           swim
                          mgrid
                          applu
                          mesa
         SPECfpRate

                          galgel
                              art
                        equake
                        facerec
                         ammp
                           lucas
                         fma3d
                        sixtrack
                          apptu

                           gzip
                            vpr
                           gcc
                           mcf
         SPECintRate

                         crafty
                        parser
                           eon
                       perlbmk
                           gap
                        vortex
                         bzip2
                          twolf
                               0.9         1.0         1.1         1.2          1.3          1.4          1.5
                                                                 Speedup

Figure 5.25 A comparison of SMT and single-thread (ST) performance on the 8-processor IBM eServer p5 575
using SPECfpRate (top half) and SPECintRate (bottom half) as benchmarks. Note that the x-axis starts at a speedup
of 0.9, a performance loss. Only one processor in each Power5 core is active, which should slightly improve the results
from SMT by decreasing destructive interference in the memory system. The SMT results are obtained by creating 16
user threads, whereas the ST results use only eight threads; with only one thread per processor, the Power5 is
switched to single-threaded mode by the OS. These results were collected by John McCalpin at IBM. As we can
see from the data, the standard deviation of the results for the SPECfpRate is higher than for SPECintRate (0.13 versus
0.07), indicating that the SMT improvement for FP programs is likely to vary widely.

                                         To examine the performance of multithreading in a multiprocessor, measure-
                                     ments were made on an IBM system with eight Power5 processors, using only one
                                     core on each processor. Figure 5.25 shows the speedup for an 8-processor Power5
                                     multiprocessor, with and without SMT, for the SPECRate2000 benchmarks, as
                                     described in the caption. On average, the SPECintRate is 1.23 times faster, and
                                     the SPECfpRate is 1.16 times faster. Note that a few floating-point benchmarks
                                     experience a slight decrease in performance in SMT mode, with the maximum

                         reduction in speedup being 0.93. Although one might expect that SMT would do a
                         better job of hiding the higher miss rates of the SPECFP benchmarks, it appears
                         that limits in the memory system are encountered when running in SMT mode
                         on such benchmarks.

               5.8       Putting It All Together: Multicore Processors
                         and Their Performance
                         For roughly 10 years, multicore has been the primary focus for scaling perfor-
                         mance, although the implementations vary widely, as does their support for larger
                         multichip multiprocessors. In this section, we examine the design of three different
                         multicores, the support they provide for larger multiprocessors, and some perfor-
                         mance characteristics, before doing a broader evaluation of small to large multi-
                         processor Xeon systems, and concluding with a detailed evaluation of the
                         multicore i7 920, a predecessor of the i7 6700.

                         Performance of Multicore-Based Multiprocessors
                         on a Multiprogrammed Workload
                         Figure 5.26 shows the key characteristics of three multicore processors designed
                         for server applications and available in 2015 through 2017. The Intel Xeon E7 is
                         based on the same basic design as the i7, but it has more cores, a slightly slower
                         clock rate (power is the limitation), and a larger L3 cache. The Power8 is the new-
                         est in the IBM Power series and features more cores and bigger caches. The Fujitsu
                         SPARC64 X + is the newest SPARC server chip; unlike the T-series mentioned in
                         Chapter 3, it uses SMT. Because these processors are configured for multicore and
                         multiprocessor servers, they are available as a family, varying processor count,
                         cache size, and so on, as the figure shows.
                              These three systems show a range of techniques both for connecting the on-
                         chip cores and for connecting multiple processor chips. First, let’s look at how
                         the cores are connected within a chip. The SPARC64 X + is the simplest: it shares
                         a single L2 cache, which is 24-way set associative, among the 16 cores. There are
                         four separate DIMM channels to attach memory accessible with a 16 ? 4 switch
                         between the cores and the channels.
                              Figure 5.27 shows how the Power8 and Xeon E7 chips are organized. Each
                         core in the Power8 has an 8 MiB bank of L3 directly connected; other banks
                         are accessed via the interconnection network, which has 8 separate buses. Thus
                         the Power8 is a true NUCA (Nonuniform Cache Architecture), because the access
                         time to the attached bank of L3 will be much faster than accessing another L3. Each
                         Power8 chip has a set of links that can be used to build a large multiprocessor using
                         an organization we will see shortly. The memory links are connected to a special
                         memory controller that includes an L4 and interfaces directly with DIMMs.
                              Part B of Figure 5.27, shows how the Xeon E7 processor chip is organized
                         when there are 18 or more cores (20 cores are shown in this figure). Three rings

Feature            IBM Power8                       Intel Xeon E7                           Fujitsu SPARC64 X +
Cores/chip         4, 6, 8, 10, 12                  4, 8, 10, 12, 22, 24                    16
Multithreading     SMT                              SMT                                     SMT
Threads/core       8                                2                                       2
Clock rate         3.1–3.8 GHz                      2.1–3.2 GHz                             3.5 GHz
L1 I cache         32 KB per core                   32 KB per core                          64 KB per core
L1 D cache         64 KB per core                   32 KB per core                          64 KB per core
L2 cache           512 KB per core                  256 KB per core                         24 MiB shared
L3 cache           L3: 32–96 MiB: 8 MiB per         10–60 MiB @ 2.5 MiB per core;           None
                   core (using eDRAM); shared       shared, with larger core counts
                   with nonuniform access time
Inclusion          Yes, L3 superset                 Yes, L3 superset                        Yes
Multicore          Extended MESI with               MESIF: an extended form of MESI         MOESI
coherence          behavioral and locality hints    allowing direct transfers of clean
protocol           (13-states)                      blocks
Multichip          Hybrid strategy with             Hybrid strategy with snooping and       Hybrid strategy with
coherence          snooping and directory           directory                               snooping and directory
implementation
Multiprocessor     Can connect up to 16             Up to 8 processor chips directly via    Crossbar interconnect chip,
interconnect       processor chips with 1 or 2      Quickpath; larger system and            supports up to 64 processors;
support            hops to reach any processor      directory support with additional       includes directory support
                                                    logic
Processor chip     1–16                             2–32                                    1–64
range
Core count         4–192                            12–576                                  8–1024
range

Figure 5.26 Summary of the characteristics of three recent high-end multicore processors (2015–2017 releases)
designed for servers. The table shows the range of processor counts, clock rates, and cache sizes within each pro-
cessor family. The Power8 L3 is a NUCA (Nonuniform Cache Access) design, and it also supports off-chip L4 of up to
128 MiB using EDRAM. A 32-core Xeon has recently been announced, but no system shipments have occurred. The
Fujitsu SPARC64 is also available as an 8-core design, which is normally configured as a single processor system. The
last row shows the range of configured systems with published performance data (such as SPECintRate) with both
processor chip counts and total core counts. The Xeon systems include multiprocessors that extend the basic inter-
connect with additional logic; for example, using the standard Quickpath interconnect limits the processor count to
8 and the largest system to 8 ? 24 ¼ 192 cores, but SGI extends the interconnect (and coherence mechanisms) with
extra logic to offer a 32 processor system using 18-core processor chips for a total size of 576 cores. Newer releases of
these processors increased clock rates (significantly in the Power8 case, less so in others) and core counts (signifi-
cantly in the case of Xeon).

                                connect the cores and the L3 cache banks, and each core and each bank of L3 is
                                connected to two rings. Thus any cache bank or any core is accessible from any
                                other core by choosing the right ring. Therefore, within the chip, the E7 has uni-
                                form access time. In practice, however, the E7 is normally operated as a NUMA
                                architecture by logically associating half the cores with each memory channel; this
                        Core                       Core                           Core                                                                                        Core

                       512 KB                     512 KB                     512 KB                                                                                          512 KB
                         L2                         L2                         L2                                         Up to 12 Cores                                       L2
                                                                                                          ...                                                ...
                         8 MB                       8 MB                            8 MB                                                                                       8 MB
                          L3                         L3                              L3                                                                                         L3
                        Region                     Region                          Region                                                                                     Region

                                                                     On-chip coherence and data interconnect

                   Off-chip             Off-chip           Interrupt                      Accelerator                                                            Memory
                                                                                                                  PHB          PHB
                                                                                                                               PHB                                Memory
                                                                                                                                                                   Memory
                 Intra-group           Intergroup           Control                        Interface                                                             Control
                                                                                                                                                                    Memory
                                                                                                                                                                  Control
                                                                                                                                                                     Memory
                                                                                                                                                                   Control
                  SMP Ctrl              SMP Ctrl                                                                                                                   x8 Memory
                                                                                                                                                                    Control
                                                                                                                                                                    x8 Memory
                                                                             RNG                                            Mux                                      Control
                                                                                                                                                                     x8
                                                                                                                                                                      Control
                                                                                                          CAPP                                                        x8 Memory
                                                                                                                                                                        Control
                                                                                                                                                                        x8
                                                                             Accel                                                                                       x8
                                                                                                                                                                         Control
                                                                                                                                                                          x8
                                                                                    Crypto          Cmp
             Intragroup links                                                       Accel           Accel         PCI gen 3 I/O
             8 B @ 4.8 GHz /                    Intergroup links                                            8 GHz / direction differential                   2 B @ 9.6 GHz read, 1B+cmd
                 direction                     2 B @ 6.4 GHz /                                               (16x+16x) or (16x+8x+8x)                               @ 9.6 GHz write
          x 3 single-ended links                    direction                                                                                                   x 8 differential channels
                                              x 3 differential links
      (A)                                                                                       The Power8 chip organization
                                                                     PCle

                                                                                  PCle

                                                                                            PCle

                                                                                                    DMI
                                                                     x10

                                                                                            x16
                                                                                   x8

                                                                                                     x4

                                                                                                                   Globally routed power
                               Link0

                                          Link1

                                                                                                                                                                  Link2
                                                                                                                    management links

                                                                     Port0        Port1    Port2    DMI
                             QPI Agent                                                                    UBox             PCU                                QPI Agent
                                                                        IOAPIC            IIO      DMA           Msg Ch
                           2x20, 9.6 GT/s                                                                                                                   1x20, 9.6 GT/s

      Core                                              L3              L3                                                   Core                 L3                                     Core
                Core

                                                                                                                    Core

                                                                                                                                                                                Core
                 Bo

                                                                                                                     Bo

                                                                                                                                                                                 Bo
                                            CacheBo                          CacheBo                                                                   CacheBo
    >=2.5 GHz                                         2.5 MB          2.5 MB                                               >=2.5 GHz            2.5 MB                                 >=2.5 GHz

      Core                                              L3              L3                                                   Core                 L3                                     Core
                Core

                                                                                                                    Core

                                                                                                                                                                                Core
                 Bo

                                                                                                                     Bo

                                                                                                                                                                                 Bo
                                            CacheBo                          CacheBo                                                                   CacheBo
    >=2.5 GHz                                         2.5 MB          2.5 MB                                               >=2.5 GHz            2.5 MB                                 >=2.5 GHz

      Core                                              L3              L3                                                   Core                 L3                                     Core
                Core

                                                                                                                    Core

                                                                                                                                                                                Core
                 Bo

                                                                                                                     Bo

                                                                                                                                                                                 Bo
                                            CacheBo                          CacheBo                                                                   CacheBo
    >=2.5 GHz                                         2.5 MB          2.5 MB                                               >=2.5 GHz            2.5 MB                                 >=2.5 GHz

      Core                                              L3              L3                                                   Core                 L3                                     Core
                Core

                                                                                                                    Core

                                                                                                                                                                                Core
                 Bo

                                                                                                                     Bo

                                                                                                                                                                                 Bo

                                            CacheBo                          CacheBo                                                                   CacheBo
    >=2.5 GHz                                         2.5 MB          2.5 MB                                               >=2.5 GHz            2.5 MB                                 >=2.5 GHz

      Core                                              L3              L3                                                   Core                 L3                                     Core
                Core

                                                                                                                    Core

                                                                                                                                                                                Core
                 Bo

                                                                                                                     Bo

                                                                                                                                                                                 Bo

                                            CacheBo                          CacheBo                                                                   CacheBo
    >=2.5 GHz                                         2.5 MB          2.5 MB                                               >=2.5 GHz            2.5 MB                                 >=2.5 GHz

                                                             Home Agent                                                              Home Agent

                                                                                                                                  DDR (2 channels)
                                                            DD (4 channels)
                                                      DD

                                                                                           DD
                                                                DD

                                                                             DD

                                                                                                                                           DD

                                                                                                                                                    DD

    (B)                                                                             The Xeon E7 organization

Figure 5.27 The on-chip organizations of the Power8 and Xeon E7 are shown. The Power8 uses 8 separate buses
between L3 and the CPU cores. Each Power8 also has two sets of links for connecting larger multiprocessors. The
Xeon uses three rings to connect processors and L3 cache banks, as well QPI for interchip links. Software is used
to logically associate half the cores with each memory channel.

      increases the probability that a desired memory page is open on a given access. The
      E7 provides 3 QuickPath Interconnect (QPI) links for connecting multiple E7s.
          Multiprocessors consisting of these multicores use a variety of different inter-
      connection strategies, as Figure 5.28 shows. The Power8 design provides support
      for connecting 16 Power8 chips for a total of 192 cores. The intragroup links pro-
      vide higher bandwidth interconnect among a completely connected module of 4
      processor chips. The intergroup links are used to connect each processor chip to
      the 3 other modules. Thus each processor is two hops from any other, and the mem-
      ory access time is determined by whether an address resides in local memory, clus-
      ter memory, or intercluster memory (actually the latter can have two different
      values, but the difference is swamped by the intercluster time).
          The Xeon E7 uses QPI to interconnect multiple multicore chips. In a 4-chip,
      multiprocessor, which with the latest announced Xeon could have 128 cores,
      the three QPI links on each processor are connected to three neighbors, yielding
      a 4-chip fully connected multiprocessor. Because memory is directly connected
      to each E7 multicore, even this 4-chip arrangement has nonuniform memory access
      time (local versus remote). Figure 5.28 shows how 8 E7 processors can be con-
      nected; like the Power8, this leads to a situation where every processor is one
      or two hops from every other processor. There are a number of Xeon-based mul-
      tiprocessor servers that have more than 8 processor chips. In such designs, the typ-
      ical organization is to connect 4 processor chips together in a square, as a module,
      with each processor connecting to two neighbors. The third QPI in each chip is
      connected to a crossbar switch. Very large systems can be created in this fashion.
      Memory accesses can then occur at four locations with different timings: local to
      the processor, an immediate neighbor, the neighbor in the cluster that is two hops
      away, and through the crossbar. Other organizations are possible and require less
      than a full crossbar in return for more hops to get to remote memory.
          The SPARC64 X + also uses a 4-processor module, but each processor has
      three connections to its immediate neighbors plus two (or three in the largest con-
      figuration) connections to a crossbar. In the largest configuration, 64 processor
      chips can be connected to two crossbar switches, for a total of 1024 cores. Memory
      access is NUMA (local, within a module, and through the crossbar), and coherency
      is directory-based.

      Performance of Multicore-Based Multiprocessors
      on a Multiprogrammed Workload
      First, we compare the performance scalability of these three multicore processors
      using SPECintRate, considering configurations up to 64 cores. Figure 5.29 shows
      how the performance scales relative to the performance of the smallest configura-
      tion, which varies between 4 and 16 cores. In the plot, the smallest configuration is
      assumed to have perfect speedup (i.e., 8 for 8 cores, 12 for 12 cores, etc.). This
      figure does not show performance among these different processors. Indeed such
      performance varies significantly: in the 4-core configuration, the IBM Power8 is

                      4 chip
                      group         12-core        12-core            12-core         12-core
                                    Power 8        Power 8            Power 8         Power 8

                                    12-core        12-core            12-core         12-core
                                    Power 8        Power 8            Power 8         Power 8

                                    12-core        12-core            12-core         12-core
                 25.6 GB/s          Power 8        Power 8            Power 8         Power 8
                Inter-group
                   Cable

                                    12-core        12-core            12-core         12-core
                                    Power 8        Power 8            Power 8         Power 8
                 78.4 GB/s
                Intra-group
                        Bus

                (A)                           Power8 system with up to 16 chips.

                                                                        CPU

                                                                        CPU                     XB

           E7          E7         E7          E7
                                                                        CPU                     XB

           E7          E7        E7           E7                        CPU

       (B) Xeon E7 system showing with up to 8 chips.        (C) SPARC64 X+ with the 4-chip building block.

Figure 5.28 The system architecture for three multiprocessors built from multicore chips.

                                                         84
                                                         80
                                                                  IBM Power8
                                                         76
                                                                  Fujitsu SPARC64 X+
                                                         72
        Speedup relative to the smallest configuration
                                                                  Intel Xeon E7
                                                         68
                                                         64
                                                         60
                                                         56
                                                         52
                                                         48
                                                         44
                                                         40
                                                         36
                                                         32
                                                         28
                                                         24
                                                         20
                                                         16
                                                         12
                                                          8
                                                          4
                                                              4   8    12     16     20    24    28      32    36     40   44   48    52     56    60    64
                                                                                                      Number of cores

Figure 5.29 The performance scaling on the SPECintRate benchmarks for four multicore processors as the
number of cores is increased to 64. Performance for each processor is plotted relative to the smallest configuration
and assuming that configuration had perfect speedup. Although this chart shows how a given multiprocessor
scales with additional cores, it does not supply any data about performance among processors. There are differences
in the clock rates, even within a given processor family. These are generally swamped by the core scaling effects,
except for the Power8 that shows a clock range spread of 1.5 ? from the smallest configuration to the 64 core
configuration.

                                                                            1.5 times as fast as the SPARC64 X + on a per core basis! Instead Figure 5.29
                                                                            shows how the performance scales for each processor family as additional cores
                                                                            are added.
                                                                                Two of the three processors show diminishing returns as they scale to 64 cores.
                                                                            The Xeon systems appear to show the most degradation at 56 and 64 cores. This
                                                                            may be largely due to having more cores share a smaller L3. For example, the 40-
                                                                            core system uses 4 chips, each with 60 MiB of L3, yielding 6 MiB of L3 per core.
                                                                            The 56-core and 64-core systems also use 4 chips but have 35 or 45 MiB of L3 per
                                                                            chip, or 2.5–2.8 MiB per core. It is likely that the resulting larger L3 miss rates lead
                                                                            to the reduction in speedup for the 56-core and 64-core systems.
                                                                                The IBM Power8 results are also unusual, appearing to show significant super-
                                                                            linear speedup. This effect, however, is due largely to differences in the clock rates,
                                                                            which are much larger across the Power8 processors than for the other processors

                                                       600
                                                       580
                                                       560        IBM Power8
                                                       540
                                                       520        Fujitu SPARC64 X+
                                                       500        Intel Xeon E7
                                                       480
      Speedup relative to the smallest configuration

                                                       460
                                                       440
                                                       420
                                                       400
                                                       380
                                                       360
                                                       340
                                                       320
                                                       300
                                                       280
                                                       260
                                                       240
                                                       220
                                                       200
                                                       180
                                                       160
                                                       140
                                                       120
                                                       100
                                                        80
                                                        60
                                                        40
                                                        20
                                                         0
                                                             0
                                                                 20
                                                                 40
                                                                      60
                                                                      80

                                                                              0
                                                                              0
                                                                              0
                                                                              0
                                                                              0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                              0
                                                                              0
                                                                             0
                                                                              0
                                                                              0
                                                                             0
                                                                              0
                                                                             0
                                                                              0
                                                                              0
                                                                              0
                                                                              0
                                                                              0
                                                                             0
                                                                              0
                                                                             0
                                                                              0
                                                                             0
                                                                           10
                                                                           12
                                                                           14
                                                                           16
                                                                           18
                                                                           20
                                                                           22
                                                                           24
                                                                           26
                                                                           28
                                                                           30
                                                                           32
                                                                           34
                                                                           36
                                                                           38
                                                                           40
                                                                           42
                                                                           44
                                                                           46
                                                                           48
                                                                           50
                                                                           52
                                                                           54
                                                                           56
                                                                           58
                                                                           60
                                                                                                   Number of cores

Figure 5.30 The scaling of relative performance for multiprocessor multicore. As before, performance is shown
relative to the smallest available system. The Xeon result at 80 cores is the same L3 effect that showed up for smaller
configurations. All systems larger than 80 cores have between 2.5 and 3.8 MiB of L3 per core, and the 80-core, or
smaller, systems have 6 MiB per core.

                                                                           in this figure. In particular, the 64-core configuration has the highest clock rate
                                                                           (4.4 GHz), whereas the 4-core configuration has a 3.0 GHz clock. If we normalize
                                                                           the relative speedup for the 64-core system based on the clock rate differential with
                                                                           the 4-core system, the effective speedup is 57 rather than 84. Therefore, while the
                                                                           Power8 system scales well, and perhaps the best among these processors, it is not
                                                                           miraculous.
                                                                               Figure 5.30 shows scaling for these three systems at configurations above 64
                                                                           processors. Once again, the clock rate differential explains the Power8 results; the
                                                                           clock-rate equivalent scaled speedup with 192 processors is 167, versus 223, when
                                                                           not accounting for clock rate differences. Even at 167, the Power8 scaling is some-
                                                                           what better than that on the SPARC64 X + or Xeon systems. Surprisingly, although
                                                                           there are some effects on speedup in going from the smallest system to 64 cores,
                                                                           they do not seem to get dramatically worse at these larger configurations. The
                                                                           nature of the workload, which is highly parallel and user-CPU-intensive, and
                                                                           the overheads paid in going to 64 cores probably lead to this result.

      Scalability in an Xeon MP With Different Workloads
      In this section, we focus on the scalability of the Xeon E7 multiprocessors on three
      different workloads: a Java-based commercially oriented workload, a virtual
      machine workload, and a scientific parallel processing workload, all from the
      SPEC benchmarking organization, as described next.

      ■   SPECjbb2015: Models a supermarket IT system that handles a mix of
          point-of-sale requests, online purchases, and data-mining operations. The
          performance metric is throughput-oriented, and we use the maximum per-
          formance measurement on the server side running multiple Java virtual
          machines.
      ■   SPECVirt2013: Models a collection of virtual machines running independent
          mixes of other SPEC benchmarks, including CPU benchmarks, web servers,
          and mail servers. The system must meet a quality of service guarantee for each
          virtual machine.
      ■   SPECOMP2012: A collection of 14 scientific and engineering programs writ-
          ten with the OpenMP standard for shared-memory parallel processing. The
          codes are written in Fortran, C, and C++ and range from fluid dynamics to
          molecular modeling to image manipulation.

          As with the previous results, Figure 5.31 shows performance assuming linear
      speedup on the smallest configuration, which for these benchmarks varies from 48
      cores to 72 cores, and plotting performance relative to the that smallest configu-
      ration. The SPECjbb2015 and SPECVirt2013 include significant systems soft-
      ware, including the Java VM software and the VM hypervisor. Other than the
      system software, the interaction among the processes is very small. In contrast,
      SPECOMP2012 is a true parallel code with multiple user processes sharing data
      and collaborating in the computation.
          Let’s begin by examining SPECjbb2015. It obtains speedup efficiency
      (speedup/processor ratio) of between 78% and 95%, showing good speedup, even
      in the largest configuration. SPECVirt2013 does even better (for the range of sys-
      tem measured), obtaining almost linear speedup at 192 cores. Both SPECjbb2015
      and SPECVirt2013 are benchmarks that scale up the application size (as in the TPC
      benchmarks discussed in Chapter 1) with larger systems so that the effects of
      Amdahl’s Law and interprocess communication are minor.
          Finally, let’s turn to SPECOMP2012, the most compute-intensive of these
      benchmarks and the one that truly involves parallel processing. The major trend
      visible here is a steady loss of efficiency as we scale from 30 to 576 cores so that
      by 576 cores, the system exhibits only half the efficiency it showed at 30 cores.
      This reduction leads to a relative speedup of 284, assuming that the 30-core
      speedup is 30. These are probably Amdahl’s Law effects resulting from limited
      parallelism as well as synchronization and communication overheads. Unlike

                                                            340

                                                            320
                                                                         SPECVirtSC2013
                                                            300          SPECJBB2015
       Performance relative to the smallest configuration

                                                                         SPECOMP2012
                                                            280

                                                            260

                                                            240

                                                            220

                                                            200

                                                            180

                                                            160

                                                            140

                                                            120

                                                            100

                                                             80

                                                             60

                                                             40
                                                               40
                                                                    60
                                                                          80
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                            0
                                                                         10
                                                                         12
                                                                         14
                                                                         16
                                                                         18
                                                                         20
                                                                         22
                                                                         24
                                                                         26
                                                                         28
                                                                         30
                                                                         32
                                                                         34
                                                                         36
                                                                         38
                                                                         40
                                                                         42
                                                                         44
                                                                         46
                                                                         48
                                                                         50
                                                                         52
                                                                         54
                                                                         56
                                                                         58
Figure 5.31 Scaling of performance on a range of Xeon E7 systems showing performance relative to the smallest
benchmark configuration, and assuming that configuration gets perfect speedup (e.g., the smallest SPEWCOMP
configuration is 30 cores and we assume a performance of 30 for that system). Only relative performance can be
assessed from this data, and comparisons across the benchmarks have no relevance. Note the difference in the scale
of the vertical and horizontal axes.

                                                                               the SPECjbb2015 and SPECVirt2013, these benchmarks are not scaled for larger
                                                                               systems.

                                                                               Performance and Energy Efficiency of the Intel i7 920
                                                                               Multicore
                                                                               In this section, we closely examine the performance of the i7 920, a predecessor of
                                                                               the 6700, on the same two groups of benchmarks we considered in Chapter 3: the
                                                                               parallel Java benchmarks and the parallel PARSEC benchmarks (described in detail
                                                                               in Figure 3.32 on page 247). Although this study uses the older i7 920, it remains, by
                                                                               far, the most comprehensive study of energy efficiency in multicore processors and
                                                                               the effects of multicore combined with SMT. The fact that the i7 920 and 6700 are
                                                                               similar indicates that the basic insights should also apply to the 6700.

                                                      First, we look at the multicore performance and scaling versus a single-core
                                                  without the use of SMT. Then we combine both the multicore and SMT capabil-
                                                  ity. All the data in this section, like that in the earlier i7 SMT evaluation
                                                  (Chapter 3) come from Esmaeilzadeh et al. (2011). The dataset is the same as
                                                  that used earlier (see Figure 3.32 on page 247), except that the Java benchmarks
                                                  tradebeans and pjbb2005 are removed (leaving only the five scalable Java bench-
                                                  marks); tradebeans and pjbb2005 never achieve speedup above 1.55 even with
                                                  four cores and a total of eight threads, and thus are not appropriate for evaluating
                                                  more cores.
                                                      Figure 5.32 plots both the speedup and energy efficiency of the Java and
                                                  PARSEC benchmarks without the use of SMT. Energy efficiency is computed
                                                  by the ratio: energy consumed by the single-core run divided by the energy con-
                                                  sumed by the two- or four-core run (i.e., efficiency is the inverse of energy con-
                                                  sumed). Higher energy efficiency means that the processor consumes less
                                                  energy for the same computation, with a value of 1.0 being the break-even

                                             4                                                           1.10
                                                        PARSEC energy efficiency
                                                        PARSEC speedup                                   1.08
                                                        Java speedup
                                            3.5         Java energy efficiency                           1.06

                                                                                                         1.04

                                             3                                                           1.02

                                                                                                                i7 2P and 4P energy efficiency
                                                                                                         1.00
                     i7 2P and 4P speedup

                                            2.5                                                          0.98

                                                                                                         0.96

                                             2                                                           0.94

                                                                                                         0.92

                                            1.5                                                          0.90

                                                                                                         0.88

                                             1                                                           0.86
                                                              2P                         4P
                                                                            Cores

Figure 5.32 This chart shows the speedup and energy efficiency for two- and four-core executions of the par-
allel Java and PARSEC workloads without SMT. These data were collected by Esmaeilzadeh et al. (2011) using the
same setup as described in Chapter 3. Turbo Boost is turned off. The speedup and energy efficiency are summarized
using harmonic mean, implying a workload where the total time spent running each benchmark on 2 cores is
equivalent.

                         point. The unused cores in all cases were in deep sleep mode, which minimized
                         their power consumption by essentially turning them off. In comparing the data
                         for the single-core and multicore benchmarks, it is important to remember that
                         the full energy cost of the L3 cache and memory interface is paid in the single-
                         core (as well as the multicore) case. This fact increases the likelihood that
                         energy consumption will improve for applications that scale reasonably well.
                         Harmonic mean is used to summarize results with the implication described
                         in the caption.
                              As the figure shows, the PARSEC benchmarks get better speedup than the
                         Java benchmarks, achieving 76% speedup efficiency (i.e., actual speedup
                         divided by processor count) on four cores, whereas the Java benchmarks
                         achieve 67% speedup efficiency on four cores. Although this observation is
                         clear from the data, analyzing why this difference exists is difficult. It is quite
                         possible that Amdahl’s Law effects have reduced the speedup for the Java
                         workload, which includes some typically serial parts, such as the garbage
                         collector. In addition, interaction between the processor architecture and the
                         application, which affects issues such as the cost of synchronization or commu-
                         nication, may also play a role. In particular, well-parallelized applications, such
                         as those in PARSEC, sometimes benefit from an advantageous ratio between
                         computation and communication, which reduces the dependence on communi-
                         cations costs (see Appendix I).
                              These differences in speedup translate to differences in energy efficiency.
                         For example, the PARSEC benchmarks actually slightly improve energy effi-
                         ciency over the single-core version; this result may be significantly affected by
                         the fact that the L3 cache is more effectively used in the multicore runs than in
                         the single-core case and the energy cost is identical in both cases. Thus, for the
                         PARSEC benchmarks, the multicore approach achieves what designers hoped
                         for when they switched from an ILP-focused design to a multicore design; namely,
                         it scales performance as fast or faster than scaling power, resulting in constant or
                         even improved energy efficiency. In the Java case, we see that neither the two- nor
                         four-core runs break even in energy efficiency because of the lower speedup levels
                         of the Java workload (although Java energy efficiency for the 2p run is the same
                         as for PARSEC). The energy efficiency in the four-core Java case is reasonably
                         high (0.94). It is likely that an ILP-centric processor would need even more power
                         to achieve a comparable speedup on either the PARSEC or Java workload. Thus
                         the TLP-centric approach is also certainly better than the ILP-centric approach for
                         improving performance for these applications. As we will see in Section 5.10, there
                         are reasons to be pessimistic about simple, efficient, long-term scaling of
                         multicore.

                         Putting Multicore and SMT Together
                         Finally, we consider the combination of multicore and multithreading by measur-
                         ing the two benchmark sets for two to four processors and one to two threads
                         (a total of four data points and up to eight threads). Figure 5.33 shows the speedup

                                                        4                                               1.20

                                                                                                               i7 2Px1T, 2Px2T, 4Px1T, and 4Px2T energy efficiency
                                                             PARSEC speedup
                                                             Java speedup

           i7 2Px1T, 2Px2T, 4Px1T, and 4Px2T speedup
                                                             PARSEC energy efficiency                   1.15
                                                       3.5   Java energy efficiency
                                                                                                        1.10

                                                        3
                                                                                                        1.05

                                                       2.5                                              1.00

                                                                                                        0.95
                                                        2

                                                                                                        0.90

                                                       1.5
                                                                                                        0.85

                                                        1                                               0.80
                                                             2Px1T          2Px2T       4Px1T   4Px2T

Figure 5.33 This chart shows the speedup for two- and four-core executions of the
      parallel Java and PARSEC workloads both with and without SMT. Remember that the
      preceding results vary in the number of threads from two to eight and reflect both archi-
      tectural effects and application characteristics. Harmonic mean is used to summarize
      results, as discussed in the Figure 5.32 caption.

      and energy efficiency obtained on the Intel i7 when the processor count is two or
      four and SMT is or is not employed, using harmonic mean to summarize the two
      benchmarks sets. Clearly, SMT can add to performance when there is sufficient
      thread-level parallelism available even in the multicore situation. For example,
      in the four-core, no-SMT case, the speedup efficiencies were 67% and 76% for
      Java and PARSEC, respectively. With SMT on four cores, those ratios are an
      astonishing 83% and 97%.
          Energy efficiency presents a slightly different picture. In the case of PARSEC,
      speedup is essentially linear for the four-core SMT case (eight threads), and power
      scales more slowly, resulting in an energy efficiency of 1.1 for that case. The Java
      situation is more complex; energy efficiency peaks for the two-core SMT (four-
      thread) run at 0.97 and drops to 0.89 in the four-core SMT (eight-thread) run. It
      seems highly likely that the Java benchmarks are encountering Amdahl’s Law
      effects when more than four threads are deployed. As some architects have
      observed, multicore does shift more responsibility for performance (and thus
      energy efficiency) to the programmer, and the results for the Java workload
      certainly bear this out.

               5.9        Fallacies and Pitfalls
                          Given the lack of maturity in our understanding of parallel computing, there are
                          many hidden pitfalls that will be uncovered either by careful designers or by unfor-
                          tunate ones. Given the large amount of hype that has surrounded multiprocessors
                          over the years, common fallacies abound. We have included a selection of them.
                Pitfall   Measuring performance of multiprocessors by linear speedup versus execution
                          time.
                          Graphs like those in Figures 5.32 and 5.33, which plot performance versus number
                          of processors, showing linear speedup, a plateau, and then a falling off, have long
                          been used to judge the success of parallel processors. Although speedup is one
                          facet of a parallel program, it is not a direct measure of performance. The first issue
                          is the power of the processors being scaled: a program that linearly improves per-
                          formance to equal 100 Intel Atom processors (the low-end processor used for net-
                          books) may be slower than the version run on an 8-core Xeon. Be especially careful
                          of floating-point-intensive programs; processing elements without hardware assist
                          may scale wonderfully but have poor collective performance.
                               Comparing execution times is fair only if you are comparing the best algo-
                          rithms on each computer. Comparing the identical code on two computers may
                          seem fair, but it is not; the parallel program may be slower on a uniprocessor than
                          on a sequential version. Developing a parallel program will sometimes lead to
                          algorithmic improvements, so comparing the previously best-known sequential
                          program with the parallel code—which seems fair—will not compare equivalent
                          algorithms. To reflect this issue, the terms relative speedup (same program) and
                          true speedup (best program) are sometimes used.
                               Results that suggest superlinear performance, when a program on n processors
                          is more than n times faster than the equivalent uniprocessor, may indicate that the
                          comparison is unfair, although there are instances where “real” superlinear
                          speedups have been encountered. For example, some scientific applications regu-
                          larly achieve superlinear speedup for small increases in processor count (2 or 4 to
                          8 or 16). These results usually arise because critical data structures that do not fit
                          into the aggregate caches of a multiprocessor with 2 or 4 processors fit into the
                          aggregate cache of a multiprocessor with 8 or 16 processors. As we saw in the pre-
                          vious section, other differences (such as high clock rate) may appear to yield super-
                          linear speedups when comparing slightly different systems.
                               In summary, comparing performance by comparing speedups is at best tricky
                          and at worst misleading. Comparing the speedups for two different multiproces-
                          sors does not necessarily tell us anything about the relative performance of the mul-
                          tiprocessors, as we also saw in the previous section. Even comparing two different
                          algorithms on the same multiprocessor is tricky because we must use true speedup,
                          rather than relative speedup, to obtain a valid comparison.
               Fallacy    Amdahl’s Law doesn’t apply to parallel computers.
                          In 1987 the head of a research organization claimed that Amdahl’s Law (see
                          Section 1.9) had been broken by an MIMD multiprocessor. This statement hardly

          meant, however, that the law has been overturned for parallel computers; the
          neglected portion of the program will still limit performance. To understand the
          basis of the media reports, let’s see what Amdahl (1967) originally said:
                A fairly obvious conclusion which can be drawn at this point is that the effort
                expended on achieving high parallel processing rates is wasted unless it is
                accompanied by achievements in sequential processing rates of very nearly the
                same magnitude. [p. 483]

          One interpretation of the law was that, because portions of every program must be
          sequential, there is a limit to the useful economic number of processors—say, 100.
          By showing linear speedup with 1000 processors, this interpretation of Amdahl’s
          Law was disproved.
              The basis for the statement that Amdahl’s Law had been “overcome” was the
          use of scaled speedup, also called weak scaling. The researchers scaled the bench-
          mark to have a dataset size that was 1000 times larger and compared the unipro-
          cessor and parallel execution times of the scaled benchmark. For this particular
          algorithm, the sequential portion of the program was constant independent of
          the size of the input, and the rest was fully parallel—thus, linear speedup with
          1000 processors. Because the running time grew faster than linear, the program
          actually ran longer after scaling, even with 1000 processors.
              Speedup that assumes scaling of the input is not the same as true speedup, and
          reporting it as if it were is misleading. Because parallel benchmarks are often run
          on different-sized multiprocessors, it is important to specify what type of applica-
          tion scaling is permissible and how that scaling should be done. Although simply
          scaling the data size with processor count is rarely appropriate, assuming a fixed
          problem size for a much larger processor count (called strong scaling) is often
          inappropriate, as well, because it is likely that users given a much larger multipro-
          cessor would opt to run a larger or more detailed version of an application. See
          Appendix I for more discussion on this important topic.
Fallacy   Linear speedups are needed to make multiprocessors cost-effective.
          It is widely recognized that one of the major benefits of parallel computing is to offer
          a “shorter time to solution” than the fastest uniprocessor. Many people, however,
          also hold the view that parallel processors cannot be as cost-effective as uniproces-
          sors unless they can achieve perfect linear speedup. This argument says that, because
          the cost of the multiprocessor is a linear function of the number of processors, any-
          thing less than linear speedup means that the performance/cost ratio decreases, mak-
          ing a parallel processor less cost-effective than using a uniprocessor.
                The problem with this argument is that cost is not only a function of processor
          count but also depends on memory, I/O, and the overhead of the system (box,
          power supply, interconnect, etc.). It also makes less sense in the multicore era,
          when there are multiple processors per chip.
                The effect of including memory in the system cost was pointed out by Wood
          and Hill (1995). We use an example based on more recent data using TPC-C and
          SPECRate benchmarks, but the argument could also be made with a parallel sci-
          entific application workload, which would likely make the case even stronger.

                 72

                              Linear speedup
                 64           Speedup TPM
                              Speedup SPECintRate
                 56           Speedup SPECfpRate

                 48
       Speedup

                 40

                 32

                 24

                 16

                  8

                  0
                      0         8           16       24         32          40        48         56        64
                                                          Processor count

Figure 5.34 Speedup for three benchmarks on an IBM eServer p5 multiprocessor when configured with 4, 8, 16,
32, and 64 processors. The dashed line shows linear speedup.

                                        Figure 5.34 shows the speedup for TPC-C, SPECintRate, and SPECfpRate on
                                    an IBM eServer p5 multiprocessor configured with 4–64 processors. The figure
                                    shows that only TPC-C achieves better than linear speedup. For SPECintRate
                                    and SPECfpRate, speedup is less than linear, but so is the cost, because unlike
                                    TPC-C, the amount of main memory and disk required both scale less than linearly.
                                        As Figure 5.35 shows, larger processor counts can actually be more cost-
                                    effective than the 4-processor configuration. In comparing the cost-performance
                                    of two computers, we must be sure to include accurate assessments of both total
                                    system cost and what performance is achievable. For many applications with larger
                                    memory demands, such a comparison can dramatically increase the attractiveness
                                    of using a multiprocessor.
                          Pitfall   Not developing the software to take advantage of, or optimize for, a multiproces-
                                    sor architecture.
                                    There is a long history of software lagging behind on multiprocessors, probably
                                    because the software problems are much harder. We give one example to show
                                    the subtlety of the issues, but there are many examples we could choose from.
                                        One frequently encountered problem occurs when software designed for a uni-
                                    processor is adapted to a multiprocessor environment. For example, the SGI

                                                            1.15
                                                                                                                                TPM performance/cost
       Performance/cost relative to four-processor system                                                                       SPECint performance/cost
                                                            1.10                                                                SPECfp performance/cost

                                                            1.05

                                                            1.00

                                                            0.95

                                                            0.90

                                                            0.85
                                                                   0   8           16         24         32          40            48         56           64
                                                                                                   Processor count

Figure 5.35 The performance/cost for IBM eServer p5 multiprocessors with 4–64 processors is shown relative to
the 4-processor configuration. Any measurement above 1.0 indicates that the configuration is more cost-effective than
the 4-processor system. The 8-processor configurations show an advantage for all three benchmarks, whereas two of the
three benchmarks show a cost-performance advantage in the 16- and 32-processor configurations. For TPC-C, the con-
figurations are those used in the official runs, which means that disk and memory scale nearly linearly with processor
count, and a 64-processor machine is approximately twice as expensive as a 32-processor version. In contrast, the disk
and memory are scaled more slowly (although still faster than necessary to achieve the best SPECRate at 64 processors). In
particular, the disk configurations go from one drive for the 4-processor version to four drives (140 GB) for the 64-
processor version. Memory is scaled from 8 GiB for the 4-processor system to 20 GiB for the 64-processor system.

                                                                           operating system in 2000 originally protected the page table data structure with a
                                                                           single lock, assuming that page allocation was infrequent. In a uniprocessor, this
                                                                           does not represent a performance problem. In a multiprocessor, it can become a
                                                                           major performance bottleneck for some programs.
                                                                               Consider a program that uses a large number of pages that are initialized at
                                                                           startup, which UNIX does for statically allocated pages. Suppose the program is
                                                                           parallelized so that multiple processes allocate the pages. Because page allocation
                                                                           requires the use of the page table data structure, which is locked whenever it is in
                                                                           use, even an OS kernel that allows multiple threads in the OS will be serialized if
                                                                           the processes all try to allocate their pages at once (which is exactly what we might
                                                                           expect at initialization time).

                             This page table serialization eliminates parallelism in initialization and has sig-
                         nificant impact on overall parallel performance. This performance bottleneck per-
                         sists even under multiprogramming. For example, suppose we split the parallel
                         program apart into separate processes and run them, one process per processor,
                         so that there is no sharing between the processes. (This is exactly what one user
                         did, because he reasonably believed that the performance problem was due to unin-
                         tended sharing or interference in his application.) Unfortunately, the lock still seri-
                         alizes all the processes, so even the multiprogramming performance is poor. This
                         pitfall indicates the kind of subtle but significant performance bugs that can arise
                         when software runs on multiprocessors. Like many other key software compo-
                         nents, the OS algorithms and data structures must be rethought in a multiprocessor
                         context. Placing locks on smaller portions of the page table effectively eliminates
                         the problem. Similar problems exist in memory structures, which increases the
                         coherence traffic in cases where no sharing is actually occurring.
                             As multicore became the dominant theme in everything from desktops to
                         servers, the lack of an adequate investment in parallel software became apparent.
                         Given the lack of focus, it will likely be many years before the software systems we
                         use adequately exploit the growing numbers of cores.

              5.10       The Future of Multicore Scaling
                         For more than 30 years, researchers and designers have predicted the end of uni-
                         processors and their dominance by multiprocessors. Until the early years of this
                         century, this prediction was constantly proven wrong. As we saw in Chapter 3,
                         the costs of trying to find and exploit more ILP became prohibitive in efficiency
                         (both in silicon area and in power). Of course, multicore does not magically solve
                         the power problem because it clearly increases both the transistor count and the
                         active number of transistors switching, which are the two dominant contributions
                         to power. As we will see in this section, energy issues are likely to limit multicore
                         scaling more severely than previously thought.
                             ILP scaling failed because of both limitations in the ILP available and the effi-
                         ciency of exploiting that ILP. Similarly, a combination of two factors means that
                         simply scaling performance by adding cores is unlikely to be broadly successful.
                         This combination arises from the challenges posed by Amdahl’s Law, which
                         assesses the efficiency of exploiting parallelism, and the end of Dennard’s Scaling,
                         which dictates the energy required for a multicore processor.
                             To understand these factors, we take a simple model of both technology scaling
                         (based on an extensive and highly detailed analysis in Esmaeilzadeh et al. (2012)).
                         Let’s start by reviewing energy consumption and power in CMOS. Recall from
                         Chapter 1 that the energy to switch a transistor is given as
                                                  Energy / Capacitive load ? Voltage2

                         CMOS scaling is limited primarily by thermal power, which is a combination of static
                         leakage power and dynamic power, which tends to dominate. Power is given by

Device count scaling (since a transistor is 1/4 the size)                                                  4
Frequency scaling (based on projections of device speed)                                                   1.75
Voltage scaling projected                                                                                  0.81
Capacitance scaling projected                                                                              0.39
Energy per switched transistor scaling (CV2)                                                               0.26
Power scaling assuming fraction of transistors switching is the same and chip exhibits full frequency      1.79
scaling

Figure 5.36 A comparison of the 22 nm technology of 2016 with a future 11 nm technology, likely to be available
sometime between 2022 and 2024. The characteristics of the 11 nm technology are based on the International Tech-
nology Roadmap for Semiconductors, which has been recently discontinued because of uncertainty about the con-
tinuation of Moore’s Law and what scaling characteristics will be seen.

                                        Power ¼ Energy per Transistor ? Frequency ? Transistors switched

                                               ¼ Capacitive load ? Voltage2 ? Frequency ? Transistors switched

                                To understand the implications of how energy and power scale, let’s compare
                                today’s 22 nm technology with a technology projected to be available in 2021–
                                24 (depending on the rate at which Moore’s Law continues to slow down).
                                Figure 5.36 shows this comparison based on technology projections and resulting
                                effects on energy and power scaling. Notice that power scaling > 1.0 means that the
                                future device consumes more power; in this case, 1.79? as much.
                                    Consider the implications of this for one of the latest Intel Xeon processors, the
                                E7-8890, which has 24 cores, 7.2 billion transistors (including almost 70 MiB of
                                cache), operates at 2.2 GHz, has a thermal power rating of 165 watts, and a die size
                                of 456 mm2. The clock frequency is already limited by power dissipation: a 4-core
                                version has a clock of 3.2 GHz, and a 10-core version has a 2.8 GHz clock. With
                                the 11 nm technology, the same size die would accommodate 96 cores with almost
                                280 MiB of cache and operate at a clock rate (assuming perfect frequency scaling)
                                of 4.9 GHz. Unfortunately, with all cores operating and no efficiency improve-
                                ments, it would consume 165 ? 1.79 ¼ 295 watts. If we assume the 165-W heat
                                dissipation limit remains, then only 54 cores can be active. This limit yields a max-
                                imum performance speedup of 54/24 ¼ 2.25 over a 5–6 year period, less than one-
                                half the performance scaling seen in the late 1990s. Furthermore, we may have
                                Amdahl’s Law effects, as the next example shows.

                Example         Suppose we have a 96-core future generation processor, but on average only 54
                                cores can be busy. Suppose that 90% of the time, we can use all available cores;
                                9% of the time, we can use 50 cores; and 1% of the time is strictly serial. How much
                                speedup might we expect? Assume that cores can be turned off when not in use and
                                draw no power and assume that the use of a different number of cores is distributed
                                so that we need to worry only about average power consumption. How would the

                         multicore speedup compare to the 24-processor count version that can use all its
                         processor 99% of the time?

               Answer    We can find how many cores can be used for the 90% of the time when more than
                         54 are usable, as follows:
                                 Average Processor Usage ¼ 0:09 ? 50 + 0:01 ? 1 + 0:90 ? Max processor
                                                   54 ¼ 4:51 + 0:90 ? Max processor
                                                         Max processor ¼ 55

                         Now, we can find the speedup:
                                                                         1
                                    Speedup ¼
                                                Fraction55 Fraction50
                                                          +           + ð1 ? Fraction55 ? Fraction50 Þ
                                                    55         50
                                                                     1
                                                   Speedup ¼                    ¼ 35:5
                                                             0:90 0:09
                                                                  +      + 0:01
                                                              55    50

                         Now compute the speedup on 24 processors:
                                                                          1
                                                 Speedup ¼
                                                           Fraction24
                                                                       + ð1 ? Fraction24 Þ
                                                               24
                                                                      1
                                                      Speedup ¼              ¼ 19:5
                                                                0:99
                                                                      + 0:01
                                                                 24
                         When considering both power constraints and Amdahl’s Law effects, the 96-
                         processor version achieves less than a factor of 2 speedup over the 24-processor
                         version. In fact, the speedup from clock rate increase nearly matches the speedup
                         from the 4 ? processor count increase. We comment on these issues further in the
                         concluding remarks.

              5.11       Concluding Remarks
                         As we saw in the previous section, multicore does not magically solve the power
                         problem because it clearly increases both the transistor count and the active number
                         of transistors switching, which are the two dominant contributions to power. The
                         failure of Dennard scaling merely makes it more extreme.
                             But multicore does alter the game. By allowing idle cores to be placed in
                         power-saving mode, some improvement in power efficiency can be achieved, as
                         the results in this chapter have shown. For example, shutting down cores in the
                         Intel i7 allows other cores to operate in Turbo mode. This capability allows a
                         trade-off between higher clock rates with fewer processors and more processors
                         with lower clock rates.
                             More importantly, multicore shifts the burden for keeping the processor busy
                         by relying more on TLP, which the application and programmer are responsible for

       identifying, rather than on ILP, for which the hardware is responsible. Multipro-
       grammed and highly parallel workloads that avoid Amdahl’s Law effects will ben-
       efit more easily.
            Although multicore provides some help with the energy efficiency challenge
       and shifts much of the burden to the software system, there remain difficult chal-
       lenges and unresolved questions. For example, attempts to exploit thread-level ver-
       sions of aggressive speculation have so far met the same fate as their ILP
       counterparts. That is, the performance gains have been modest and are likely less
       than the increase in energy consumption, so ideas such as speculative threads or
       hardware run-ahead have not been successfully incorporated in processors. As
       in speculation for ILP, unless the speculation is almost always right, the costs
       exceed the benefits.
            Thus, at the present, it seems unlikely that some form of simple multicore scal-
       ing will provide a cost-effective path to growing performance. A fundamental
       problem must be overcome: finding and exploiting significant amounts of paral-
       lelism in an energy- and silicon-efficient manner. In the previous chapter, we
       examined the exploitation of data parallelism via a SIMD approach. In many appli-
       cations, data parallelism occurs in large amounts, and SIMD is a more energy-
       efficient method for exploiting data parallelism. In the next chapter, we explore
       large-scale cloud computing. In such environments, massive amounts of parallel-
       ism are available from millions of independent tasks generated by individual users.
       Amdahl’s Law plays little role in limiting the scale of such systems because the
       tasks (e.g., millions of Google search requests) are independent. Finally, in
       Chapter 7, we explore the rise of domain-specific architectures (DSAs). Most
       domain-specific architectures exploit the parallelism of the targeted domain, which
       is often data parallelism, and as with GPUs, DSAs can achieve much higher effi-
       ciency as measured by energy consumption or silicon utilization.
            In the last edition, published in 2012, we raised the question of whether it
       would be worthwhile to consider heterogeneous processors. At that time, no such
       multicore was delivered or announced, and heterogeneous multiprocessors had
       seen only limited success in special-purpose computers or embedded systems.
       While the programming models and software systems remain challenging, it
       appears inevitable that multiprocessors with heterogeneous processors will play
       an important role. Combining domain-specific processors, like those discussed
       in Chapters 4 and 7, with general-purpose processors is perhaps the best road for-
       ward to achieve increased performance and energy efficiency while maintaining
       some of the flexibility that general-purpose processors offer.

5.12   Historical Perspectives and References
       Section M.7 (available online) looks at the history of multiprocessors and parallel
       processing. Divided by both time period and architecture, the section features dis-
       cussions on early experimental multiprocessors and some of the great debates in
       parallel processing. Recent advances are also covered. References for further read-
       ing are included.

                                 Case Studies and Exercises by Amr Zaky and
                                 David A. Wood
                                 Case Study 1: Single Chip Multicore Multiprocessor
                                 Concepts illustrated by this case study
                                 ■     Snooping Coherence Protocol Transitions
                                 ■     Coherence Protocol Performance
                                 ■     Coherence Protocol Optimizations
                                 ■     Synchronization

                                 A multicore SMT multiprocessor is illustrated in Figure 5.37. Only the cache con-
                                 tents are shown. Each core has a single, private cache with coherence maintained
                                 using the snooping coherence protocol of Figure 5.7. Each cache is direct-mapped,
                                 with four lines, each holding 2 bytes (to simplify diagram). For further simplifica-
                                 tion, the whole line addresses in memory are shown in the address fields in the
                                 caches, where the tag would normally exist. The coherence states are denoted
                                 M, S, and I for Modified, Shared, and Invalid.

                        5.1.     [10/10/10/10/10/10/10] <5.2> For each part of this exercise, the initial cache and
                                 memory state are assumed to initially have the contents shown in Figure 5.37. Each
                                 part of this exercise specifies a sequence of one or more CPU operations of
                                 the form

               Core 0                                   Core 1                               Core3

    Line     Coherency                       Cache      Coherency                   Cache   Coherency
                       Address       Data                         Address   Data                      Address   Data
   number      state                          line        state                      line     state
      0          I       AC00        0010       0           I       AC00    0010       0        S       AC20     20
      1          S       AC08        0008       1           M       AC28    0068       1        S       AC08    0008
      2          M       AC10        0030       2           I       AC10    0010       2        I       AC10    0010
      3          I       AC18        0010       3           S       AC18    0018       3        I       AC18    0010

                                                  Address   Data
                                                      …      …
                                                     AC00   0010
                                                     AC08   0008
                                                     AC10   0010
                                                     AC18   0018
                                                     AC20   0020
                                                     AC28   0028
                                                     AC30   0030
                                                      ….     …..

                                                      Memory

Figure 5.37 Multicore (point-to-point) multiprocessor.

           Ccore#: R, < address > for reads
           and
           Ccore#: W, < address > <-- < value written > for writes.
           For example,
           C3: R, AC10 & C0: W, AC18 <-- 0018
            Read and write operations are for 1 byte at a time. Show the resulting state
       (i.e., coherence state, tags, and data) of the caches and memory after the actions given
       below. Show only the cache lines that experience some state change; for example:
            C0.L0: (I, AC20, 0001) indicates that line 0 in core 0 assumes an
       “invalid” coherence state (I), stores AC20 from the memory, and has data con-
       tents 0001. Furthermore, represent any changes to the memory state as M:
       < address > <– value.
            Different parts (a) through (g) do not depend on one another: assume the
       actions in all parts are applied to the initial cache and memory states.

       a. [10] <5.2> C0: R, AC20
       b. [10] <5.2> C0: W, AC20 <-- 80
       c. [10] <5.2> C3: W, AC20 <-- 80
       d. [10] <5.2> C1: R, AC10
       e. [10] <5.2> C0: W, AC08 <-- 48
       f. [10] <5.2> C0: W, AC30 <-- 78
       g. [10] <5.2> C3: W, AC30 <-- 78

5.2.   [20/20/20/20] <5.3> The performance of a snooping cache-coherent multiprocessor
       depends on many detailed implementation issues that determine how quickly a cache
       responds with data in an exclusive or M state block. In some implementations, a pro-
       cessor read miss to a cache block that is exclusive in another processor’s cache is
       faster than a miss to a block in memory. This is because caches are smaller, and thus
       faster, than main memory. Conversely, in some implementations, misses satisfied by
       memory are faster than those satisfied by caches. This is because caches are generally
       optimized for “front side” or CPU references, rather than “back side” or snooping
       accesses. For the multiprocessor illustrated in Figure 5.37, consider the execution
       of a sequence of operations on a single processor core where
       ■   read and write hits generate no stall cycles;
       ■   read and write misses generate Nmemory and Ncache stall cycles if satisfied by
           memory and cache, respectively;
       ■   write hits that generate an invalidate incur Ninvalidate stall cycles; and
       ■   a write-back of a block, either due to a conflict or another processor’s request to
           an exclusive block, incurs an additional Nwriteback stall cycles.
       Consider two implementations with different performance characteristics summa-
       rized in Figure 5.38.

                                                         Implementation 1                       Implementation 2
                          Parameter                           Cycles                                 Cycles
                          Nmemory                               100                                     100
                          Ncache                                  40                                    130
                          Ninvalidate                             15                                     15
                          Nwriteback                              10                                     10

Figure 5.38 Snooping coherence latencies.

                             To observe how these cycle values are used, we illustrate how the following
                          sequence of operations, assuming the initial caches’ states in Figure 5.37, behave
                          under implementation 1.
                              C1: R, AC10
                              C3: R, AC10
                              For simplicity, assume that the second operation begins after the first com-
                          pletes, even though they are on different processor cores.
                              For Implementation 1,
                          ■   the first read generates 50 stall cycles because the read is satisfied by C0’s
                              cache: C1 stalls for 40 cycles while it waits for the block, and C0 stalls for 10
                              cycles while it writes the block back to memory in response to C1’s request; and
                          ■   the second read by C3 generates 100 stall cycles because its miss is satisfied by
                              memory.
                          Therefore this sequence generates a total of 150 stall cycles.
                             For the following sequences of operations, how many stall cycles are generated
                          by each implementation?
                          a. [20] <5.3> C0: R, AC20
                                        C0: R, AC28
                                        C0: R, AC30
                          b. [20] <5.3> C0: R, AC00
                                        C0: W, AC08 <-- 48
                                        C0: W, AC30 <-- 78
                          c. [20] <5.3> C1: R, AC20
                                        C1: R, AC28
                                        C1: R, AC30
                          d. [20] <5.3> C1: R, AC00
                                        C1: W, AC08 <-- 48
                                        C1: W, AC30 <-- 78

                   5.3.   [20] <5.2> Some applications read a large dataset first and then modify most or all of it.
                          The base MSI coherence protocol will first fetch all of the cache blocks in the Shared
                          state and then be forced to perform an invalidate operation to upgrade them to the

       Modified state. The additional delay has a significant impact on some workloads. The
       MESI addition to the standard protocol (see Section 5.2) provides some relief in these
       cases. Draw new protocol diagrams for a MESI protocol that adds the Exclusive state
       and transitions to the base MSI protocol’s Modified, Shared, and Invalidate states.
5.4.   [20/20/20/20/20] <5.2> Assume the cache contents of Figure 5.37 and the timing
       of Implementation 1 in Figure 5.38. What are the total stall cycles for the following
       code sequences with both the base protocol and the new MESI protocol in Exercise
       5.3? Assume state transitions that require zero interconnect transactions incur no
       additional stall cycles.
       a. [20] <5.2> C0: R, AC00
                     C0: W, AC00 <-- 40
       b. [20] <5.2> C0: R, AC20
                     C0: W, AC20 <-- 60
       c. [20] <5.2> C0: R, AC00
                     C0: R, AC20
       d. [20] <5.2> C0: R, AC00
                     C1: W, AC00 <-- 60
       e. [20] <5.2> C0: R, AC00
                     C0: W, AC00 <-- 60
                     C1: W, AC00 <-- 40

5.5.   Code running on a single core and not sharing any variables with other cores can
       suffer some performance degradation because of the snooping coherence protocol.
       Consider the two following iterative loops are NOT functionally equivalent but they
       seem similar in complexity. One could be led to conclude that they would spend a
       comparably close number of cycles when executed on the same processor core.

                Loop 1                                   Loop 2
                Repeat i: 1 .. n                         Repeat i:1 .. n
                A[i] <-- A[i-1] +B[i];                   A[i] <-- A[i] +B[i];

       Assume that
       ■   every cache line can hold exactly one element of A or B;
       ■   arrays A and B do not interfere in the cache; and
       ■   all the elements of A or B are in the cache before either loop is executed.
       Compare their performance when run on a core whose cache uses the MESI
       coherence protocol. Use the stall cycles data for Implementation 1 in Figure 5.38.
          Assume that a cache line can hold multiple elements of A and B (A and B go to
       separate cache lines). How will this affect the relative performances of Loop1
       and Loop2?

                             Suggest hardware and/or software mechanisms that would improve the perfor-
                          mance of Loop1 on a single core.
                   5.6.   [20] <5.2> Many snooping coherence protocols have additional states, state tran-
                          sitions, or bus transactions to reduce the overhead of maintaining cache coherency.
                          In Implementation 1 of Exercise 5.2, misses are incurring fewer stall cycles when
                          they are supplied by cache than when they are supplied by memory. The MOESI
                          protocol extension (see Section 5.2) addresses this need.
                               Draw new protocol diagrams with the additional state and transitions.
                   5.7.   [20/20/20/20] <5.2> For the following code sequences and the timing parameters
                          for the two implementations in Figure 5.36, compute the total stall cycles for the
                          base MSI protocol and the optimized MESI protocol in Exercise 5.3. Assume state
                          transitions that do not require bus transactions incur no additional stall cycles.
                          a. [20] <5.2> C1: R, AC10
                                        C3: R, AC10
                                        C0: R, AC10
                          b. [20] <5.2> C1: R, AC20
                                        C3: R, AC20
                                        C0: R, AC20
                          c. [20] <5.2> C0: W, AC20 <-- 80
                                        C3: R, AC20
                                        C0: R, AC20
                          d. [20] <5.2> C0: W, AC08 <--88
                                        C3: R, AC08
                                        C0: W, AC08 <-- 98

                   5.8.   [20/20/20/20] <5.5> The spin lock is the simplest synchronization mechanism
                          possible on most commercial shared-memory machines. This spin lock relies on
                          the exchange primitive to atomically load the old value and store a new value.
                          The lock routine performs the exchange operation repeatedly until it finds the lock
                          unlocked (i.e., the returned value is 0).
                                           addi x2, x0, #1
                             lockit:       EXCH x2, 0(x1)
                                           bnez x2, lockit
                              The lock is released simply by storing a 0 into x2.
                              As discussed in Section 5.5, the more optimized spin lock employs cache
                          coherence and uses a load to check the lock, allowing it to spin with a shared var-
                          iable in the cache.
                             lockit:       ld        x2, 0(x1)
                                           bnez      x2, lockit
                                           addi      x2, x0, #1
                                           EXCH      x2,0(x1)
                                           bnez      x2, lockit

    Assume that processor cores C0, C1, and C3 are all trying to acquire a lock at
address 0xAC00 (i.e., register R1 holds the value 0xAC00). Assume the cache con-
tents from Figure 5.37 and the timing parameters from Implementation 1 in
Figure 5.38. For simplicity, assume the critical sections are 1000 cycles long.
a. [20] <5.5> Using the simple spin lock, determine approximately how many
   memory stall cycles each processor incurs before acquiring the lock.
b. [20] <5.5> Using the optimized spin lock, determine approximately how many
   memory stall cycles each processor incurs before acquiring the lock.
c. [20] <5.5> Using the simple spin lock, approximately how many memory
   accesses occur?
d. [20] <5.5> Using the optimized spin lock, approximately how many memory
   accesses occur?

Case Study 2: Simple Directory-Based Coherence
Concepts illustrated by this case study
■   Directory Coherence Protocol Transitions
■   Coherence Protocol Performance
■   Coherence Protocol Optimizations

Consider the distributed shared-memory system illustrated in Figure 5.39. It con-
sists of 8 nodes of processor cores organized as three-dimensional hypercube with
point-to-point interconnections, as shown in the figure. For simplification, we
assume the following scaled-down configuration:

■   Every node has a single processor core with a direct-mapped L1 data cache
    with its dedicated cache controller.
■   The L1 data cache has a capacity of two cache lines with a line size of B bytes.
■   The L1 cache states are denoted M, S, and I for Modified, Shared, and Invalid.
    An example cache entry in some would like

     1: S, M3, 0xabcd -->
    Cache line 1 is in the “Shared” state; it contains memory block M3 and the data
value of the block is 0xabcd.

■   The system memory comprises 8 memory blocks (i.e., one memory block per
    node) and is distributed among the eight nodes, with every node owning a
    memory block. Node Ci owns memory block Mi.
■   Each memory block is B-bytes wide and is tracked by a coherency directory
    entry stored with the memory block.

                                    Node 0                                 Node 1
                                     (000)                                  (001)

                                                     Node 4                                  Node 5
                                                      (100)                                   (101)

                                    Node 2                                 Node 3
                                     (010)                                  (011)

                                                     Node 6                                  Node 7
                                                      (110)                                   (111)

Figure 5.39 Multicore multiprocessor with DSM.

                         ■     The state of each memory directory entry is denoted DM, DS, and DI for Direc-
                               tory Modified, Directory Shared, and Directory Invalid. Additionally, the
                               directory entry lists the block sharers using a bit vector with 1 bit for every
                               node. Here is an example memory block and associated directory entry:

                                M3: 0XABCD, DS, 00000011 -->
                            Memory block M3 (in node C3) contains the value 0xABCD and is shared by
                         nodes 0 and 1 (corresponding to 1s in the bit vector).

                         Read/Write Notation
                         To describe read/write transactions, we will use the notation

                         Ci#: R, <Mi > for reads

                         and

                         Ci#: W, < Mi > <-- < value written > for writes.

For example,

C3: R, M2 describes the core in node 3 issuing a read transaction from an address
  at memory block M2 (the address may possibly be cached in C3 already).
C0: W, M3 <-- 0018 describes the core in node 0 issuing a write transaction
  (data is 0X0018) to an address at memory block M3 (the address may possibly
  be cached in C0 already).

Messages
The directory coherency schemes depend on exchange of command and/or data
messages as described by the directory protocol described in Figure 5.20. An
example of a command message is a read request. An example of a data message
is a read response (with data included).

■   Messages originating an ending in the same node do not cross any inter-
    node links.
■   Message with distinct source/destination nodes travel through inter-node links.
    These messages may be destined from one cache controller to another, from a
    cache controller to a directory controller, or from a directory controller to a
    cache controller.
■   Messages traveling from a source node to a distinct destination node are stat-
    ically routed.
        The static routing algorithm selects a shorted path between the source and
        destination nodes.
        The short path is determined by considering the binary representations of
        the source and destination indices (e.g., 001 for node C1 and 100 for node
        C4), then by moving from one node to a neighboring node that was not
        already crossed by the message.
         – For example, to go from node 6 to node 0 (110 --> 000), the path is
             110--> 100--> 000.
         – Because more than one shorted path may exist (110--> 010--> 000 is
             another path for the preceding example), we assume that the path is
             selected by inverting first the least significant bit that is different from
             the corresponding bit in destination index. For example, to travel from
             node 1 to node 6 (001--> 110), the path is 001--> 000-->
             010--> 110.
        The longest possible path traveled by any message has 3 links (equal to the
        number of bits in the binary representation of a node index).
■   A node can simultaneously process up to three messages from/to distinct
    neighboring nodes’ links if no two of them are competing for the same link
    resource as clarified by the following examples of messages sent/received
    to/from/through node 000.

                          Messages: from 001 --> 010; 010 --> 000 (to cache/directory controller);
                          100 --> 001. OK (distinct destinations).
                               Message: from 001 --> 010; 000 --> 001 (from cache/directory control-
                          ler); 100 --> 001.
                               Not OK as two messages are destined to node 001
                               In case of destination contention, ties are broken assigning priority to
                              a. message destined to the node (000 in example) cache or directory
                                 controller; then
                              b. messages forwarded from one to another (through 000 in example); then
                              c. messages originating from the node (000 in example) cache or directory
                                 controller.
                          ■   Assume the transmission and service delays in the following table.

                          Message type           Cache controller         Directory controller            Link
                          No data                2 cycles                 5 cycles                      10 cycles
                          With data              (3 + dB =4 e) cycles     (6 + 10 ? B) cycles           (4 + B)

                          ■   If a message is forwarded through a node, it is first completely received by the
                              node before being sent to the next node on the path.
                          ■   Assume any cache controller; directory controller has unlimited capacity to
                              enqueue messages and service them in FCFS order.

                   5.9.   [10/10/10] <5.4> For each part of this exercise, assume that initially all caches
                          lines are invalid, and the data in memory Mi is the byte i (0X00 <= i <=
                          0x07) repeated as many times as the block size. Assume that successive requests
                          are completely serialized. That is, no core will issue a coherency request until the
                          previous request (by same or different core) is completed.
                              For each of the following parts,
                          ■   show the final state (i.e., coherence state, sharers/owners, tags, and data) of the
                              caches and directory controller (including data values) after the given transac-
                              tion sequence has completed; and
                          ■   show the messages transferred (choose a suitable format for message types).
                              a. [10] <5.4> C3: R, M4
                                            C3: R, M2
                                            C7: W, M4 <--0xaaaa
                                            C1: W, M4 <--0xbbbb
                              b. [10] <5.4> C3: R, M0
                                            C3: R, M2
                                            C6: W, M4 <--0xaaaa
                                            C3: W, M4 <--0xbbbb

           c. [10] <5.4> C0: R, M7
                         C3: R, M4
                         C6: W, M2 <--0xaaaa
                         C2: W, M2 <--0xbbbb
5.10.   [10/10/10] <5.4> The directory protocol used in 5.9 (based on Figure 5.20)
        assumes that the directory controller receives requests, sends invalidates, receives
        modified data, sends modified data to requester if block was dirty, and so on.
        Assume now that the directory controller will delegate some work to the cores.
        For example, it will notify the exclusive owner of a modified block when some
        other core needs the block and will have the owner send the block to the new
        sharer. Specifically, consider the following optimizations and indicate what their
        benefits (if any) are. Also, specify how the messages will be modified (in compar-
        ison with Figure 5.20 protocol) to support the new change.
        Hint: Benefits might be reduction in number of messages, faster response time, and
        so on.
        a. [10] <5.4> On a write miss to a shared memory block, the directory controller
           sends the data to the requester and instructs the sharers to send their invalidate
           acknowledgements directly to the requester.
        b. [10] <5.4> On a read miss to a block modified in some other core, the directory
           controller instructs the owner of the modified copy to directly forward the data
           to the requester.
        c. [10] <5.4> On a read miss to a block in shared (S) state in some other cores, the
           directory controller instructs one of the sharers (say, the one closest to the
           requester) to directly forward the data to the requester.
5.11.   [15/15/15] <5.4> In problem 5.9, it was assumed that all transactions on the sys-
        tem were serially executed, which is both unrealistic and inefficient in a DSM mul-
        ticore. We now relax this condition. We will require only that all transactions
        originating in one core are serialized. However, different cores can independently
        issue their read/write transactions and even compete for the same memory block.
        The transactions of problem 5.9 are represented next to reflect the new, relaxed
        constraints. Redo problem 5.9 with the new, relaxed constraints.

        a. [15] <5.4>
           C1: W, M4 <--0xbbbb              C3: R, M4    C7: R, M2
                                            C3: W, M4 <--0xaaaa
        b. [15] <5.4>
           C3: R, M0      C6: W, M4 <--0xaaaa
           C3: R, M2
           C3: W, M4 <--0xbbbb
        c. [15] <5.4>
           C0: R, M7 C2: W, M2 <--0xbbbb C3: R, M4 C6: W, M2 <--0xaaaa

5.12.   [10/10] <5.4> Use the routing and delay information described earlier and trace
        how the following groups of transactions will progress in the system (assume that
        all accesses are misses).

                          a. C0: R, M7 C2: W, M2 <--0xbbbb C3: R, M4 C6: W, M2 <--0xaaaa
                          b. C0: R, M7              C3: R, M7
                                          C2: W, M7 <--0xbbbb
                  5.13.   [20] <5.4> What extra complexities may arise if the messages can be adaptively
                          rerouted on the links? For example, a coherency message from core M1 directory
                          controller to C2 (expressed in binary as M001 --> C010) will be routed either through
                          the inter-node path C001--> C000--> C010 or the inter-node path C001--> C011--
                          > C010, depending on link availability.
                  5.14.   [20] <5.4> In a read miss, a cache might overwrite a line in the shared (S) state
                          without notifying the directory that owns the corresponding memory block. Alter-
                          natively, it will notify the directory so that it deletes this cache from the list of
                          sharers.
                              Show how the following transaction groups (performed one at a time in series)
                          will proceed under both approaches.
                                 C3: R, M4
                                 C3: R, M2
                                 C2: W, M4 <--0xabcd

                          Case Study 3: Memory Consistency
                          Concepts Illustrated by This Case Study
                          ■   Legitimate Program Behavior Under Sequential Consistency (SC) Models
                          ■   Hardware Optimization Allowed for SC Models
                          ■   Using Synchronization Primitives to Make a Consistency Model Emulate a
                              More Restrictive Model

                  5.15.   [10/10] <5.6> Consider the following code segments running on two processors
                          P1 and P2. Assume A and B are initially 0.

                                   P1:                                           P2:
                                         While (B == 0);                           While (A==0);
                                         A=1;                                      B = 1;

                          a. If the processors adhere to sequential consistency (SC) consistency model.
                             What are the possible values of A and B at the end of the segments? Show
                             the statement interleaving supporting your answer(s).
                          b. Repeat (a) if the processors adhere to the total store order (TSO)
                             consistency model.
                  5.16.   [5] <5.6> Consider the following code segments running on two processors P1
                          and P2. Assume A, and B, are initially 0. Explain how an optimizing compiler
                          might make it impossible for B to be ever set to 2 in a sequentially consistent
                          execution model.

                    P1:                                       P2:
                      A=1;                                      B=1;
                      A=2;                                      While (A <> 1);
                      While (B == 0);                           B = 2;
5.17.   [10] <5.4>. In a processor implementing a SC consistency model, the data cache
        is augmented with a data prefetch unit. Will that alter the SC implementation exe-
        cution results? Why or why not?
5.18.   [10/10] <5.6> Assume that the following code segment is executed on a processor
        that implements partial store order (PSO),
               A=1;
               B=2;
               If (C== 3)
               D=B;
        a. Augment the code with synchronization primitives to make it emulate the
           behavior of a total store order (TSO) implementation.
        b. Augment the code with synchronization primitives to make it emulate the
           behavior of a sequential consistency (SC) implementation.
5.19.   [20/20/20] <5.6> Sequential consistency (SC) requires that all reads and writes
        appear to have executed in some total order. This may require the processor to stall
        in certain cases before committing a read or write instruction. Consider the code
        sequence
           write A
           read B
             where the write A results in a cache miss and the read B results in a cache hit.
             Under SC, the processor must stall read B until after it can order (and thus per-
        form) write A. Simple implementations of SC will stall the processor until the cache
        receives the data and can perform the write.
             Release consistency (RC) consistency mode (see Section 5.6) relaxes these
        constraints: ordering—when desired—is enforced by judicious use of synchroni-
        zation operations. This allows, among other optimizations, processors to imple-
        ment write buffers, which hold committed writes that have not yet been ordered
        with respect to other processors’ writes. Reads can pass (and potentially bypass)
        the write buffer in RC (which they could not do in SC).
             Assume that one memory operation can be performed per cycle and that oper-
        ations that hit in the cache or that can be satisfied by the write buffer introduce no
        stall cycles. Operations that miss incur the latencies listed in Figure 5.38.
             How many stall cycles occur prior to each operation for both the SC and RC
        consistency models? (Write buffer can hold at most one write.)
        a. [20] <5.6> P0: write 110 <-- 80                //assume miss (no other
                                                          cache has the line)
                         P0: read 108                     //assume miss (no other
                                                          cache has the line)

                          b. [20] <5.6> P0: read 110                        //assume miss (no other
                                                                            cache has the line)
                                           P0: write 100 <-- 90             //assume hit
                          c. [20] <5.6> P0: write 100 <-- 80                //assume miss
                                        P0: write 110 <-- 90                //assume hit
                  5.20.   [20] <5.6> Repeat part (a) of problem 5.19 under an SC model on a processor that
                          has a read prefetch unit. Assume a read prefetch was triggered 20 cycles in advance
                          of the write operation.

                          Exercises
                  5.21.   [15] <5.1> Assume that we have a function for an application of the form F(i, p),
                          which gives the fraction of time that exactly i processors are usable given that a
                          total of p processors are available. This means that
                                             Xp
                                                 i¼1
                                                       F ði, pÞ ¼ 1

                          Assume that when i processors are in use, the applications run i times faster.
                          a. Rewrite Amdahl’s Law so that it gives the speedup as a function of p for some
                             application.
                          b. An application A runs on single processor for a time T seconds. Different por-
                             tions of its running time can improve if a larger number of processors is used.
                             Figure 5.40 provides the details.
                          How much speedup will A achieve when on 8 processors?
                          c. Repeat for 32 processors and an infinite number of processors.
                  5.22.   [15/20/10] <5.1> In this exercise, we examine the effect of the interconnection
                          network topology on the CPI of programs running on a 64-processor
                          distributed-memory multiprocessor. The processor clock rate is 2.0 GHz, and
                          the base CPI of an application with all references hitting in the cache is 0.75.
                          Assume that 0.2% of the instructions involve a remote communication reference.
                          The cost of a remote communication reference is (100 + 10 h) ns, h being the num-
                          ber of communication network hops that a remote reference has to make to the
                          remote processor memory and back. Assume all communication links are
                          bidirectional.
                          a. [15] <5.1> Calculate the worst-case remote communication cost when the 64
                             processors are arranged as a ring, as an 8 ? 8 processor grid, or as a hypercube
                             (hint: longest communication path on a 2n hypercube has n links).

                          Fraction of T      20%           20%        10%    5%     15%       20%       10%
                          Processors (P)     1             2          4      6      8         16        128

Figure 5.40 Percentage of application’s A time that can use up to P processors.

        b. [20] <5.1> Compare the base CPI of the application with no remote commu-
           nication to the CPI achieved with each of the three topologies in part (a).
5.23.   [15] <5.2> Show how the basic snooping protocol of Figure 5.6 can be changed
        for a write-through cache. What is the major hardware functionality that is not
        needed with a write-through cache compared with a write-back cache?
5.24.   [20/20] <5.2> Please answer the following problems:
        a. [20] <5.2> Add a clean exclusive state to the basic snooping cache coherence
           protocol (Figure 5.6). Show the protocol in the finite state machine format used
           in the figure.
        b. [20] <5.2> Add an “owned” state to the protocol of part (a) and describe using
           the same finite state machine format used in Figure 5.6.
5.25.   [15] <5.2> One proposed solution for the problem of false sharing is to add a valid
        bit per word. This would allow the protocol to invalidate a word without removing
        the entire block, letting a processor keep a portion of a block in its cache while
        another processor writes a different portion of the block. What extra complications
        are introduced into the basic snooping cache coherence protocol (Figure 5.6) by
        this addition? Consider all possible protocol actions.
5.26.   [15/20] <5.3> This exercise studies the impact of aggressive techniques to exploit
        instruction-level parallelism in the processor when used in the design of shared-
        memory multiprocessor systems. Consider two systems identical except for the
        processor. System A uses a processor with a simple single-issue, in-order pipeline,
        and system B uses a processor with four-way issue, out-of-order execution and a
        reorder buffer with 64 entries.
        a. [15] <5.3> Following the convention of Figure 5.11, let us divide the execution
           time into instruction execution, cache access, memory access, and other stalls.
           How would you expect each of these components to differ between system A
           and system B?
        b. [10] <5.3> Based on the discussion of the behavior of OLTP workload in
           Section 5.3, what is the important difference between the OLTP workload
           and other benchmarks that limit benefit from a more aggressive processor
           design?
5.27.   [15] <5.3> How would you change the code of an application to avoid false shar-
        ing? What might be done by a compiler and what might require programmer
        directives?
5.28.   [15] <5.3> An application is calculating the number of occurrences of a certain
        word in a very large number of documents. A very large number of processors
        divided the work, searching the different documents. They created a huge
        array—word_count—of 32-bit integers, every element of which is the number
        of times the word occurred in some document. In a second phase, the computation
        is moved to a small SMP server with four processors. Each processor sums up
        approximately ¼ of the array elements. Later, one processor calculates the
        total sum.

                          for (int p = 0; p<=3; p++) // Each iteration of is executed on a
                                                         separate processor.
                          {
                               sum [p] = 0;
                               for (int i = 0; i < n/4; i++) // n is size of word_count and
                                                                is divisible by 4
                                     sum[p] = sum[p] + word_count[p+4*i];
                          }
                          total_sum = sum[0] +sum[1]+sum[2]+sum[3] //executed only
                                                                             on processor.

                          a. Assuming each processor has a 32-byte L1 data cache. Identify the cache line
                             sharing (true or false) that the code exhibits.
                          b. Rewrite the code to reduce the number of misses to elements of the array
                             word_count.
                          c. Identify a manual fix you can make to the code to rid it of any false sharing.
                  5.29.   [15] <5.4> Assume a directory-based cache coherence protocol. The directory
                          currently has information that indicates that processor P1 has the data in “exclu-
                          sive” mode. If the directory now gets a request for the same cache block from pro-
                          cessor P1, what could this mean? What should the directory controller do? (Such
                          cases are called “race conditions” and are the reason why coherence protocols are
                          so hard to design and verify.)
                  5.30.   [20] <5.4> A directory controller can send invalidates for lines that have been
                          replaced by the local cache controller. To avoid such messages, and to keep the
                          directory consistent, replacement hints are used. Such messages tell the controller
                          that a block has been replaced. Modify the directory coherence protocol of
                          Section 5.4 to use such replacement hints.
                  5.31.   [20/15/20/15] <5.4> One downside of a straightforward implementation of direc-
                          tories using fully populated bit vectors is that the total size of the directory infor-
                          mation scales as the product: processor count ? memory blocks. If memory grows
                          linearly with processor count, the total size of the directory grows quadratically in
                          the processor count. In practice, because the directory needs only 1 bit per memory
                          block (which is typically 32–128 bytes), this problem is not serious for small-to-
                          moderate processor counts. For example, assuming a 128-byte block, and P pro-
                          cessors, the amount of directory storage compared to main memory is P/(128*8) ¼
                          P/1024, which is 12.5% overhead for P ¼ 128 processors. We can avoid this prob-
                          lem by observing that we need to keep only an amount of information that is pro-
                          portional to the cache size of each processor. We explore some solutions in these
                          exercises.
                          a. [20] <5.4> One method to obtain a scalable directory protocol is to organize
                             the multiprocessor as a logical hierarchy with the processors as leaves of the
                             hierarchy and directories positioned at the root of each subtree. The directory
                             at each subtree records which descendants cache which memory blocks. It also

           records the memory blocks—with a home in that subtree—that are cached out-
           side the subtree. Compute the amount of storage needed to record the proces-
           sor information for the directories, assuming that each directory is fully
           associative. Your answer should incorporate both the number of nodes at each
           level of the hierarchy as well as the total number of nodes.
        b. [15] <5.4> Another approach to reducing the directory size is to allow only a
           limited number of the directory’s memory blocks to be shared at any given time.
           Implement the directory as a four-way set-associative cache storing full bit vec-
           tors. If a directory cache miss occurs, choose a directory entry and invalidate the
           entry. Describe how this organization will work elaborating what will happen as
           a is block read, written replaced and written back to memory. Modify the pro-
           tocol in Figure 5.20 to reflect the new transitions required by this directory
           organization.
        c. [20] <5.4> Rather than reducing the number of directory entries, we can imple-
           ment bit vectors that are not dense. For example, we can set every directory
           entry to 9 bits. If a block is cached in only one node outside its home, this field
           contains the node number. If the block is cached in more than one node outside
           its home, this field is a bit vector with each bit indicating a group of eight pro-
           cessors, at least one of which caches the block. Illustrate how this scheme would
           work for a 64-processor DSM machine that consists of eight 8-processors
           groups.
        d. [15] An extreme approach to reducing the directory size is to implement an
           “empty” directory; that is, the directory in every processor does not store
           any memory states. It receives requests and forwards them as appropriate.
           What is the benefit of having such a directory over having no directory at all
           for a DSM system?
5.32.   [10] <5.5> Implement the classical compare-and-swap instruction using the load
        linked/store conditional instruction pair.
5.33.   [15] <5.5> One performance optimization commonly used is to pad synchroniza-
        tion variables so as not to have any other useful data in the same cache line. Con-
        struct an example demonstrating that this optimization can be extremely useful in
        some situations. Assume a snoopy write invalidate protocol.
5.34.   [30] <5.5> One possible implementation of the load linked/store conditional pair
        for multicore processors is to constrain these instructions to using uncached mem-
        ory operations. A monitor unit intercepts all reads and writes from any core to the
        memory. It keeps track of the source of the load linked instructions and whether
        any intervening stores occur between the load linked and its corresponding store
        conditional instruction. The monitor can prevent any failing store conditional from
        writing any data and can use the interconnect signals to inform the processor that
        this store failed.
           Design such a monitor for a memory system supporting a four-core SMP. Take
        into account that, generally, read and write requests can have different data sizes (4/
        8/16/32 bytes). Any memory location can be the target of a load linked/store

                          conditional pair, and the memory monitor should assume that load linked/store
                          conditional references to any location can, possibly, be interleaved with regular
                          accesses to the same location. The monitor complexity should be independent
                          of the memory size.
                  5.35.   [25] <5.5> Prove that, in a two-level cache hierarchy where L1 is closer to the
                          processor, inclusion is maintained with no extra action if L2 has at least as much
                          associativity as L1, both caches use LRU replacement, and both caches have the
                          same block sizes.
                  5.36.   [Discussion] <5> When trying to perform detailed performance evaluation of a
                          multiprocessor system, system designers use one of three tools: analytical models,
                          trace-driven simulation, and execution-driven simulation. Analytical models use
                          mathematical expressions to model the behavior of programs. Trace-driven simu-
                          lations run the applications on a real machine and generate a trace, typically of
                          memory operations. These traces can be replayed through a cache simulator or
                          a simulator with a simple processor model to predict the performance of the system
                          when various parameters are changed. Execution-driven simulators simulate the
                          entire execution maintaining an equivalent structure for the processor state and
                          so on.
                          a. What are the accuracy/speed trade-offs between these approaches?
                          b. CPU traces, if not carefully collected, can exhibit artifacts of the system they are
                             collected on. Discuss this issue while using branch-prediction and spin-wait
                             synchronization as examples. (Hint: The program itself is not available to a pure
                             CPU trace; just the trace is available.)
                  5.37.   [40] <5.7, 5.9> Multiprocessors and clusters usually show performance increases
                          as you increase the number of the processors, with the ideal being n times speedup
                          for n processors. The goal of this biased benchmark is to make a program that gets
                          worse performance as you add processors. For example, this means that one pro-
                          cessor on the multiprocessor or cluster runs the program fastest, two are slower,
                          four are slower than two, and so on. What are the key performance characteristics
                          for each organization that give inverse linear speedup?
This page intentionally left blank
