              4
                                 Data-Level Parallelism in
                                 Vector, SIMD, and GPU
                                 Architectures

                                 We call these algorithms data parallel algorithms because their
                                 parallelism comes from simultaneous operations across large sets
                                 of data rather than from multiple threads of control.
                                                           W. Daniel Hillis and Guy L. Steele,
                                               “Data parallel algorithms,” Commun. ACM (1986)

                                 If you were plowing a field, which would you rather use: two strong
                                 oxen or 1024 chickens?
                                               Seymour Cray, Father of the Supercomputer
                                                   (arguing for two powerful vector processors
                                                                versus many simple processors)

Computer Architecture. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811905-1.00004-3
© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

                  4.1        Introduction
                             A question for the single instruction multiple data (SIMD) architecture, which
                             Chapter 1 introduced, has always been just how wide a set of applications has sig-
                             nificant data-level parallelism (DLP). Five years after the SIMD classification was
                             proposed (Flynn, 1966), the answer is not only the matrix-oriented computations of
                             scientific computing but also the media-oriented image and sound processing and
                             machine learning algorithms, as we will see in Chapter 7. Since a multiple instruc-
                             tion multiple data (MIMD) architecture needs to fetch one instruction per data oper-
                             ation, single instruction multiple data (SIMD) is potentially more energy-efficient
                             since a single instruction can launch many data operations. These two answers make
                             SIMD attractive for personal mobile devices as well as for servers. Finally, perhaps
                             the biggest advantage of SIMD versus MIMD is that the programmer continues to
                             think sequentially yet achieves parallel speedup by having parallel data operations.
                                 This chapter covers three variations of SIMD: vector architectures, multimedia
                             SIMD instruction set extensions, and graphics processing units (GPUs).1
                                 The first variation, which predates the other two by more than 30 years, extends
                             pipelined execution of many data operations. These vector architectures are easier
                             to understand and to compile to than other SIMD variations, but they were consid-
                             ered too expensive for microprocessors until recently. Part of that expense was in
                             transistors, and part was in the cost of sufficient dynamic random access memory
                             (DRAM) bandwidth, given the widespread reliance on caches to meet memory per-
                             formance demands on conventional microprocessors.
                                 The second SIMD variation borrows from the SIMD name to mean basically
                             simultaneous parallel data operations and is now found in most instruction set
                             architectures that support multimedia applications. For x86 architectures, the
                             SIMD instruction extensions started with the MMX (multimedia extensions) in
                             1996, which were followed by several SSE (streaming SIMD extensions) versions
                             in the next decade, and they continue until this day with AVX (advanced vector
                             extensions). To get the highest computation rate from an x86 computer, you often
                             need to use these SIMD instructions, especially for floating-point programs.
                                 The third variation on SIMD comes from the graphics accelerator community,
                             offering higher potential performance than is found in traditional multicore com-
                             puters today. Although GPUs share features with vector architectures, they have
                             their own distinguishing characteristics, in part because of the ecosystem in which
                             they evolved. This environment has a system processor and system memory in
                             addition to the GPU and its graphics memory. In fact, to recognize those distinc-
                             tions, the GPU community refers to this type of architecture as heterogeneous.

1
  This chapter is based on material in Appendix F, “Vector Processors,” by Krste Asanovic, and Appendix G, “Hardware
and Software for VLIW and EPIC” from the 5th edition of this book; on material in Appendix A, “Graphics and Computing
GPUs,” by John Nickolls and David Kirk, from the 5th edition of Computer Organization and Design; and to a lesser extent
on material in “Embracing and Extending 20th-Century Instruction Set Architectures,” by Joe Gebis and David Patterson,
IEEE Computer, April 2007.

          For problems with lots of data parallelism, all three SIMD variations share the
      advantage of being easier on the programmer than classic parallel MIMD
      programming.
          The goal of this chapter is for architects to understand why vector is more general
      than multimedia SIMD, as well as the similarities and differences between vector
      and GPU architectures. Because vector architectures are supersets of the multimedia
      SIMD instructions, including a better model for compilation, and because GPUs
      share several similarities with vector architectures, we start with vector architectures
      to set the foundation for the following two sections. The next section introduces
      vector architectures, and Appendix G goes much deeper into the subject.

4.2   Vector Architecture
      The most efficient way to execute a vectorizable application is a vector
      processor.
                                                                         Jim Smith,
                              International Symposium on Computer Architecture (1994)

      Vector architectures grab sets of data elements scattered about memory, place them
      into large sequential register files, operate on data in those register files, and then
      disperse the results back into memory. A single instruction works on vectors of
      data, which results in dozens of register-register operations on independent data
      elements.
           These large register files act as compiler-controlled buffers, both to hide mem-
      ory latency and to leverage memory bandwidth. Because vector loads and stores
      are deeply pipelined, the program pays the long memory latency only once per vec-
      tor load or store versus once per element, thus amortizing the latency over, say, 32
      elements. Indeed, vector programs strive to keep the memory busy.
           The power wall leads architects to value architectures that can deliver good
      performance without the energy and design complexity costs of highly out-of-
      order superscalar processors. Vector instructions are a natural match to this trend
      because architects can use them to increase performance of simple in-order scalar
      processors without greatly raising energy demands and design complexity. In prac-
      tice, developers can express many of the programs that ran well on complex out-of-
      order designs more efficiently as data-level parallelism in the form of vector
      instructions, as Kozyrakis and Patterson (2002) showed.

      RV64V Extension
      We begin with a vector processor consisting of the primary components that
      Figure 4.1 shows. It is loosely based on the 40-year-old Cray-1, which was one
      of the first supercomputers. At the time of the writing of this edition, the RISC-
      V vector instruction set extension RVV was still under development. (The vector
      extension by itself is called RVV, so RV64V refers to the RISC-V base instructions

                                          Main memory

                                              Vector                            FP add/subtract
                                            load/store

                                                                                  FP multiply

                                                                                   FP divide

                              Vector
                              registers                                              Integer

                                                                                     Logical

                                                    Scalar
                                                    registers

Figure 4.1 The basic structure of a vector architecture, RV64V, which includes a
                         RISC-V scalar architecture. There are also 32 vector registers, and all the functional units
                         are vector functional units. The vector and scalar registers have a significant number of
                         read and write ports to allow multiple simultaneous vector operations. A set of crossbar
                         switches (thick gray lines) connects these ports to the inputs and outputs of the vector
                         functional units.

                         plus the vector extension.) We show a subset of RV64V, trying to capture its
                         essence in a few pages.
                             The primary components of the instruction set architecture of RV64V are the
                         following:

                         ■   Vector registers—Each vector register holds a single vector, and RV64V has
                             32 of them, each 64 bits wide. The vector register file needs to provide enough
                             ports to feed all the vector functional units. These ports will allow a high degree
                             of overlap among vector operations to different vector registers. The read and
                             write ports, which total at least 16 read ports and 8 write ports, are connected to
                             the functional unit inputs or outputs by a pair of crossbar switches. One way to

    increase the register file bandwidth is to compose it from multiple banks, which
    work well with relatively long vectors.
■   Vector functional units—Each unit is fully pipelined in our implementation,
    and it can start a new operation on every clock cycle. A control unit is needed
    to detect hazards, both structural hazards for functional units and data hazards
    on register accesses. Figure 4.1 shows that we assume an implementation of
    RV64V has five functional units. For simplicity, we focus on the floating-point
    functional units in this section.
■   Vector load/store unit—The vector memory unit loads or stores a vector to
    or from memory. The vector loads and stores are fully pipelined in our
    hypothetical RV64V implementation so that words can be moved between
    the vector registers and memory with a bandwidth of one word per clock
    cycle, after an initial latency. This unit would also normally handle scalar
    loads and stores.
■   A set of scalar registers—Scalar registers can likewise provide data as input to
    the vector functional units, as well as compute addresses to pass to the vector
    load/store unit. These are the normal 31 general-purpose registers and 32
    floating-point registers of RV64G. One input of the vector functional units
    latches scalar values as they are read out of the scalar register file.

Figure 4.2 lists the RV64V vector instructions we use in this section. The
description in Figure 4.2 assumes that the input operands are all vector registers,
but there are also versions of these instructions where an operand can be a scalar
register (xi or fi). RV64V uses the suffix .vv when both are vectors, .vs
when the second operand is a scalar, and .sv when the first is a scalar register.
Thus these three are all valid RV64V instructions: vsub.vv, vsub.vs, and
vsub.sv. (Add and other commutative operations have only the first two
versions, as vadd.sv and vadd.sv would be redundant.) Because the
operands determine the version of the instruction, we usually let the assembler
supply the appropriate suffix. The vector functional unit gets a copy of the sca-
lar value at instruction issue time.
     Although the traditional vector architectures didn’t support narrow data types
efficiently, vectors naturally accommodate varying data sizes (Kozyrakis and
Patterson, 2002). Thus, if a vector register has 32 64-bit elements, then 128 ? 16-
bit elements, and even 256 ? 8-bit elements are equally valid views. Such hardware
multiplicity is why a vector architecture can be useful for multimedia applications as
well as for scientific applications.
     Note that the RV64V instructions in Figure 4.2 omit the data type and size! An
innovation of RV64V is to associate a data type and data size with each vector
register, rather than the normal approach of the instruction supplying that informa-
tion. Thus, before executing the vector instructions, a program configures the
vector registers being used to specify their data type and widths. Figure 4.3 lists
the options for RV64V.
Mnemonic      Name                Description
vadd          ADD                 Add elements of V[rs1] and V[rs2], then put each result in V[rd]
vsub          SUBtract            Subtract elements of V[rs2] frpm V[rs1], then put each result in V[rd]
vmul          MULtiply            Multiply elements of V[rs1] and V[rs2], then put each result in V[rd]
vdiv          DIVide              Divide elements of V[rs1] by V[rs2], then put each result in V[rd]
vrem          REMainder           Take remainder of elements of V[rs1] by V[rs2], then put each result in V[rd]
vsqrt         SQuare RooT         Take square root of elements of V[rs1], then put each result in V[rd]
vsll          Shift Left          Shift elements of V[rs1] left by V[rs2], then put each result in V[rd]
vsrl          Shift Right         Shift elements of V[rs1] right by V[rs2], then put each result in V[rd]
vsra          Shift Right         Shift elements of V[rs1] right by V[rs2] while extending sign bit, then put each result in
              Arithmetic          V[rd]
vxor          XOR                 Exclusive OR elements of V[rs1] and V[rs2], then put each result in V[rd]
vor           OR                  Inclusive OR elements of V[rs1] and V[rs2], then put each result in V[rd]
vand          AND                 Logical AND elements of V[rs1] and V[rs2], then put each result in V[rd]
vsgnj         SiGN source         Replace sign bits of V[rs1] with sign bits of V[rs2], then put each result in V[rd]
vsgnjn        Negative SiGN       Replace sign bits of V[rs1] with complemented sign bits of V[rs2], then put each result
              source              in V[rd]
vsgnjx        Xor SiGN            Replace sign bits of V[rs1] with xor of sign bits of V[rs1] and V[rs2], then put each
              source              result in V[rd]
vld           Load                Load vector register V[rd] from memory starting at address R[rs1]
vlds          Strided Load        Load V[rd] from address at R[rs1] with stride in R[rs2] (i.e., R[rs1] + i ? R[rs2])
vldx          Indexed Load        Load V[rs1] with vector whose elements are at R[rs2] + V[rs2] (i.e., V[rs2] is an index)
              (Gather)
vst           Store               Store vector register V[rd] into memory starting at address R[rs1]
vsts          Strided Store       Store V[rd] into memory at address R[rs1] with stride in R[rs2] (i.e., R[rs1] + i ? R[rs2])
vstx          Indexed Store       Store V[rs1] into memory vector whose elements are at R[rs2] + V[rs2] ( i.e., V[rs2] is
              (Scatter)           an index)
vpeq          Compare ¼           Compare elements of V[rs1] and V[rs2]. When equal, put a 1 in the corresponding 1-bit
                                  element of p[rd]; otherwise, put 0
vpne          Compare !¼          Compare elements of V[rs1] and V[rs2]. When not equal, put a 1 in the corresponding
                                  1-bit element of p[rd]; otherwise, put 0
vplt          Compare <           Compare elements of V[rs1] and V[rs2]. When less than, put a 1 in the corresponding 1-
                                  bit element of p[rd]; otherwise, put 0
vpxor         Predicate XOR       Exclusive OR 1-bit elements of p[rs1] and p[rs2], then put each result in p[rd]
vpor          Predicate OR        Inclusive OR 1-bit elements of p[rs1] and p[rs2], then put each result in p[rd]
vpand         Predicate AND       Logical AND 1-bit elements of p[rs1] and p[rs2], then put each result in p[rd]
setvl         Set Vector          Set vl and the destination register to the smaller of mvl and the source regsiter
              Length

Figure 4.2 The RV64V vector instructions. All use the R instruction format. Each vector operation with two operands
is shown with both operands being vector (.vv), but there are also versions where the second operand is a scalar
register (.vs) and, when it makes a difference, where the first operand is a scalar register and the second is a vector
register (.sv). The type and width of the operands are determined by configuring each vector register rather than
being supplied by the instruction. In addition to the vector registers and predicate registers, there are two vector
control and status registers (CSRs), vl and vctype, discussed below. The strided and indexed data transfers are also
explained later. Once completed, RV64 will surely have more instructions, but the ones in this figure will be included.

Integer         8, 16, 32, and 64 bits         Floating point         16, 32, and 64 bits

Figure 4.3 Data sizes supported for RV64V assuming it also has the single- and
double-precision floating-point extensions RVS and RVD. Adding RVV to such a
RISC-V design means the scalar unit must also add RVH, which is a scalar instruction
extension to support half-precision (16-bit) IEEE 754 floating point. Because RV32V
would not have doubleword scalar operations, it could drop 64-bit integers from the
vector unit. If a RISC-V implementation didn’t include RVS or RVD, it could omit the vec-
tor floating-point instructions.

    One reason for dynamic register typing is that many instructions are required
for a conventional vector architecture that supports such variety. Given the com-
binations of data types and sizes in Figure 4.3, if not for dynamic register typing,
Figure 4.2 would be several pages long!
    Dynamic typing also lets programs disable unused vector registers. As a conse-
quence, enabled vector registers are allocated all the vector memory as long vectors.
For example, assume we have 1024 bytes of vector memory, if 4 vector registers
are enabled and they are type 64–bit floats, the processor would give each vector
register 256 bytes or 256/8¼32 elements. This valiue is called the maximum vector
length (mvl), which is set by the processor and cannot be changed by sofware.
    One complaint about vector architectures is that their larger state means slower
context switch time. Our implementation of RV64V increases state a factor of 3:
from 2 ? 32 ? 8 ¼ 512 bytes to 2 ? 32 ? 1024¼1536 bytes. A pleasant side effect
of dynamic register typing is that the program can configure vector registers as dis-
abled when they are not being used, so there is no need to save and restore them on
a context switch.
    A third benefit of dynamic register typing is that conversions between different
size operands can be implicit depending on the configuration of the registers rather
than as additional explicit conversion instructions. We’ll see an example of this
benefit in the next section.
    The names vld and vst denote vector load and vector store, and they load or
store an entire vectors of data. One operand is the vector register to be loaded or
stored; the other operand, which is a RV64G general-purpose register, is the start-
ing address of the vector in memory. Vector needs more registers beyond the vector
registers themselves. The vector-length register vl is used when the natural vector
length is not equal to mvl, the vector-type register vctype records register types,
and the predicate registers pi are used when loops involve IF statements. We’ll see
them in action in the following example.
    With a vector instruction, the system can perform the operations on the vector
data elements in many ways, including operating on many elements simultaneously.
This flexibility lets vector designs use slow but wide execution units to achieve
high performance at low power. Furthermore, the independence of elements within
a vector instruction set allows scaling of functional units without performing addi-
tional costly dependency checks, as superscalar processors require.

                         How Vector Processors Work: An Example
                         We can best understand a vector processor by looking at a vector loop for RV64V.
                         Let’s take a typical vector problem, which we use throughout this section:
                            Y=a?X+Y
                        X and Y are vectors, initially resident in memory, and a is a scalar. This problem is
                        the SAXPY or DAXPY loop that forms the inner loop of the Linpack benchmark
                        (Dongarra et al., 2003). (SAXPY stands for single-precision a ? X plus Y, and
                        DAXPY for double precision a ? X plus Y.) Linpack is a collection of linear alge-
                        bra routines, and the Linpack benchmark consists of routines for performing
                        Gaussian elimination.
                            For now, let us assume that the number of elements, or length, of a vector reg-
                        ister (32) matches the length of the vector operation we are interested in. (This
                        restriction will be lifted shortly.)

             Example     Show the code for RV64G and RV64V for the DAXPY loop. For this example,
                         assume that X and Y have 32 elements and the starting addresses of X and Y
                         are in x5 and x6, respectively. (A subsequent example covers when they do
                         not have 32 elements.)
               Answer    Here is the RISC-V code:
                                    fld    f0,a                        # Load scalar a
                                    addi   x28,x5,#256                 # Last address to load
                              Loop: fld    f1,0(x5)                    # Load X[i]
                                    fmul.d f1,f1,f0                    # a ? X[i]
                                    fld    f2,0(x6)                    # Load Y[i]
                                    fadd.d f2,f2,f1                    # a ? X[i] + Y[i]
                                    fsd    f2,0(x6)                    # Store into Y[i]
                                    addi   x5,x5,#8                    # Increment index to X
                                    addi   x6,x6,#8                    # Increment index to Y
                                    bne    x28,x5,Loop                 # Check if done
                         Here is the RV64V code for DAXPY:
                                      vsetdcfg       4*FP64                # Enable 4 DP FP vregs
                                      fld            f0,a                  # Load scalar a
                                      vld            v0,x5                 # Load vector X
                                      vmul           v1,v0,f0              # Vector-scalar mult
                                      vld            v2,x6                 # Load vector Y
                                      vadd           v3,v1,v2              # Vector-vector add
                                      vst            v3,x6                 # Store the sum
                                      vdisable                             # Disable vector regs
                         Note that the assembler determines which version of the vector operations to gen-
                         erate. Because the multiply has a scalar operand, it generates vmul.vs, whereas
                         the add doesn’t, so it generates vadd.vv.

              The initial instruction configures the first four vector registers to hold 64-bit
          floating-point data. The last instruction disables all vector registers. If a context
          switch happened after the last instruction, there is no additional state to save.
              The most dramatic difference between the preceding scalar and vector code is that
          the vector processor greatly reduces the dynamic instruction bandwidth, executing
          only 8 instructions versus 258 for RV64G. This reduction occurs because the vector
          operations work on 32 elements and the overhead instructions that constitute nearly
          half the loop on RV64G are not present in the RV64V code. When the compiler
          produces vector instructions for such a sequence, and the resulting code spends
          much of its time running in vector mode, the code is said to be vectorized or vector-
          izable. Loops can be vectorized when they do not have dependences between
          iterations of a loop, which are called loop-carried dependences (see Section 4.5).
              Another important difference between RV64G and RV64V is the frequency of
          pipeline interlocks for a simple implementation of RV64G. In the straightforward
          RV64G code, every fadd.d must wait for a fmul.d, and every fsd must wait
          for the fadd.d. On the vector processor, each vector instruction will stall only
          for the first element in each vector, and then subsequent elements will flow smoothly
          down the pipeline. Thus pipeline stalls are required only once per vector instruction,
          rather than once per vector element. Vector architects call forwarding of element-
          dependent operations chaining, in that the dependent operations are “chained”
          together. In this example, the pipeline stall frequency on RV64G will be about
          32 ? higher than it is on RV64V. Software pipelining, loop unrolling (Appendix
          H), or out-of-order execution can reduce the pipeline stalls on RV64G; however,
          the large difference in instruction bandwidth cannot be reduced substantially.
              Let’s show off the dynamic register typing before discussing performance of
          the code.

Example   A common use of multiply-accumulate operations is to multiply using narrow data
          and to accumulate at a wider size to increase the accuracy of a sum of products.
          Show how the preceding code would change if X and a were single-precision
          instead of a double-precision floating point. Next, show the changes to this code
          if we switch X, Y, and a from floating-point type to integers.

 Answer   The changes are underlined in the following code. Amazingly, the same code works
          with two small changes: the configuration instruction includes one single-precision
          vector, and the scalar load is now single-precision:

             vsetdcfg 1*FP32,3*FP64 # 1 32b, 3 64b vregs
             flw      f0,a       # Load scalar a
             vld      v0,x5      # Load vector X
             vmul      v1,v0,f0 # Vector-scalar mult
             vld      v2,x6      # Load vector Y
             vadd      v3,v1,v2 # Vector-vector add
             vst      v3,x6      # Store the sum
             vdisable           # Disable vector regs

                         Note that RV64V hardware will implicitly perform a conversion from the narrower
                         single-precision to the wider double-precision in this setup.
                            The switch to integers is almost as easy, but we must now use an integer load
                         instruction and integer register to hold the scalar value:
                            vsetdcfg 1*X32,3*X64             # 1 32b, 3 64b int reg
                            lw       x7,a                    # Load scalar a
                            vld      v0,x5                   # Load vector X
                            vmul     v1,v0,x7                # Vector-scalar mult
                            vld      v2,x6                   # Load vector Y
                            vadd     v3,v1,v2                # Vector-vector add
                            vst      v3,x6                   # Store the sum
                            vdisable                         # Disable vector regs

                         Vector Execution Time
                         The execution time of a sequence of vector operations primarily depends on three
                         factors: (1) the length of the operand vectors, (2) structural hazards among the
                         operations, and (3) the data dependences. Given the vector length and the initiation
                         rate, which is the rate at which a vector unit consumes new operands and produces
                         new results, we can compute the time for a single vector instruction.
                              All modern vector computers have vector functional units with multiple par-
                         allel pipelines (or lanes) that can produce two or more results per clock cycle,
                         but they may also have some functional units that are not fully pipelined. For sim-
                         plicity, our RV64V implementation has one lane with an initiation rate of one ele-
                         ment per clock cycle for individual operations. Thus the execution time in clock
                         cycles for a single vector instruction is approximately the vector length.
                              To simplify the discussion of vector execution and vector performance, we use
                         the notion of a convoy, which is the set of vector instructions that could potentially
                         execute together. The instructions in a convoy must not contain any structural haz-
                         ards; if such hazards were present, the instructions would need to be serialized and
                         initiated in different convoys. Thus the vld and the following vmul in the pre-
                         ceding example can be in the same convoy. As we will soon see, you can estimate
                         performance of a section of code by counting the number of convoys. To keep this
                         analysis simple, we assume that a convoy of instructions must complete execution
                         before any other instructions (scalar or vector) can begin execution.
                              It might seem that in addition to vector instruction sequences with structural
                         hazards, sequences with read-after-write dependency hazards should also be in
                         separate convoys. However, chaining allows them to be in the same convoy since
                         it allows a vector operation to start as soon as the individual elements of its vector
                         source operand become available: the results from the first functional unit in the
                         chain are “forwarded” to the second functional unit. In practice, we often imple-
                         ment chaining by allowing the processor to read and write a particular vector reg-
                         ister at the same time, albeit to different elements. Early implementations of

          chaining worked just like forwarding in scalar pipelining, but this restricted the
          timing of the source and destination instructions in the chain. Recent implementa-
          tions use flexible chaining, which allows a vector instruction to chain to essentially
          any other active vector instruction, assuming that we don’t generate a structural
          hazard. All modern vector architectures support flexible chaining, which we
          assume throughout this chapter.
              To turn convoys into execution time, we need a metric to estimate the length of
          a convoy. It is called a chime, which is simply the unit of time taken to execute one
          convoy. Thus a vector sequence that consists of m convoys executes in m chimes;
          for a vector length of n, for our simple RV64V implementation, this is approxi-
          mately m ? n clock cycles.
              The chime approximation ignores some processor-specific overheads, many of
          which are dependent on vector length. Therefore measuring time in chimes is a
          better approximation for long vectors than for short ones. We will use the chime
          measurement, rather than clock cycles per result, to indicate explicitly that we are
          ignoring certain overheads.
              If we know the number of convoys in a vector sequence, we know the execution
          time in chimes. One source of overhead ignored in measuring chimes is any limitation
          on initiating multiple vector instructions in a single clock cycle. If only one vector
          instruction can be initiated in a clock cycle (the reality in most vector processors),
          the chime count will underestimate the actual execution time of a convoy. Because
          the length of vectors is typically much greater than the number of instructions in
          the convoy, we will simply assume that the convoy executes in one chime.

Example   Show how the following code sequence lays out in convoys, assuming a single
          copy of each vector functional unit:
                  vld      v0,x5                 # Load vector X
                  vmul     v1,v0,f0              # Vector-scalar multiply
                  vld      v2,x6                 # Load vector Y
                  vadd     v3,v1,v2              # Vector-vector add
                  vst      v3,x6                 # Store the sum
          How many chimes will this vector sequence take? How many cycles per
          FLOP (floating-point operation) are needed, ignoring vector instruction issue
          overhead?

 Answer   The first convoy starts with the first vld instruction. The vmul is dependent on the
          first vld, but chaining allows it to be in the same convoy.
              The second vld instruction must be in a separate convoy because there is a
          structural hazard on the load/store unit for the prior vld instruction. The vadd
          is dependent on the second vld, but it can again be in the same convoy via chain-
          ing. Finally, the vst has a structural hazard on the vld in the second convoy, so it
          must go in the third convoy. This analysis leads to the following layout of vector
          instructions into convoys:

                         1. vld              vmul
                         2. vld              vadd
                         3. vst
                         The sequence requires three convoys. Because the sequence takes three chimes and
                         there are two floating-point operations per result, the number of cycles per FLOP is
                         1.5 (ignoring any vector instruction issue overhead). Note that, although we allow
                         the vld and vmul both to execute in the first convoy, most vector machines will
                         take 2 clock cycles to initiate the instructions.
                            This example shows that the chime approximation is reasonably accurate for
                         long vectors. For example, for 32-element vectors, the time in chimes is 3, so
                         the sequence would take about 32 ? 3 or 96 clock cycles. The overhead of issuing
                         convoys in two separate clock cycles would be small.

                             Another source of overhead is far more significant than the issue limitation. The
                         most important source of overhead ignored by the chime model is vector start-up
                         time, which is the latency in clock cycles until the pipeline is full. The start-up time
                         is principally determined by the pipelining latency of the vector functional unit. For
                         RV64V, we will use the same pipeline depths as the Cray-1, although latencies in
                         more modern processors have tended to increase, especially for vector loads. All
                         functional units are fully pipelined. The pipeline depths are 6 clock cycles for
                         floating-point add, 7 for floating-point multiply, 20 for floating-point divide,
                         and 12 for vector load.
                             Given these vector basics, the next several sections will give optimizations that
                         either improve the performance or increase the types of programs that can run well
                         on vector architectures. In particular, they will answer these questions:

                         ■   How can a vector processor execute a single vector faster than one element per
                             clock cycle? Multiple elements per clock cycle improve performance.
                         ■   How does a vector processor handle programs where the vector lengths are not
                             the same as the maximum vector length (mvl)? Because most application vec-
                             tors don’t match the architecture vector length, we need an efficient solution to
                             this common case.
                         ■   What happens when there is an IF statement inside the code to be vectorized?
                             More code can vectorize if we can efficiently handle conditional statements.
                         ■   What does a vector processor need from the memory system? Without suffi-
                             cient memory bandwidth, vector execution can be futile.
                         ■   How does a vector processor handle multiple dimensional matrices? This pop-
                             ular data structure must vectorize for vector architectures to do well.
                         ■   How does a vector processor handle sparse matrices? This popular data struc-
                             ture must vectorize also.

■   How do you program a vector computer? Architectural innovations that are a
    mismatch to programming languages and their compilers may not get
    widespread use.

The rest of this section introduces each of these optimizations of the vector archi-
tecture, and Appendix G goes into greater depth.

Multiple Lanes: Beyond One Element per Clock Cycle
A critical advantage of a vector instruction set is that it allows software to pass a
large amount of parallel work to hardware using only a single short instruction.
One vector instruction can include scores of independent operations yet be
encoded in the same number of bits as a conventional scalar instruction. The par-
allel semantics of a vector instruction allow an implementation to execute these
elemental operations using a deeply pipelined functional unit, as in the RV64V
implementation we’ve studied so far; an array of parallel functional units; or a com-
bination of parallel and pipelined functional units. Figure 4.4 illustrates how to
improve vector performance by using parallel pipelines to execute a vector add
instruction.
     The RV64V instruction set has the property that all vector arithmetic instruc-
tions only allow element N of one vector register to take part in operations with
element N from other vector registers. This dramatically simplifies the design of
a highly parallel vector unit, which can be structured as multiple parallel lanes.
As with a traffic highway, we can increase the peak throughput of a vector unit
by adding more lanes. Figure 4.5 shows the structure of a four-lane vector unit.
Thus going to four lanes from one lane reduces the number of clocks for a chime
from 32 to 8. For multiple lanes to be advantageous, both the applications and the
architecture must support long vectors; otherwise, they will execute so quickly that
you’ll run out of instruction bandwidth, requiring ILP techniques (see Chapter 3) to
supply enough vector instructions.
     Each lane contains one portion of the vector register file and one execution
pipeline from each vector functional unit. Each vector functional unit executes
vector instructions at the rate of one element group per cycle using multiple
pipelines, one per lane. The first lane holds the first element (element 0) for all
vector registers, and so the first element in any vector instruction will have its
source and destination operands located in the first lane. This allocation allows
the arithmetic pipeline local to the lane to complete the operation without commu-
nicating with other lanes. Avoiding interlane communication reduces the wiring
cost and register file ports required to build a highly parallel execution unit and
helps explain why vector computers can complete up to 64 operations per clock
cycle (2 arithmetic units and 2 load/store units across 16 lanes).
     Adding multiple lanes is a popular technique to improve vector performance as
it requires little increase in control complexity and does not require changes to
existing machine code. It also allows designers to trade off die area, clock rate,
voltage, and energy without sacrificing peak performance. If the clock rate of a

                                             Element group

           (A)                     (B)

Figure 4.4 Using multiple functional units to improve the performance of a single vector add instruction,
C 5 A + B. The vector processor (A) on the left has a single add pipeline and can complete one addition per clock
cycle. The vector processor (B) on the right has four add pipelines and can complete four additions per clock cycle.
The elements within a single vector add instruction are interleaved across the four pipelines. The set of elements that
move through the pipelines together is termed an element group. Reproduced with permission from Asanovic, K.,
1998. Vector Microprocessors (Ph.D. thesis). Computer Science Division, University of California, Berkeley.

                             vector processor is halved, doubling the number of lanes will retain the same peak
                             performance.

                             Vector-Length Registers: Handling Loops Not Equal to 32
                             A vector register processor has a natural vector length determined by the maximum
                             vector length (mvl). This length, which was 32 in our example above, is unlikely

        Lane 0                Lane 1                   Lane 2                Lane 3

     FP add                 FP add                  FP add                FP add
     pipe 0                 pipe 1                  pipe 2                pipe 3

         Vector                Vector                   Vector                Vector
       registers:            registers:               registers:            registers:
       elements              elements                 elements              elements
      0, 4, 8, . . .        1, 5, 9, . . .          2, 6, 10, . . .       3, 7, 11, . . .

     FP mul.               FP mul.                  FP mul.               FP mul.
      pipe 0                pipe 1                   pipe 2                pipe 3

                                    Vector load-store unit

Figure 4.5 Structure of a vector unit containing four lanes. The vector register mem-
ory is divided across the lanes, with each lane holding every fourth element of each
vector register. The figure shows three vector functional units: an FP add, an FP multiply,
and a load-store unit. Each of the vector arithmetic units contains four execution pipe-
lines, one per lane, which act in concert to complete a single vector instruction. Note
how each section of the vector register file needs to provide only enough ports for pipe-
lines local to its lane. This figure does not show the path to provide the scalar operand
for vector-scalar instructions, but the scalar processor (or Control Processor) broadcasts
a scalar value to all lanes.

to match the real vector length in a program. Moreover, in a real program, the
length of a particular vector operation is often unknown at compile time. In fact,
a single piece of code may require different vector lengths. For example, consider
this code:
                              for (i=0; i <n; i=i+1)
                                  Y[i] = a * X[i] + Y[i];
The size of all the vector operations depends on n, which may not even be known
until run time. The value of n might also be a parameter to a procedure containing
the preceding loop and therefore subject to change during execution.

                              The solution to these problems is to add a vector-length register (vl). The vl
                         controls the length of any vector operation, including a vector load or store. The
                         value in the vl, however, cannot be greater than the maximum vector length (mvl).
                         This solves our problem as long as the real length is less than or equal to the max-
                         imum vector length (mvl). This parameter means the length of vector registers can
                         grow in later computer generations without changing the instruction set. As we will
                         see in the next section, multimedia SIMD extensions have no equivalent of mvl, so
                         they expand the instruction set every time they increase their vector length.
                              What if the value of n is not known at compile time and thus may be greater
                         than the mvl? To tackle the second problem where the vector is longer than the
                         maximum length, a technique called strip mining is traditionally used. Strip mining
                         is the generation of code such that each vector operation is done for a size less than
                         or equal to the mvl. One loop handles any number of iterations that is a multiple of
                         the mvl and another loop that handles any remaining iterations and must be less
                         than the mvl. RISC-V has a better solution than a separate loop for strip mining.
                         The instruction setvl writes the smaller of the mvl and the loop variable n into
                         vl (and to another register). If the number of iterations of the loop is larger than n,
                         then the fastest the loop can compute is mvl values at time, so setvl sets vl to
                         mvl. If n is smaller than mvl, it should compute only on the last n elements in this
                         final iteration of the loop, so setvl sets vl to n. setvl also writes another scalar
                         register to help with later loop bookkeeping. Below is the RV64V code for vector
                         DAXPY for any value of n.

                                vsetdcfg         2 DP FP         # Enable 2 64b Fl.Pt. registers
                                fld              f0,a            # Load scalar a
                          loop: setvl            t0,a0           # vl = t0 = min(mvl,n)
                                vld              v0,x5           # Load vector X
                                slli             t1,t0,3         # t1 = vl * 8 (in bytes)
                                add              x5,x5,t1        # Increment pointer to X by vl*8
                                vmul             v0,v0,f0        # Vector-scalar mult
                                vld              v1,x6           # Load vector Y
                                vadd             v1,v0,v1        # Vector-vector add
                                sub              a0,a0,t0        # n ?= vl (t0)
                                vst              v1,x6           # Store the sum into Y
                                add              x6,x6,t1        # Increment pointer to Y by vl*8
                                bnez             a0,loop         # Repeat if n != 0
                                vdisable                         # Disable vector regs

                         Predicate Registers: Handling IF Statements in Vector Loops
                         From Amdahl’s law, we know that the speedup on programs with low to moderate
                         levels of vectorization will be very limited. The presence of conditionals (IF state-
                         ments) inside loops and the use of sparse matrices are two main reasons for lower
                         levels of vectorization. Programs that contain IF statements in loops cannot be run

   Value of j     0        1          2          3          ...       ...      n/MVL

  Range of i      0       m       (m + MVL) (m + 2 × MVL) . . .       ...     (n − MVL)
                  ..      ..           ..         ..                              ..
                (m − 1) (m − 1)      (m − 1)    (m − 1)                         (n − 1)
                        + MVL      + 2 × MVL + 3 × MVL

Figure 4.6 A vector of arbitrary length processed with strip mining. All blocks but the
first are of length MVL, utilizing the full power of the vector processor. In this figure, we
use the variable m for the expression (n % MVL). (The C operator % is modulo.)

in vector mode using the techniques we have discussed up to now because the IF
statements introduce control dependences into a loop. Likewise, we cannot imple-
ment sparse matrices efficiently using any of the capabilities we have seen so far.
We examine strategies for dealing with conditional execution here, leaving the dis-
cussion of sparse matrices for later.
    Consider the following loop written in C:
                for (i = 0; i < 64; i=i+1)
                  if (X[i] != 0)
                    X[i] = X[i] – Y[i];
This loop cannot normally be vectorized because of the conditional execution of
the body; however, if the inner loop could be run for the iterations for which X[i] 6¼
0, then the subtraction could be vectorized.
     The common extension for this capability is vector-mask control. In RV64V,
predicate registers hold the mask and essentially provide conditional execution of
each element operation in a vector instruction. These registers use a Boolean vector
to control the execution of a vector instruction, just as conditionally executed
instructions use a Boolean condition to determine whether to execute a scalar
instruction (see Chapter 3). When the predicate register p0 is set, all following vec-
tor instructions operate only on the vector elements whose corresponding entries in
the predicate register are 1. The entries in the destination vector register that cor-
respond to a 0 in the mask register are unaffected by the vector operation. Like
vector registers, predicate registers are configured and can be disabled. Enabling
a predicate register initializes it to all 1 s, meaning that subsequent vector instruc-
tions operate on all vector elements. We can now use the following code for the
previous loop, assuming that the starting addresses of X and Y are in x5 and
x6, respectively:
    vsetdcfg            2*FP64             # Enable 2 64b FP vector regs
    vsetpcfgi           1                  # Enable 1 predicate register
    vld                 v0,x5              # Load vector X into v0
    vld                 v1,x6              # Load vector Y into v1
    fmv.d.x             f0,x0              # Put (FP) zero into f0

                             vpne      p0,v0,f0                 # Set p0(i) to 1 if v0(i)!=f0
                             vsub      v0,v0,v1                 # Subtract under vector mask
                             vst       v0,x5                    # Store the result in X
                             vdisable                           # Disable vector registers
                             vpdisable                          # Disable predicate registers
                         Compiler writers use the term IF-conversion to transform an IF statement into a
                         straight-line code sequence using conditional execution.
                             Using a vector-mask register does have overhead, however. With scalar archi-
                         tectures, conditionally executed instructions still require execution time when
                         the condition is not satisfied. Nonetheless, the elimination of a branch and the asso-
                         ciated control dependences can make a conditional instruction faster even if it
                         sometimes does useless work. Similarly, vector instructions executed with a vector
                         mask still take the same execution time, even for the elements where the mask
                         is zero. Likewise, despite a significant number of zeros in the mask, using
                         vector-mask control may still be significantly faster than using scalar mode.
                             As we will see in Section 4.4, one difference between vector processors and
                         GPUs is the way they handle conditional statements. Vector processors make the
                         predicate registers part of the architectural state and rely on compilers to manipulate
                         mask registers explicitly. In contrast, GPUs get the same effect using hardware to
                         manipulate internal mask registers that are invisible to GPU software. In both cases,
                         the hardware spends the time to execute a vector element whether the corresponding
                         mask bit is 0 or 1, so the GFLOPS rate drops when masks are used.

                         Memory Banks: Supplying Bandwidth for Vector
                         Load/Store Units
                         The behavior of the load/store vector unit is significantly more complicated than
                         that of the arithmetic functional units. The start-up time for a load is the time to
                         get the first word from memory into a register. If the rest of the vector can be sup-
                         plied without stalling, then the vector initiation rate is equal to the rate at which new
                         words are fetched or stored. Unlike simpler functional units, the initiation rate may
                         not necessarily be 1 clock cycle because memory bank stalls can reduce effective
                         throughput.
                             Typically, penalties for start-ups on load/store units are higher than
                         those for arithmetic units—over 100 clock cycles on many processors. For
                         RV64V, we assume a start-up time of 12 clock cycles, the same as the Cray-
                         1. (Recent vector computers use caches to bring down latency of vector loads
                         and stores.)
                             To maintain an initiation rate of one word fetched or stored per clock cycle,
                         the memory system must be capable of producing or accepting this much data.
                         Spreading accesses across multiple independent memory banks usually delivers
                         the desired rate. As we will soon see, having significant numbers of banks is
                         useful for dealing with vector loads or stores that access rows or columns
                         of data.

             Most vector processors use memory banks, which allow several independent
          accesses rather than simple memory interleaving for three reasons:

          1. Many vector computers support many loads or stores per clock cycle, and the
             memory bank cycle time is usually several times larger than the processor cycle
             time. To support simultaneous accesses from multiple loads or stores, the mem-
             ory system needs multiple banks and needs to be able to control the addresses to
             the banks independently.
          2. Most vector processors support the ability to load or store data words that are
             not sequential. In such cases, independent bank addressing, rather than inter-
             leaving, is required.
          3. Most vector computers support multiple processors sharing the same memory
             system, so each processor will be generating its own separate stream of
             addresses.

          In combination, these features lead to the desire for a large number of independent
          memory banks, as the following example shows.

Example   The largest configuration of a Cray T90 (Cray T932) has 32 processors, each capa-
          ble of generating 4 loads and 2 stores per clock cycle. The processor clock cycle is
          2.167 ns, while the cycle time of the SRAMs used for the memory system is 15 ns.
          Calculate the minimum number of memory banks required to allow all processors
          to run at the full memory bandwidth.

 Answer   The maximum number of memory references each cycle is 192: 32 processors
          times 6 references per processor. Each SRAM bank is busy for 15/2.167 ¼ 6.92
          clock cycles, which we round up to 7 processor clock cycles. Therefore we require
          a minimum of 192 ? 7 ¼ 1344 memory banks!
             The Cray T932 actually has 1024 memory banks, so the early models could not
          sustain the full bandwidth to all processors simultaneously. A subsequent memory
          upgrade replaced the 15 ns asynchronous SRAMs with pipelined synchronous
          SRAMs that more than halved the memory cycle time, thereby providing sufficient
          bandwidth.

             Taking a higher-level perspective, vector load/store units play a similar role to
          prefetch units in scalar processors in that both try to deliver data bandwidth by
          supplying processors with streams of data.

          Stride: Handling Multidimensional Arrays in Vector
          Architectures
          The position in memory of adjacent elements in a vector may not be sequential.
          Consider this straightforward code for matrix multiply in C:

                                        for (i = 0; i < 100; i=i+1)
                                          for (j = 0; j < 100; j=j+1) {
                                            A[i][j] = 0.0;
                                            for (k = 0; k < 100; k=k+1)
                                              A[i][j] = A[i][j] + B[i][k] * D[k][j];
                                            }

                         We could vectorize the multiplication of each row of B with each column of D and
                         strip-mine the inner loop with k as the index variable.
                              To do so, we must consider how to address adjacent elements in B and adjacent
                         elements in D. When an array is allocated memory, it is linearized and must be laid
                         out in either row-major order (as in C) or column-major order (as in Fortran). This
                         linearization means that either the elements in the row or the elements in the col-
                         umn are not adjacent in memory. For example, the preceding C code allocates in
                         row-major order, so the elements of D that are accessed by iterations in the inner
                         loop are separated by the row size times 8 (the number of bytes per entry) for a total
                         of 800 bytes. In Chapter 2, we saw that blocking could improve locality in cache-
                         based systems. For vector processors without caches, we need another technique to
                         fetch elements of a vector that are not adjacent in memory.
                              This distance separating elements to be gathered into a single vector register is
                         called the stride. In this example, matrix D has a stride of 100 double words (800
                         bytes), and matrix B would have a stride of 1 double word (8 bytes). For column-
                         major order, which is used by Fortran, the strides would be reversed. Matrix D
                         would have a stride of 1, or 1 double word (8 bytes), separating successive
                         elements, while matrix B would have a stride of 100, or 100 double words (800
                         bytes). Thus, without reordering the loops, the compiler can’t hide the long
                         distances between successive elements for both B and D.
                              Once a vector is loaded into a vector register, it acts as if it had logically adja-
                         cent elements. Thus a vector processor can handle strides greater than one, called
                         nonunit strides, using only vector load and vector store operations with stride
                         capability. This ability to access nonsequential memory locations and to reshape
                         them into a dense structure is one of the major advantages of a vector
                         architecture.
                              Caches inherently deal with unit-stride data; increasing block size can help
                         reduce miss rates for large scientific datasets with unit stride, but increasing block
                         size can even have a negative effect for data that are accessed with nonunit strides.
                         While blocking techniques can solve some of these problems (see Chapter 2), the
                         ability to access noncontiguous data efficiently remains an advantage for vector
                         processors on certain problems, as we will see in Section 4.7.
                              On RV64V, where the addressable unit is a byte, the stride for our example
                         would be 800. The value must be computed dynamically because the size of
                         the matrix may not be known at compile time or—just like vector length—may
                         change for different executions of the same statement. The vector stride, like
                         the vector starting address, can be put in a general-purpose register. Then the
                         RV64V instruction VLDS (load vector with stride) fetches the vector into a vector

          register. Likewise, when storing a nonunit stride vector, use the instruction VSTS
          (store vector with stride).
              Supporting strides greater than one complicates the memory system. Once we
          introduce nonunit strides, it becomes possible to request accesses from the same
          bank frequently. When multiple accesses contend for a bank, a memory bank
          conflict occurs, thereby stalling one access. A bank conflict and thus a stall will
          occur if
                                 Number of banks
                                                                   < Bank busy time
                   Least common multiple ðStride, Number of banksÞ

Example   Suppose we have 8 memory banks with a bank busy time of 6 clocks and a total
          memory latency of 12 cycles. How long will it take to complete a 64-element
          vector load with a stride of 1? With a stride of 32?

 Answer   Because the number of banks is larger than the bank busy time, for a stride of 1, the
          load will take 12 + 64 ¼ 76 clock cycles, or 1.2 clock cycles per element. The worst
          possible stride is a value that is a multiple of the number of memory banks, as in
          this case with a stride of 32 and 8 memory banks. Every access to memory (after the
          first one) will collide with the previous access and will have to wait for the 6-clock-
          cycle bank busy time. The total time will be 12 + 1 + 6 * 63 ¼ 391 clock cycles, or
          6.1 clock cycles per element, slowing it down by a factor of 5!

          Gather-Scatter: Handling Sparse Matrices in Vector
          Architectures
          As previously mentioned, sparse matrices are commonplace, so it is important to
          have techniques to allow programs with sparse matrices to execute in vector mode.
          In a sparse matrix, the elements of a vector are usually stored in some compacted
          form and then accessed indirectly. Assuming a simplified sparse structure, we
          might see code that looks like this:
                         for (i = 0; i < n; i=i+1)
                           A[K[i]] = A[K[i]] + C[M[i]];
          This code implements a sparse vector sum on the arrays A and C, using index vec-
          tors K and M to designate the nonzero elements of A and C. (A and C must have the
          same number of nonzero elements—n of them—so K and M are the same size.)
              The primary mechanism for supporting sparse matrices is gather-scatter oper-
          ations using index vectors. The goal of such operations is to support moving
          between a compressed representation (i.e., zeros are not included) and normal
          representation (i.e., the zeros are included) of a sparse matrix. A gather operation
          takes an index vector and fetches the vector whose elements are at the addresses
          given by adding a base address to the offsets given in the index vector. The result is
          a dense vector in a vector register. After these elements are operated on in a dense

                         form, the sparse vector can be stored in an expanded form by a scatter store, using
                         the same index vector. Hardware support for such operations is called gather-scat-
                         ter, and it appears on nearly all modern vector processors. The RV64V instructions
                         are vldi (load vector indexed or gather) and vsti (store vector indexed or
                         scatter). For example, if x5, x6, x7, and x28 contain the starting addresses of
                         the vectors in the previous sequence, we can code the inner loop with vector
                         instructions such as:
                                  vsetdcfg       4*FP64              # 4 64b FP vector registers
                                  vld            v0, x7              # Load K[]
                                  vldx           v1, x5, v0)         # Load A[K[]]
                                  vld            v2, x28             # Load M[]
                                  vldi           v3, x6, v2)         # Load C[M[]]
                                  vadd           v1, v1, v3          # Add them
                                  vstx           v1, x5, v0)         # Store A[K[]]
                                  vdisable                           # Disable vector registers

                             This technique allows code with sparse matrices to run in vector mode. A
                         simple vectorizing compiler could not automatically vectorize the preceding
                         source code because the compiler would not know that the elements of K are
                         distinct values, and thus that no dependences exist. Instead, a programmer directive
                         would tell the compiler that it was safe to run the loop in vector mode.
                             Although indexed loads and stores (gather and scatter) can be pipelined, they
                         typically run much more slowly than nonindexed loads or stores, because the mem-
                         ory banks are not known from the start of the instruction. The register file must also
                         provide communication between the lanes of a vector unit to support gather and
                         scatter.
                             Each element of a gather or scatter has an individual address, so they can’t be
                         handled in groups, and there can be conflicts at many places throughout the mem-
                         ory system. Thus each individual access incurs significant latency even on cache-
                         based systems. However, as Section 4.7 shows, a memory system can deliver better
                         performance by designing for this case and by using more hardware resources
                         versus when architects have a laissez-faire attitude toward such unpredictable
                         accesses.
                             As we will see in Section 4.4, all loads are gathers and all stores are scatters in
                         GPUs in that no separate instructions restrict addresses to be sequential. To turn the
                         potentially slow gathers and scatters into the more efficient unit-stride accesses to
                         memory, the GPU hardware must recognize the sequential addresses during
                         execution and the GPU programmer to ensure that all the addresses in a gather
                         or scatter are to adjacent locations.

                         Programming Vector Architectures
                         An advantage of vector architectures is that compilers can tell programmers at
                         compile time whether a section of code will vectorize or not, often giving hints

                 Operations executed         Operations executed         Speedup
Benchmark          in vector mode,              in vector mode,          from hint
name             compiler-optimized          with programmer aid        optimization
BDNA                    96.1%                        97.2%                  1.52
MG3D                    95.1%                        94.5%                  1.00
FLO52                   91.5%                        88.7%                   N/A
ARC3D                   91.1%                        92.0%                  1.01
SPEC77                  90.3%                        90.4%                  1.07
MDG                     87.7%                        94.2%                  1.49
TRFD                    69.8%                        73.7%                  1.67
DYFESM                  68.8%                        65.6%                   N/A
ADM                     42.9%                        59.6%                  3.60
OCEAN                   42.8%                        91.2%                  3.92
TRACK                   14.4%                        54.6%                  2.52
SPICE                   11.5%                        79.9%                  4.06
QCD                      4.2%                        75.1%                  2.15

Figure 4.7 Level of vectorization among the Perfect Club benchmarks when exe-
cuted on the Cray Y-MP (Vajapeyam, 1991). The first column shows the vectorization
level obtained with the compiler without hints, and the second column shows the
results after the codes have been improved with hints from a team of Cray Research
programmers.

as to why it did not vectorize the code. This straightforward execution model
allows experts in other domains to learn how to improve performance by revising
their code or by giving hints to the compiler when it’s okay to assume indepen-
dence between operations, such as for gather-scatter data transfers. It is this
dialogue between the compiler and the programmer, with each side giving hints
to the other on how to improve performance, that simplifies programming of vector
computers.
     Today, the main factor that affects the success with which a program runs in
vector mode is the structure of the program itself: Do the loops have true data
dependences (see Section 4.5), or can they be restructured so as not to have such
dependences? This factor is influenced by the algorithms chosen and, to some
extent, by how they are coded.
     As an indication of the level of vectorization achievable in scientific programs,
let’s look at the vectorization levels observed for the Perfect Club benchmarks.
Figure 4.7 shows the percentage of operations executed in vector mode for two
versions of the code running on the Cray Y-MP. The first version is that obtained
with just compiler optimization on the original code, while the second version uses
extensive hints from a team of Cray Research programmers. Several studies of the
performance of applications on vector processors show a wide variation in the level
of compiler vectorization.

                             The hint-rich versions show significant gains in vectorization level for codes
                         that the compiler could not vectorize well by itself, with all codes now above 50%
                         vectorization. The median vectorization improved from about 70% to about 90%.

               4.3       SIMD Instruction Set Extensions for Multimedia
                         SIMD Multimedia Extensions started with the simple observation that many media
                         applications operate on narrower data types than the 32-bit processors were opti-
                         mized for. Graphics systems would use 8 bits to represent each of the three primary
                         colors plus 8 bits for transparency. Depending on the application, audio samples are
                         usually represented with 8 or 16 bits. By partitioning the carry chains within, say, a
                         256-bit adder, a processor could perform simultaneous operations on short vectors
                         of thirty-two 8-bit operands, sixteen 16-bit operands, eight 32-bit operands, or four
                         64-bit operands. The additional cost of such partitioned adders was small. Figure 4.8
                         summarizes typical multimedia SIMD instructions. Like vector instructions, a
                         SIMD instruction specifies the same operation on vectors of data. Unlike vector
                         machines with large register files such as the RISC-V RV64V vector registers,
                         which can hold, say, thirty-two 64-bit elements in each of 32 vector registers, SIMD
                         instructions tend to specify fewer operands and thus use much smaller register files.
                             In contrast to vector architectures, which offer an elegant instruction set that is
                         intended to be the target of a vectorizing compiler, SIMD extensions have three
                         major omissions: no vector length register, no strided or gather/scatter data transfer
                         instructions, and no mask registers.

                         1. Multimedia SIMD extensions fix the number of data operands in the opcode,
                            which has led to the addition of hundreds of instructions in the MMX, SSE,
                            and AVX extensions of the x86 architecture. Vector architectures have a
                            vector-length register that specifies the number of operands for the current oper-
                            ation. These variable-length vector registers easily accommodate programs that
                            naturally have shorter vectors than the maximum size the architecture supports.
                            Moreover, vector architectures have an implicit maximum vector length in the

                         Instruction category                                  Operands
                         Unsigned add/subtract        Thirty-two 8-bit, sixteen 16-bit, eight 32-bit, or four 64-bit
                         Maximum/minimum              Thirty-two 8-bit, sixteen 16-bit, eight 32-bit, or four 64-bit
                         Average                      Thirty-two 8-bit, sixteen 16-bit, eight 32-bit, or four 64-bit
                         Shift right/left             Thirty-two 8-bit, sixteen 16-bit, eight 32-bit, or four 64-bit
                         Floating point               Sixteen 16-bit, eight 32-bit, four 64-bit, or two 128-bit

Figure 4.8 Summary of typical SIMD multimedia support for 256-bit-wide opera-
                         tions. Note that the IEEE 754-2008 floating-point standard added half-precision (16-
                         bit) and quad-precision (128-bit) floating-point operations.
                4.3   SIMD Instruction Set Extensions for Multimedia         ■   305

   architecture, which combined with the vector length register avoids the use of
   many opcodes.
2. Up until recently, multimedia SIMD did not offer the more sophisticated
   addressing modes of vector architectures, namely strided accesses and
   gather-scatter accesses. These features increase the number of programs that
   a vector compiler can successfully vectorize (see Section 4.7).
3. Although this is changing, multimedia SIMD usually did not offer the mask reg-
   isters to support conditional execution of elements as in vector architectures.

Such omissions make it harder for the compiler to generate SIMD code and
increase the difficulty of programming in SIMD assembly language.
     For the x86 architecture, the MMX instructions added in 1996 repurposed the
64-bit floating-point registers, so the basic instructions could perform eight 8-bit
operations or four 16-bit operations simultaneously. These were joined by parallel
MAX and MIN operations, a wide variety of masking and conditional instructions,
operations typically found in digital signal processors, and ad hoc instructions that
were believed to be useful in important media libraries. Note that MMX reused the
floating-point data-transfer instructions to access memory.
     The Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE) successor in 1999 added 16 separate
registers (XMM registers) that were 128 bits wide, so now instructions could simul-
taneously perform sixteen 8-bit operations, eight 16-bit operations, or four 32-bit
operations. It also performed parallel single-precision floating-point arithmetic.
Because SSE had separate registers, it needed separate data transfer instructions.
Intel soon added double-precision SIMD floating-point data types via SSE2 in
2001, SSE3 in 2004, and SSE4 in 2007. Instructions with four single-precision
floating-point operations or two parallel double-precision operations increased
the peak floating-point performance of the x86 computers, as long as programmers
placed the operands side by side. With each generation, they also added ad hoc
instructions whose aim was to accelerate specific multimedia functions perceived
to be important.
     The Advanced Vector Extensions (AVX), added in 2010, doubled the width of
the registers again to 256 bits (YMM registers) and thereby offered instructions that
double the number of operations on all narrower data types. Figure 4.9 shows AVX
instructions useful for double-precision floating-point computations. AVX2 in
2013 added 30 new instructions such as gather (VGATHER) and vector shifts
(VPSLL, VPSRL, VPSRA). AVX-512 in 2017 doubled the width again to 512 bits
(ZMM registers), doubled the number of the registers again to 32, and added about
250 new instructions including scatter (VPSCATTER) and mask registers
(OPMASK). AVX includes preparations to extend registers to 1024 bits in future
editions of the architecture.
     In general, the goal of these extensions has been to accelerate carefully written
libraries rather than for the compiler to generate them (see Appendix H), but recent
x86 compilers are trying to generate such code, particularly for floating-point-
intensive applications. Since the opcode determines the width of the SIMD regis-
ter, every time the width doubles, so must the number of SIMD instructions.

AVX instruction                Description
VADDPD                         Add four packed double-precision operands
VSUBPD                         Subtract four packed double-precision operands
VMULPD                         Multiply four packed double-precision operands
VDIVPD                         Divide four packed double-precision operands
VFMADDPD                       Multiply and add four packed double-precision operands
VFMSUBPD                       Multiply and subtract four packed double-precision operands
VCMPxx                         Compare four packed double-precision operands for EQ, NEQ, LT, LE, GT, GE, …
VMOVAPD                        Move aligned four packed double-precision operands
VBROADCASTSD                   Broadcast one double-precision operand to four locations in a 256-bit register

Figure 4.9 AVX instructions for x86 architecture useful in double-precision floating-point programs. Packed-
double for 256-bit AVX means four 64-bit operands executed in SIMD mode. As the width increases with AVX, it
is increasingly important to add data permutation instructions that allow combinations of narrow operands from
different parts of the wide registers. AVX includes instructions that shuffle 32-bit, 64-bit, or 128-bit operands within
a 256-bit register. For example, BROADCAST replicates a 64-bit operand four times in an AVX register. AVX also
includes a large variety of fused multiply-add/subtract instructions; we show just two here.

                                  Given these weaknesses, why are multimedia SIMD extensions so popular?
                              First, they initially cost little to add to the standard arithmetic unit and they were
                              easy to implement. Second, they require scant extra processor state compared to
                              vector architectures, which is always a concern for context switch times. Third,
                              you need a lot of memory bandwidth to support a vector architecture, which
                              many computers don’t have. Fourth, SIMD does not have to deal with problems
                              in virtual memory when a single instruction can generate 32 memory accesses
                              and any of which can cause a page fault. The original SIMD extensions used
                              separate data transfers per SIMD group of operands that are aligned in memory,
                              and so they cannot cross page boundaries. Another advantage of short, fixed-
                              length “vectors” of SIMD is that it is easy to introduce instructions that can help
                              with new media standards, such as instructions that perform permutations or
                              instructions that consume either fewer or more operands than vectors can pro-
                              duce. Finally, there was concern about how well vector architectures can work
                              with caches. More recent vector architectures have addressed all of these prob-
                              lems. The overarching issue, however, is that due the overiding importance of
                              backwards binary compatability, once an architecture gets started on the SIMD
                              path it’s very hard to get off it.

                Example       To get an idea about what multimedia instructions look like, assume we added a
                              256-bit SIMD multimedia instruction extension to RISC-V, tentatively called
                              RVP for “packed.” We concentrate on floating-point in this example. We add
                              the suffix “4D” on instructions that operate on four double-precision operands
                              at once. Like vector architectures, you can think of a SIMD Processor as having
                              lanes, four in this case. RV64P expands the F registers to be the full width, in this
                              case 256 bits. This example shows the RISC-V SIMD code for the DAXPY loop,
                         4.3   SIMD Instruction Set Extensions for Multimedia         ■   307

         with the changes to the RISC-V code for SIMD underlined. We assume that the
         starting addresses of X and Y are in x5 and x6, respectively.

Answer   Here is the RISC-V SIMD code:
                   fld      f0,a                  #Load scalar a
                   splat.4D f0,f0                 #Make 4 copies of a
                   addi     x28,x5,#256           #Last address to load
             Loop: fld.4D   f1,0(x5)              #Load X[i] ... X[i+3]
                   fmul.4D  f1,f1,f0              #a?X[i] ... a?X[i+3]
                   fld.4D   f2,0(x6)              #Load Y[i] ... Y[i+3]
                   fadd.4D  f2,f2,f1              # a?X[i]+Y[i]...
                                                  # a?X[i+3]+Y[i+3]
                      fsd.4D          f2,0(x6)    #Store Y[i]... Y[i+3]
                      addi            x5,x5,#32   #Increment index to X
                      addi            x6,x6,#32   #Increment index to Y
                      bne             x28,x5,Loop #Check if done
         The changes were replacing every RISC-V double-precision instruction with its 4D
         equivalent, increasing the increment from 8 to 32, and adding the splat instruc-
         tion that makes 4 copies of a in the 256 bits of f0. While not as dramatic as the
         32 ? reduction of dynamic instruction bandwidth of RV64V, RISC-V SIMD does
         get almost a 4 ? reduction: 67 versus 258 instructions executed for RV64G. This
         code knows the number of elements. That number is often determined at run time,
         which would require an extra strip-mine loop to handle the case when the number is
         not a modulo of 4.

         Programming Multimedia SIMD Architectures
         Given the ad hoc nature of the SIMD multimedia extensions, the easiest way to use
         these instructions has been through libraries or by writing in assembly language.
             Recent extensions have become more regular, giving compilers a more reason-
         able target. By borrowing techniques from vectorizing compilers, compilers are
         starting to produce SIMD instructions automatically. For example, advanced com-
         pilers today can generate SIMD floating-point instructions to deliver much higher
         performance for scientific codes. However, programmers must be sure to align all
         the data in memory to the width of the SIMD unit on which the code is run to prevent
         the compiler from generating scalar instructions for otherwise vectorizable code.

         The Roofline Visual Performance Model
         One visual, intuitive way to compare potential floating-point performance of var-
         iations of SIMD architectures is the Roofline model (Williams et al., 2009). The
         horizontal and diagonal lines of the graphs it produces give this simple model its
         name and indicate its value (see Figure 4.11). It ties together floating-point perfor-
         mance, memory performance, and arithmetic intensity in a two-dimensional graph.

                                        O(1)              O(log(N))               O(N)

                                                         Arithmetic intensity

                                                            Spectral
                                  Sparse                                              Dense
                                                            methods                                   N-body
                                  matrix                                              matrix
                                                            (FFTs)                                    (Particle
                                  (SpMV)                                              (BLAS3)         methods)
                                        Structured Structured
                                        grids      grids
                                        (Stencils, (Lattice
                                        PDEs)      methods)

Figure 4.10 Arithmetic intensity, specified as the number of floating-point opera-
                         tions to run the program divided by the number of bytes accessed in main memory
                         (Williams et al., 2009). Some kernels have an arithmetic intensity that scales with prob-
                         lem size, such as a dense matrix, but there are many kernels with arithmetic intensities
                         independent of problem size.

                         Arithmetic intensity is the ratio of floating-point operations per byte of memory
                         accessed. It can be calculated by taking the total number of floating-point opera-
                         tions for a program divided by the total number of data bytes transferred to main
                         memory during program execution. Figure 4.10 shows the relative arithmetic
                         intensity of several example kernels.
                             Peak floating-point performance can be found using the hardware specifica-
                         tions. Many of the kernels in this case study do not fit in on-chip caches, so peak
                         memory performance is defined by the memory system behind the caches. Note
                         that we need the peak memory bandwidth that is available to the processors,
                         not just at the DRAM pins as in Figure 4.27 on page 328. One way to find the
                         (delivered) peak memory performance is to run the Stream benchmark.
                             Figure 4.11 shows the Roofline model for the NEC SX-9 vector processor on
                         the left and the Intel Core i7 920 multicore computer on the right. The vertical Y-
                         axis is achievable floating-point performance from 2 to 256 GFLOPS/s. The hor-
                         izontal X-axis is arithmetic intensity, varying from 1/8 FLOP/DRAM byte
                         accessed to 16 FLOP/DRAM byte accessed in both graphs. Note that the graph
                         is a log-log scale, and that Rooflines are done just once for a computer.
                             For a given kernel, we can find a point on the X-axis based on its arithmetic
                         intensity. If we drew a vertical line through that point, the performance of the ker-
                         nel on that computer must lie somewhere along that line. We can plot a horizontal
                         line showing peak floating-point performance of the computer. Obviously, the
                         actual floating-point performance can be no higher than the horizontal line because
                         that is a hardware limit.
                             How could we plot the peak memory performance? Because the X-axis is
                         FLOP/byte and the Y-axis is FLOP/s, bytes/s is just a diagonal line at a 45-degree
                         angle in this figure. Thus we can plot a third line that gives the maximum floating-
                         point performance that the memory system of that computer can support for a given
                                                                     4.3    SIMD Instruction Set Extensions for Multimedia                                  ■   309

                                                                                                                           Intel Core i7 920
                                                     NEC SX-9 CPU                                                             (Nehalem)
                                        256                                                                    256

             Double precision GLFOP/s

                                                                                    Double precision GLFOP/s
                                        128                  102.4 GFLOP/s                                     128

                                                   am /s
                                         64                                                                     64

                                                tre B
                                                                                                                                       42.66 GFLOP/s

                                                     )
                                              (S 2 G
                                                16
                                         32                                                                     32

                                                                                                                               am /s
                                         16                                                                     16

                                                                                                                            tre B
                                                                                                                                 )
                                                                                                                          (S .4 G
                                                                                                                            16
                                          8                                                                      8

                                          4                                                                      4

                                          2                                                                      2
                                           1/8 1/4 1/2 1      2    4    8    16                                   1/8 1/4 1/2 1      2    4    8       16
                                                   Arithmetic intensity                                                   Arithmetic intensity

Figure 4.11 Roofline model for one NEC SX-9 vector processor on the left and the Intel Core i7 920 multicore
computer with SIMD extensions on the right (Williams et al., 2009). This Roofline is for unit-stride memory accesses
and double-precision floating-point performance. NEC SX-9 is a vector supercomputer announced in 2008 that
cost millions of dollars. It has a peak DP FP performance of 102.4 GFLOP/s and a peak memory bandwidth of
162 GB/s from the Stream benchmark. The Core i7 920 has a peak DP FP performance of 42.66 GFLOP/s and a peak
memory bandwidth of 16.4 GB/s. The dashed vertical lines at an arithmetic intensity of 4 FLOP/byte show that both
processors operate at peak performance. In this case, the SX-9 at 102.4 FLOP/s is 2.4? faster than the Core i7 at
42.66 GFLOP/s. At an arithmetic intensity of 0.25 FLOP/byte, the SX-9 is 10 ? faster at 40.5 GFLOP/s versus
4.1 GFLOP/s for the Core i7.

                                                    arithmetic intensity. We can express the limits as a formula to plot these lines in the
                                                    graphs in Figure 4.11:
                                                                Attainable GFLOPs=s ¼ MinðPeak Memory BW

                                                                                                                  Arithmetic Intensity, Peak Floating ? Point Perf:Þ
                                                    The “Roofline” sets an upper bound on performance of a kernel depending on its
                                                    arithmetic intensity. If we think of arithmetic intensity as a pole that hits the roof,
                                                    either it hits the flat part of the roof, which means performance is computationally
                                                    limited, or it hits the slanted part of the roof, which means performance is ulti-
                                                    mately limited by memory bandwidth. In Figure 4.11, the vertical dashed line
                                                    on the right (arithmetic intensity of 4) is an example of the former and the vertical
                                                    dashed line on the left (arithmetic intensity of 1/4) is an example of the latter. Given
                                                    a Roofline model of a computer, you can apply it repeatedly, because it doesn’t
                                                    vary by kernel.
                                                        Note that the “ridge point,” where the diagonal and horizontal roofs meet,
                                                    offers an interesting insight into a computer. If it is far to the right, then only kernels
                                                    with very high arithmetic intensity can achieve the maximum performance of that
                                                    computer. If it is far to the left, then almost any kernel can potentially hit the max-
                                                    imum performance. As we will see, this vector processor has both much higher

                         memory bandwidth and a ridge point far to the left as compared to other SIMD
                         Processors.
                             Figure 4.11 shows that the peak computational performance of the SX-9 is
                         2.4 ? faster than Core i7, but the memory performance is 10 ? faster. For programs
                         with an arithmetic intensity of 0.25, the SX-9 is 10 ? faster (40.5 versus
                         4.1 GFLOP/s). The higher memory bandwidth moves the ridge point from 2.6
                         in the Core i7 to 0.6 on the SX-9, which means many more programs can reach
                         the peak computational performance on the vector processor.

               4.4       Graphics Processing Units
                         People can buy a GPU chip with thousands of parallel floating-point units for a few
                         hundred dollars and plug it into their desk side PC. Such affordability and conve-
                         nience makes high performance computing available to many. The interest in
                         GPU computing blossomed when this potential was combined with a programming
                         language that made GPUs easier to program. Therefore many programmers of sci-
                         entific and multimedia applications today are pondering whether to use GPUs or
                         CPUs. For programmers interested in machine learning, which is the subject of
                         Chapter 7, GPUs are currently the preferred platform.
                             GPUs and CPUs do not go back in computer architecture genealogy to a com-
                         mon ancestor; there is no “missing link” that explains both. As Section 4.10
                         describes, the primary ancestors of GPUs are graphics accelerators, as doing
                         graphics well is the reason why GPUs exist. While GPUs are moving toward
                         mainstream computing, they can’t abandon their responsibility to continue to excel
                         at graphics. Thus the design of GPUs may make more sense when architects ask,
                         given the hardware invested to do graphics well, how can we supplement it to
                         improve the performance of a wider range of applications?
                             Note that this section concentrates on using GPUs for computing. To see how
                         GPU computing combines with the traditional role of graphics acceleration, see
                         “Graphics and Computing GPUs,” by John Nickolls and David Kirk (Appendix
                         A in the 5th edition of Computer Organization and Design by the same authors
                         as this book).
                             Because the terminology and some hardware features are quite different
                         from vector and SIMD architectures, we believe it will be easier if we start with
                         the simplified programming model for GPUs before we describe the architecture.

                         Programming the GPU
                         CUDA is an elegant solution to the problem of representing parallelism
                         in algorithms, not all algorithms, but enough to matter. It seems to res-
                         onate in some way with the way we think and code, allowing an easier,
                         more natural expression of parallelism beyond the task level.
                                                                                      Vincent Natol,
                                                                    “Kudos for CUDA,” HPC Wire (2010)

The challenge for the GPU programmer is not simply getting good perfor-
mance on the GPU, but also in coordinating the scheduling of computation
on the system processor and the GPU and the transfer of data between system
memory and GPU memory. Moreover, as we see will see later in this section,
GPUs have virtually every type of parallelism that can be captured by the
programming environment: multithreading, MIMD, SIMD, and even
instruction-level.
    NVIDIA decided to develop a C-like language and programming environment
that would improve the productivity of GPU programmers by attacking both the
challenges of heterogeneous computing and of multifaceted parallelism. The name
of their system is CUDA, for Compute Unified Device Architecture. CUDA pro-
duces C/C++ for the system processor (host) and a C and C++ dialect for the GPU
(device, thus the D in CUDA). A similar programming language is OpenCL, which
several companies are developing to offer a vendor-independent language for mul-
tiple platforms.
    NVIDIA decided that the unifying theme of all these forms of parallelism
is the CUDA Thread. Using this lowest level of parallelism as the program-
ming primitive, the compiler and the hardware can gang thousands of CUDA
Threads together to utilize the various styles of parallelism within a GPU: mul-
tithreading, MIMD, SIMD, and instruction-level parallelism. Therefore NVI-
DIA classifies the CUDA programming model as single instruction, multiple
thread (SIMT). For reasons we will soon see, these threads are blocked
together and executed in groups of threads, called a Thread Block. We call
the hardware that executes a whole block of threads a multithreaded SIMD
Processor.
    We need just a few details before we can give an example of a CUDA
program:

•   To distinguish between functions for the GPU (device) and functions for the
    system processor (host), CUDA uses __device__ or __global__ for
    the former and __host__ for the latter.
•   CUDA variables declared with __device__ are allocated to the GPU
    Memory (see below), which is accessible by all multithreaded SIMD
    Processors.
•   The extended function call syntax for the function name that runs on the
    GPU is
         name < <<dimGrid, dimBlock>> > (… parameter list…)
    where dimGrid and dimBlock specify the dimensions of the code (in
    Thread Blocks) and the dimensions of a block (in threads).
•   In addition to the identifier for blocks (blockIdx) and the identifier for each
    thread in a block (threadIdx), CUDA provides a keyword for the number of
    threads per block (blockDim), which comes from the dimBlock parameter
    in the preceding bullet.

                         Before seeing the CUDA code, let’s start with conventional C code for the DAXPY
                         loop from Section 4.2:
                            // Invoke DAXPY
                            daxpy(n, 2.0, x, y);
                            // DAXPY in C
                            void daxpy(int n, double a, double *x, double *y)
                            {
                                           for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i)
                                                y[i] = a*x[i] + y[i];
                            }

                         Following is the CUDA version. We launch n threads, one per vector element, with
                         256 CUDA Threads per Thread Block in a multithreaded SIMD Processor. The
                         GPU function starts by calculating the corresponding element index i based on
                         the block ID, the number of threads per block, and the thread ID. As long as this
                         index is within the array (i < n), it performs the multiply and add.

                            // Invoke DAXPY with 256 threads per Thread Block
                            __host__
                            int nblocks = (n + 255) / 256;
                               daxpy<<<nblocks, 256>>>(n, 2.0, x, y);
                            // DAXPY in CUDA
                            __global__
                            void daxpy(int n, double a, double *x, double *y)
                            {
                               int i = blockIdx.x*blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;
                               if (i < n) y[i] = a*x[i] + y[i];
                            }
                             Comparing the C and CUDA codes, we see a common pattern to parallelizing
                         data-parallel CUDA code. The C version has a loop where each iteration is inde-
                         pendent from the others, allowing the loop to be transformed straightforwardly into
                         a parallel code where each loop iteration becomes a separate thread. (As previously
                         mentioned and described in detail in Section 4.5, vectorizing compilers also rely on
                         a lack of dependences between iterations of a loop, which are called loop-carried
                         dependences.) The programmer determines the parallelism in CUDA explicitly by
                         specifying the grid dimensions and the number of threads per SIMD Processor. By
                         assigning a single thread to each element, there is no need to synchronize between
                         threads when writing results to memory.
                             The GPU hardware handles parallel execution and thread management; it is not
                         done by applications or by the operating system. To simplify scheduling by the
                         hardware, CUDA requires that Thread Blocks be able to execute independently
                         and in any order. Different Thread Blocks cannot communicate directly, although
                         they can coordinate using atomic memory operations in global memory.
                             As we will soon see, many GPU hardware concepts are not obvious in CUDA.
                         Writing efficient GPU code requires that programmers think in terms of SIMD

operations, even though the CUDA programming model looks like MIMD. Per-
formance programmers must keep the GPU hardware in mind when writing in
CUDA. That could hurt programmer productivity, but then most programmers
are using GPUs instead of CPUs to get performance. For reasons explained shortly,
they know that they need to keep groups of 32 threads together in control flow to
get the best performance from multithreaded SIMD Processors and to create many
more threads per multithreaded SIMD Processor to hide latency to DRAM. They
also need to keep the data addresses localized in one or a few blocks of memory to
get the expected memory performance.
    Like many parallel systems, a compromise between productivity and perfor-
mance is for CUDA to include intrinsics to give programmers explicit control over
the hardware. The struggle between productivity on the one hand versus allowing the
programmer to be able to express anything that the hardware can do on the other
hand happens often in parallel computing. It will be interesting to see how the lan-
guage evolves in this classic productivity-performance battle as well as to see
whether CUDA becomes popular for other GPUs or even other architectural styles.

NVIDIA GPU Computational Structures
The uncommon heritage mentioned above helps explain why GPUs have their own
architectural style and their own terminology independent from CPUs. One obsta-
cle to understanding GPUs has been the jargon, with some terms even having
misleading names. This obstacle has been surprisingly difficult to overcome, as
the many rewrites of this chapter can attest.
     To try to bridge the twin goals of making the architecture of GPUs understand-
able and learning the many GPU terms with nontraditional definitions, our
approach is to use the CUDA terminology for software but initially use more
descriptive terms for the hardware, sometimes borrowing terms from OpenCL.
Once we explain the GPU architecture in our terms, we’ll map them into the
official jargon of NVIDIA GPUs.
     From left to right, Figure 4.12 lists the descriptive term used in this section, the
closest term from mainstream computing, the official NVIDIA GPU jargon in case
you are interested, and then a short explanation of the term. The rest of this section
explains the microarchitectural features of GPUs using the descriptive terms on the
left in the figure.
     We use NVIDIA systems as our example as they are representative of GPU archi-
tectures. Specifically, we follow the terminology of the preceding CUDA parallel pro-
gramming language and use the NVIDIA Pascal GPU as the example (see Section 4.7).
     Like vector architectures, GPUs work well only with data-level parallel
problems. Both styles have gather-scatter data transfers and mask registers, and
GPU processors have even more registers than do vector processors. Sometimes,
GPUs implement certain features in hardware that vector processors would imple-
ment in software. This difference is because vector processors have a scalar
processor that can execute a software function. Unlike most vector architectures,

                                                             Official
                       Descriptive      Closest old term     CUDA/NVIDIA
Type                   name             outside of GPUs      GPU term         Short explanation
                       Vectorizable     Vectorizable Loop    Grid             A vectorizable loop, executed on the GPU, made up
                       Loop                                                   of one or more Thread Blocks (bodies of vectorized
                                                                              loop) that can execute in parallel
Program abstractions

                       Body of          Body of a (Strip-    Thread Block     A vectorized loop executed on a multithreaded
                       Vectorized       Mined)                                SIMD Processor, made up of one or more threads of
                       Loop             Vectorized Loop                       SIMD instructions. They can communicate via local
                                                                              memory
                       Sequence of      One iteration of a   CUDA Thread      A vertical cut of a thread of SIMD instructions
                       SIMD Lane        Scalar Loop                           corresponding to one element executed by one SIMD
                       Operations                                             Lane. Result is stored depending on mask and
                                                                              predicate register
                       A Thread of      Thread of Vector     Warp             A traditional thread, but it only contains SIMD
Machine object

                       SIMD             Instructions                          instructions that are executed on a multithreaded
                       Instructions                                           SIMD Processor. Results stored depending on a per-
                                                                              element mask
                       SIMD             Vector Instruction   PTX              A single SIMD instruction executed across SIMD
                       Instruction                           Instruction      Lanes
                       Multithreaded    (Multithreaded)      Streaming        A multithreaded SIMD Processor executes threads of
                       SIMD             Vector Processor     Multiprocessor   SIMD instructions, independent of other SIMD
                       Processor                                              Processors
Processing hardware

                       Thread Block     Scalar Processor     Giga Thread      Assigns multiple Thread Blocks (bodies of
                       Scheduler                             Engine           vectorized loop) to multithreaded SIMD Processors
                       SIMD Thread      Thread Scheduler     Warp             Hardware unit that schedules and issues threads of
                       Scheduler        in a Multithreaded   Scheduler        SIMD instructions when they are ready to execute;
                                        CPU                                   includes a scoreboard to track SIMD Thread
                                                                              execution
                       SIMD Lane        Vector Lane          Thread           A SIMD Lane executes the operations in a thread of
                                                             Processor        SIMD instructions on a single element. Results
                                                                              stored depending on mask
                       GPU Memory       Main Memory          Global           DRAM memory accessible by all multithreaded
                                                             Memory           SIMD Processors in a GPU
Memory hardware

                       Private Memory   Stack or Thread      Local Memory     Portion of DRAM memory private to each SIMD
                                        Local Storage                         Lane
                                        (OS)
                       Local Memory     Local Memory         Shared           Fast local SRAM for one multithreaded SIMD
                                                             Memory           Processor, unavailable to other SIMD Processors
                       SIMD Lane        Vector Lane          Thread           Registers in a single SIMD Lane allocated across a
                       Registers        Registers            Processor        full Thread Block (body of vectorized loop)
                                                             Registers

Figure 4.12 Quick guide to GPU terms used in this chapter. We use the first column for hardware terms. Four
groups cluster these 11 terms. From top to bottom: program abstractions, machine objects, processing hardware,
and memory hardware. Figure 4.21 on page 312 associates vector terms with the closest terms here, and
Figure 4.24 on page 317 and Figure 4.25 on page 318 reveal the official CUDA/NVIDIA and AMD terms and definitions
along with the terms used by OpenCL.

GPUs also rely on multithreading within a single multithreaded SIMD Processor to
hide memory latency (see Chapters 2 and 3). However, efficient code for both vec-
tor architectures and GPUs requires programmers to think in groups of SIMD
operations.
     A Grid is the code that runs on a GPU that consists of a set of Thread Blocks.
Figure 4.12 draws the analogy between a grid and a vectorized loop and between a
Thread Block and the body of that loop (after it has been strip-mined, so that it is a
full computation loop). To give a concrete example, let’s suppose we want to mul-
tiply two vectors together, each 8192 elements long: A = B * C. We’ll return to this
example throughout this section. Figure 4.13 shows the relationship between this
example and these first two GPU terms. The GPU code that works on the whole
8192 element multiply is called a Grid (or vectorized loop). To break it down into
more manageable sizes, a Grid is composed of Thread Blocks (or body of a
vectorized loop), each with up to 512 elements. Note that a SIMD instruction
executes 32 elements at a time. With 8192 elements in the vectors, this example
thus has 16 Thread Blocks because 16 ¼ 8192 ? 512. The Grid and Thread Block
are programming abstractions implemented in GPU hardware that help program-
mers organize their CUDA code. (The Thread Block is analogous to a strip-mined
vector loop with a vector length of 32.)
     A Thread Block is assigned to a processor that executes that code, which we
call a multithreaded SIMD Processor, by the Thread Block Scheduler. The
programmer tells the Thread Block Scheduler, which is implemented in hardware,
how many Thread Blocks to run. In this example, it would send 16 Thread Blocks
to multithreaded SIMD Processors to compute all 8192 elements of this loop
     Figure 4.14 shows a simplified block diagram of a multithreaded SIMD
Processor. It is similar to a vector processor, but it has many parallel functional
units instead of a few that are deeply pipelined, as in a vector processor. In the pro-
gramming example in Figure 4.13, each multithreaded SIMD Processor is assigned
512 elements of the vectors to work on. SIMD Processors are full processors with
separate PCs and are programmed using threads (see Chapter 3).
     The GPU hardware then contains a collection of multithreaded SIMD Proces-
sors that execute a Grid of Thread Blocks (bodies of vectorized loop); that is, a
GPU is a multiprocessor composed of multithreaded SIMD Processors.
     A GPU can have from one to several dozen multithreaded SIMD Processors. For
example, the Pascal P100 system has 56, while the smaller chips may have as few as
one or two. To provide transparent scalability across models of GPUs with a differing
number of multithreaded SIMD Processors, the Thread Block Scheduler assigns
Thread Blocks (bodies of a vectorized loop) to multithreaded SIMD Processors.
Figure 4.15 shows the floor plan of the P100 implementation of the Pascal architecture.
     Dropping down one more level of detail, the machine object that the hardware
creates, manages, schedules, and executes is a thread of SIMD instructions. It is a
traditional thread that contains exclusively SIMD instructions. These threads of
SIMD instructions have their own PCs, and they run on a multithreaded SIMD
Processor. The SIMD Thread Scheduler knows which threads of SIMD instruc-
tions are ready to run and then sends them off to a dispatch unit to be run on

Figure 4.13 The mapping of a Grid (vectorizable loop), Thread Blocks (SIMD basic blocks), and threads of SIMD
instructions to a vector-vector multiply, with each vector being 8192 elements long. Each thread of SIMD instruc-
tions calculates 32 elements per instruction, and in this example, each Thread Block contains 16 threads of SIMD
instructions and the Grid contains 16 Thread Blocks. The hardware Thread Block Scheduler assigns Thread Blocks
to multithreaded SIMD Processors, and the hardware Thread Scheduler picks which thread of SIMD instructions
to run each clock cycle within a SIMD Processor. Only SIMD Threads in the same Thread Block can communicate
via local memory. (The maximum number of SIMD Threads that can execute simultaneously per Thread Block is
32 for Pascal GPUs.)

            Instruction
                                                   Warp scheduler
              cache

                                                           Instruction register

                                                                                                                                         SIMD lanes
                                                                                                                                           (thread
                                                                                                                                         processors)
  Regi-    Reg     Reg     Reg     Reg     Reg      Reg     Reg     Reg     Reg       Reg      Reg      Reg     Reg     Reg      Reg
  sters
  1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32 1K × 32

  Load    Load    Load    Load     Load    Load    Load     Load    Load    Load      Load     Load     Load    Load    Load     Load
  store   store   store   store    store   store   store    store   store   store     store    store    store   store   store    store
   unit    unit    unit    unit     unit    unit    unit     unit    unit    unit      unit     unit     unit    unit    unit     unit

                     Address coalescing unit                                        Interconnection network

                                                                                                                                To global
                                                                    Local memory
                                                                                                                                 memory
                                                                       64 KB

Figure 4.14 Simplified block diagram of a multithreaded SIMD Processor. It has 16 SIMD Lanes. The SIMD Thread
Scheduler has, say, 64 independent threads of SIMD instructions that it schedules with a table of 64 program counters
(PCs). Note that each lane has 1024 32-bit registers.

                                    the multithreaded SIMD Processor. Thus GPU hardware has two levels of hard-
                                    ware schedulers: (1) the Thread Block Scheduler that assigns Thread Blocks (bod-
                                    ies of vectorized loops) to multithreaded SIMD Processors and (2) the SIMD
                                    Thread Scheduler within a SIMD Processor, which schedules when threads of
                                    SIMD instructions should run.
                                        The SIMD instructions of these threads are 32 wide, so each thread of SIMD
                                    instructions in this example would compute 32 of the elements of the computation.
                                    In this example, Thread Blocks would contain 512/32 ¼ 16 SIMD Threads (see
                                    Figure 4.13).
                                        Because the thread consists of SIMD instructions, the SIMD Processor must
                                    have parallel functional units to perform the operation. We call them SIMD Lanes,
                                    and they are quite similar to the Vector Lanes in Section 4.2.

Figure 4.15 Full-chip block diagram of the Pascal P100 GPU. It has 56 multithreaded SIMD Processors, each with an
L1 cache and local memory, 32 L2 units, and a memory-bus width of 4096 data wires. (It has 60 blocks, with four spares
to improve yield.) The P100 has 4 HBM2 ports supporting up to 16 GB of capacity. It contains 15.4 billion transistors.

                                 With the Pascal GPU, each 32-wide thread of SIMD instructions is mapped
                             to 16 physical SIMD Lanes, so each SIMD instruction in a thread of SIMD instruc-
                             tions takes 2 clock cycles to complete. Each thread of SIMD instructions is
                             executed in lock step and scheduled only at the beginning. Staying with the anal-
                             ogy of a SIMD Processor as a vector processor, you could say that it has 16 lanes,
                             the vector length is 32, and the chime is 2 clock cycles. (This wide but shallow
                             nature is why we use the more accurate term SIMD Processor rather than vector.)
                                 Note that the number of lanes in a GPU SIMD Processor can be anything up to the
                             number of threads in a Thread Block, just as the number of lanes in a vector processor
                             can vary between 1 and the maximum vector length. For example, across GPU gen-
                             erations, the number of lanes per SIMD Processor has fluctuated between 8 and 32.
                                 Because by definition the threads of SIMD instructions are independent, the
                             SIMD Thread Scheduler can pick whatever thread of SIMD instructions is ready,
                             and need not stick with the next SIMD instruction in the sequence within a thread.
                             The SIMD Thread Scheduler includes a scoreboard (see Chapter 3) to keep track of
                             up to 64 threads of SIMD instructions to see which SIMD instruction is ready to go.
                             The latency of memory instructions is variable because of hits and misses in the
                             caches and the TLB, thus the requirement of a scoreboard to determine when these
                             instructions are complete. Figure 4.16 shows the SIMD Thread Scheduler picking
                             threads of SIMD instructions in a different order over time. The assumption
                             of GPU architects is that GPU applications have so many threads of SIMD instruc-
                             tions that multithreading can both hide the latency to DRAM and increase utiliza-
                             tion of multithreaded SIMD Processors.

                                                              Photo: Judy Schoonmaker
                                 SIMD thread scheduler

                        Time
                               SIMD thread 8 instruction 11

                               SIMD thread 1 instruction 42

                               SIMD thread 3 instruction 95

                               SIMD thread 8 instruction 12

                               SIMD thread 3 instruction 96

                               SIMD thread 1 instruction 43

Figure 4.16 Scheduling of threads of SIMD instructions. The scheduler selects a ready
thread of SIMD instructions and issues an instruction synchronously to all the SIMD
Lanes executing the SIMD Thread. Because threads of SIMD instructions are indepen-
dent, the scheduler may select a different SIMD Thread each time.

    Continuing our vector multiply example, each multithreaded SIMD Processor
must load 32 elements of two vectors from memory into registers, perform the
multiply by reading and writing registers, and store the product back from reg-
isters into memory. To hold these memory elements, a SIMD Processor has
between an impressive 32,768–65,536 32-bit registers (1024 per lane in
Figure 4.14), depending on the model of the Pascal GPU. Just like a vector pro-
cessor, these registers are divided logically across the Vector Lanes or, in this
case, SIMD Lanes.
    Each SIMD Thread is limited to no more than 256 registers, so you might think
of a SIMD Thread as having up to 256 vector registers, with each vector register
having 32 elements and each element being 32 bits wide. (Because double-
precision floating-point operands use two adjacent 32-bit registers, an alternative
view is that each SIMD Thread has 128 vector registers of 32 elements, each of
which is 64 bits wide.)
    There is a trade-off between register use and maximum number of threads;
fewer registers per thread means more threads are possible, and more registers

                         mean fewer threads. That is, not all SIMD Threads need to have the maximum
                         number of registers. Pascal architects believe much of this precious silicon area
                         would be idle if all threads had the maximum number of registers.
                              To be able to execute many threads of SIMD instructions, each is dynamically
                         allocated a set of the physical registers on each SIMD Processor when threads of
                         SIMD instructions are created and freed when the SIMD Thread exits. For example,
                         a programmer can have a Thread Block that uses 36 registers per thread with, say, 16
                         SIMD Threads alongside another Thread Block that has 20 registers per thread with
                         32 SIMD Threads. Subsequent Thread Blocks may show up in any order, and the
                         registers have to be allocated on demand. While this variability can lead to fragmen-
                         tation and make some registers unavailable, in practice most Thread Blocks use the
                         same number of registers for a given vectorizable loop (“grid”). The hardware must
                         know where the registers for each Thread Block are in the large register file, and this
                         is recorded on a per Thread-Block basis. This flexibility requires routing, arbitration,
                         and banking in the hardware because a specific register for a given Thread Block
                         could end up in any location in the register file.
                              Note that a CUDA Thread is just a vertical cut of a thread of SIMD instructions,
                         corresponding to one element executed by one SIMD Lane. Beware that CUDA
                         Threads are very different from POSIX Threads; you can’t make arbitrary system
                         calls from a CUDA Thread.
                              We’re now ready to see what GPU instructions look like.

                         NVIDA GPU Instruction Set Architecture
                         Unlike most system processors, the instruction set target of the NVIDIA compilers
                         is an abstraction of the hardware instruction set. PTX (Parallel Thread Execution)
                         provides a stable instruction set for compilers as well as compatibility across gen-
                         erations of GPUs. The hardware instruction set is hidden from the programmer.
                         PTX instructions describe the operations on a single CUDA Thread and usually
                         map one-to-one with hardware instructions, but one PTX instruction can expand
                         to many machine instructions, and vice versa. PTX uses an unlimited number of
                         write-once registers and the compiler must run a register allocation procedure to
                         map the PTX registers to a fixed number of read-write hardware registers available
                         on the actual device. The optimizer runs subsequently and can reduce register use
                         even further. This optimizer also eliminates dead code, folds instructions together,
                         and calculates places where branches might diverge and places where diverged
                         paths could converge.
                              Although there is some similarity between the x86 microarchitecture and PTX,
                         in that both translate to an internal form (microinstructions for x86), the difference
                         is that this translation happens in hardware at runtime during execution on the x86
                         versus in software and load time on a GPU.
                              The format of a PTX instruction is
                             opcode.type d, a, b, c;
                            where d is the destination operand; a, b, and c are source operands; and the
                         operation type is one of the following:

                        Type                                .type specifier
       Untyped bits 8, 16, 32, and 64 bits             .b8, .b16, .b32, .b64
       Unsigned integer 8, 16, 32, and 64 bits         .u8, .u16, .u32, .u64
       Signed integer 8, 16, 32, and 64 bits           .s8, .s16, .s32, .s64
       Floating Point 16, 32, and 64 bits              .f16, .f32, .f64

Source operands are 32-bit or 64-bit registers or a constant value. Destinations are
registers, except for store instructions.
    Figure 4.17 shows the basic PTX instruction set. All instructions can be pred-
icated by 1-bit predicate registers, which can be set by a set predicate instruction
(setp). The control flow instructions are functions call and return, thread
exit, branch, and barrier synchronization for threads within a Thread Block
(bar.sync). Placing a predicate in front of a branch instruction gives us con-
ditional branches. The compiler or PTX programmer declares virtual registers as
32-bit or 64-bit typed or untyped values. For example, R0, R1, ... are for 32-bit
values and RD0, RD1, ... are for 64-bit registers. Recall that the assignment of
virtual registers to physical registers occurs at load time with PTX.
    The following sequence of PTX instructions is for one iteration of our DAXPY
loop on page 292:

shl.u32 R8, blockIdx, 8   ; Thread Block ID * Block size
                          ;(256 or 28)
add.u32 R8, R8, threadIdx ; R8 = i = my CUDA Thread ID
shl.u32 R8, R8, 3         ; byte offset
ld.global.f64 RD0, [X+R8]; RD0 = X[i]
ld.global.f64 RD2, [Y+R8]; RD2 = Y[i]
mul.f64 RD0, RD0, RD4     ; Product in RD0 = RD0 * RD4
                          ; (scalar a)
add.f64 RD0, RD0, RD2     ; Sum in RD0 = RD0 + RD2 (Y[i])
st.global.f64 [Y+R8], RD0; Y[i] = sum (X[i]*a + Y[i])

As demonstrated above, the CUDA programming model assigns one CUDA Thread
to each loop iteration and offers a unique identifier number to each Thread Block
(blockIdx) and one to each CUDA Thread within a block (threadIdx). Thus
it creates 8192 CUDA Threads and uses the unique number to address each element
within the array, so there is no incrementing or branching code. The first three PTX
instructions calculate that unique element byte offset in R8, which is added to the
base of the arrays. The following PTX instructions load two double-precision
floating-point operands, multiply and add them, and store the sum. (We’ll describe
the PTX code corresponding to the CUDA code “if (i < n)” below.)
     Note that unlike vector architectures, GPUs don’t have separate instructions for
sequential data transfers, strided data transfers, and gather-scatter data transfers.

Group              Instruction              Example                            Meaning                Comments
                   arithmetic .type = .s32, .u32, .f32, .s64, .u64, .f64
                   add.type                 add.f32 d, a, b                    d = a + b;
                   sub.type                 sub.f32 d, a, b                    d = a – b;
                   mul.type                 mul.f32 d, a, b                    d = a * b;
                   mad.type                 mad.f32 d, a, b, c                 d = a * b + c;         multiply-add
                   div.type                 div.f32 d, a, b                    d = a / b;             multiple microinstructions
                   rem.type                 rem.u32 d, a, b                    d = a % b;             integer remainder
                   abs.type                 abs.f32 d, a                       d = jaj;
Arithmetic
                   neg.type                 neg.f32 d, a                       d = 0 – a;
                   min.type                 min.f32 d, a, b                    d = (a < b)? a:b;      floating selects non-NaN
                   max.type                 max.f32 d, a, b                    d = (a > b)? a:b;      floating selects non-NaN
                   setp.cmp.type            setp.lt.f32 p, a, b                p = (a < b);           compare and set predicate
                   numeric .cmp = eq, ne, lt, le, gt, ge; unordered cmp = equ, neu, ltu, leu, gtu, geu, num, nan
                   mov.type                 mov.b32 d, a                       d = a;                 move
                   selp.type                selp.f32 d, a, b, p                d = p? a: b;           select with predicate
                   cvt.dtype.atype          cvt.f32.s32 d, a                   d = convert(a);        convert atype to dtype
                   special .type = .f32 (some .f64)
                   rcp.type                 rcp.f32 d, a                       d = 1/a;               reciprocal
                   sqrt.type                sqrt.f32 d, a                      d = sqrt(a);           square root
                   rsqrt.type               rsqrt.f32 d, a                     d = 1/sqrt(a);         reciprocal square root
Special function
                   sin.type                 sin.f32 d, a                       d = sin(a);            sine
                   cos.type                 cos.f32 d, a                       d = cos(a);            cosine
                   lg2.type                 lg2.f32 d, a                       d = log(a)/log(2)      binary logarithm
                   ex2.type                 ex2.f32 d, a                       d = 2 ** a;            binary exponential
                   logic.type = .pred,.b32, .b64
                   and.type                 and.b32 d, a, b                    d = a & b;
                   or.type                  or.b32 d, a, b                     d = a j b;
                   xor.type                 xor.b32 d, a, b                    d = a ^b;
Logical
                   not.type                 not.b32 d, a, b                    d = ?a;                one’s complement
                   cnot.type                cnot.b32 d, a, b                   d = (a==0)? 1:0;       C logical not
                   shl.type                 shl.b32 d, a, b                    d = a << b;            shift left
                   shr.type                 shr.s32 d, a, b                    d = a >> b;            shift right
                   memory.space = .global, .shared, .local, .const; .type = .b8, .u8, .s8, .b16, .b32, .b64
                   ld.space.type            ld.global.b32 d, [a+off]           d = *(a+off);          load from memory space
                   st.space.type            st.shared.b32 [d+off], a           *(d+off) = a;          store to memory space
Memory access      tex.nd.dtyp.btype        tex.2d.v4.f32.f32 d, a, b          d = tex2d(a, b);       texture lookup
                   atom.spc.op.type         atom.global.add.u32 d,[a], b    atomic { d = *a;          atomic read-modify-write
                                            atom.global.cas.b32 d,[a], b, c *a = op(*a, b); }         operation
                   atom.op = and, or, xor, add, min, max, exch, cas; .spc = .global; .type = .b32
                   branch                   @p bra target                      if (p) goto target;    conditional branch
                   call                     call (ret), func, (params)         ret = func(params); call function

Control flow       ret                      ret                                return;                return from function call
                   bar.sync                 bar.sync d                         wait for threads       barrier synchronization
                   exit                     exit                               exit;                  terminate thread execution

Figure 4.17 Basic PTX GPU thread instructions.

All data transfers are gather-scatter! To regain the efficiency of sequential (unit-
stride) data transfers, GPUs include special Address Coalescing hardware to rec-
ognize when the SIMD Lanes within a thread of SIMD instructions are collectively
issuing sequential addresses. That runtime hardware then notifies the Memory
Interface Unit to request a block transfer of 32 sequential words. To get this impor-
tant performance improvement, the GPU programmer must ensure that adjacent
CUDA Threads access nearby addresses at the same time so that they can be coa-
lesced into one or a few memory or cache blocks, which our example does.

Conditional Branching in GPUs
Just like the case with unit-stride data transfers, there are strong similarities
between how vector architectures and GPUs handle IF statements, with the former
implementing the mechanism largely in software with limited hardware support
and the latter making use of even more hardware. As we will see, in addition to
explicit predicate registers, GPU branch hardware uses internal masks, a branch
synchronization stack, and instruction markers to manage when a branch diverges
into multiple execution paths and when the paths converge.
     At the PTX assembler level, control flow of one CUDA Thread is described by
the PTX instructions branch, call, return, and exit, plus individual per-thread-lane
predication of each instruction, specified by the programmer with per-thread-lane
1-bit predicate registers. The PTX assembler analyzes the PTX branch graph and
optimizes it to the fastest GPU hardware instruction sequence. Each can make its
own decision on a branch and does not need to be in lock step.
     At the GPU hardware instruction level, control flow includes branch, jump,
jump indexed, call, call indexed, return, exit, and special instructions that manage
the branch synchronization stack. GPU hardware provides each SIMD Thread with
its own stack; a stack entry contains an identifier token, a target instruction address,
and a target thread-active mask. There are GPU special instructions that push stack
entries for a SIMD Thread and special instructions and instruction markers that pop
a stack entry or unwind the stack to a specified entry and branch to the target
instruction address with the target thread-active mask. GPU hardware instructions
also have an individual per-lane predication (enable/disable), specified with a 1-bit
predicate register for each lane.
     The PTX assembler typically optimizes a simple outer-level IF-THEN-ELSE
statement coded with PTX branch instructions to solely predicated GPU instruc-
tions, without any GPU branch instructions. A more complex control flow often
results in a mixture of predication and GPU branch instructions with special
instructions and markers that use the branch synchronization stack to push a stack
entry when some lanes branch to the target address, while others fall through. NVI-
DIA says a branch diverges when this happens. This mixture is also used when a
SIMD Lane executes a synchronization marker or converges, which pops a stack
entry and branches to the stack-entry address with the stack-entry thread-
active mask.

                             The PTX assembler identifies loop branches and generates GPU branch
                         instructions that branch to the top of the loop, along with special stack instructions
                         to handle individual lanes breaking out of the loop and converging the SIMD Lanes
                         when all lanes have completed the loop. GPU indexed jump and indexed call
                         instructions push entries on the stack so that when all lanes complete the switch
                         statement or function call, the SIMD Thread converges.
                             A GPU set predicate instruction (setp in Figure 4.17) evaluates the condi-
                         tional part of the IF statement. The PTX branch instruction then depends on that
                         predicate. If the PTX assembler generates predicated instructions with no GPU
                         branch instructions, it uses a per-lane predicate register to enable or disable each
                         SIMD Lane for each instruction. The SIMD instructions in the threads inside the
                         THEN part of the IF statement broadcast operations to all the SIMD Lanes. Those
                         lanes with the predicate set to 1 perform the operation and store the result, and the
                         other SIMD Lanes don’t perform an operation or store a result. For the ELSE
                         statement, the instructions use the complement of the predicate (relative to the
                         THEN statement), so the SIMD Lanes that were idle now perform the operation
                         and store the result while their formerly active siblings don’t. At the end of
                         the ELSE statement, the instructions are unpredicated so the original computation
                         can proceed. Thus, for equal length paths, an IF-THEN-ELSE operates at 50%
                         efficiency or less.
                             IF statements can be nested, thus the use of a stack, and the PTX assembler
                         typically generates a mix of predicated instructions and GPU branch and special
                         synchronization instructions for complex control flow. Note that deep nesting
                         can mean that most SIMD Lanes are idle during execution of nested conditional
                         statements. Thus, doubly nested IF statements with equal-length paths run at
                         25% efficiency, triply nested at 12.5% efficiency, and so on. The analogous
                         case would be a vector processor operating where only a few of the mask bits
                         are ones.
                             Dropping down a level of detail, the PTX assembler sets a “branch synchro-
                         nization” marker on appropriate conditional branch instructions that pushes the
                         current active mask on a stack inside each SIMD Thread. If the conditional branch
                         diverges (some lanes take the branch but some fall through), it pushes a stack entry
                         and sets the current internal active mask based on the condition. A branch synchro-
                         nization marker pops the diverged branch entry and flips the mask bits before the
                         ELSE portion. At the end of the IF statement, the PTX assembler adds another
                         branch synchronization marker that pops the prior active mask off the stack into
                         the current active mask.
                             If all the mask bits are set to 1, then the branch instruction at the end of the
                         THEN skips over the instructions in the ELSE part. There is a similar optimization
                         for the THEN part in case all the mask bits are 0 because the conditional branch
                         jumps over the THEN instructions. Parallel IF statements and PTX branches often
                         use branch conditions that are unanimous (all lanes agree to follow the same path)
                         such that the SIMD Thread does not diverge into a different individual lane control
                         flow. The PTX assembler optimizes such branches to skip over blocks of instruc-
                         tions that are not executed by any lane of a SIMD Thread. This optimization is

useful in conditional error checking, for example, where the test must be made but
is rarely taken.
     The code for a conditional statement similar to the one in Section 4.2 is
   if (X[i] != 0)
     X[i] = X[i] – Y[i];
   else X[i] = Z[i];
    This IF statement could compile to the following PTX instructions (assuming
that R8 already has the scaled thread ID), with *Push, *Comp, *Pop indicating
the branch synchronization markers inserted by the PTX assembler that push the
old mask, complement the current mask, and pop to restore the old mask:

   ld.global.f64 RD0, [X+R8]        ; RD0 = X[i]
   setp.neq.s32 P1, RD0, #0         ;P1 is predicate reg 1
   @!P1, bra ELSE1, *Push           ; Push old mask, set new
                       ; mask bits if P1 false, go to ELSE1
   ld.global.f64 RD2, [Y+R8]        ; RD2 = Y[i]
   sub.f64 RD0, RD0, RD2            ; Difference in RD0
   st.global.f64 [X+R8], RD0        ; X[i] = RD0
   @P1, bra ENDIF1, *Comp           ; complement mask bits
                                    ; if P1 true, go to ENDIF1
 ELSE1: ld.global.f64 RD0, [Z+R8] ; RD0 = Z[i]
        st.global.f64 [X+R8], RD0 ; X[i] = RD0
ENDIF1:<next instruction >, *Pop ; pop to restore old mask

     Once again, normally all instructions in the IF-THEN-ELSE statement are exe-
cuted by a SIMD Processor. It’s just that only some of the SIMD Lanes are enabled
for the THEN instructions and some lanes for the ELSE instructions. As previously
mentioned, in the surprisingly common case that the individual lanes agree on the
predicated branch—such as branching on a parameter value that is the same for all
lanes so that all active mask bits are 0s or all are 1s—the branch skips the THEN
instructions or the ELSE instructions.
     This flexibility makes it appear that an element has its own program counter;
however, in the slowest case, only one SIMD Lane could store its result every 2
clock cycles, with the rest idle. The analogous slowest case for vector architec-
tures is operating with only one mask bit set to 1. This flexibility can lead naive
GPU programmers to poor performance, but it can be helpful in the early stages
of program development. Keep in mind, however, that the only choice for a
SIMD Lane in a clock cycle is to perform the operation specified in the PTX
instruction or be idle; two SIMD Lanes cannot simultaneously execute different
instructions.
     This flexibility also helps explain the name CUDA Thread given to each ele-
ment in a thread of SIMD instructions, because it gives the illusion of acting inde-
pendently. A naive programmer may think that this thread abstraction means GPUs
handle conditional branches more gracefully. Some threads go one way, the rest go

                         another, which seems true as long as you’re not in a hurry. Each CUDA Thread is
                         either executing the same instruction as every other thread in the Thread Block or it
                         is idle. This synchronization makes it easier to handle loops with conditional
                         branches because the mask capability can turn off SIMD Lanes and it detects
                         the end of the loop automatically.
                             The resulting performance sometimes belies that simple abstraction. Writing
                         programs that operate SIMD Lanes in this highly independent MIMD mode is like
                         writing programs that use lots of virtual address space on a computer with a smaller
                         physical memory. Both are correct, but they may run so slowly that the program-
                         mer will not be pleased with the result.
                             Conditional execution is a case where GPUs do in runtime hardware what vec-
                         tor architectures do at compile time. Vector compilers do a double IF-conversion,
                         generating four different masks. The execution is basically the same as GPUs, but
                         there are some more overhead instructions executed for vectors. Vector architec-
                         tures have the advantage of being integrated with a scalar processor, allowing them
                         to avoid the time for the 0 cases when they dominate a calculation. Although it will
                         depend on the speed of the scalar processor versus the vector processor, the cross-
                         over point when it’s better to use scalar might be when less than 20% of the mask
                         bits are 1s. One optimization available at runtime for GPUs, but not at compile time
                         for vector architectures, is to skip the THEN or ELSE parts when mask bits are all
                         0s or all 1s.
                             Thus the efficiency with which GPUs execute conditional statements comes
                         down to how frequently the branches will diverge. For example, one calculation
                         of eigenvalues has deep conditional nesting, but measurements of the code show
                         that around 82% of clock cycle issues have between 29 and 32 out of the 32 mask
                         bits set to 1, so GPUs execute this code more efficiently than one might expect.
                             Note that the same mechanism handles the strip-mining of vector loops—when
                         the number of elements doesn’t perfectly match the hardware. The example at the
                         beginning of this section shows that an IF statement checks to see if this SIMD
                         Lane element number (stored in R8 in the preceding example) is less than the limit
                         (i < n), and it sets masks appropriately.

                         NVIDIA GPU Memory Structures
                         Figure 4.18 shows the memory structures of an NVIDIA GPU. Each SIMD Lane in
                         a multithreaded SIMD Processor is given a private section of off-chip DRAM,
                         which we call the private memory. It is used for the stack frame, for spilling
                         registers, and for private variables that don’t fit in the registers. SIMD Lanes do
                         not share private memories. GPUs cache this private memory in the L1 and L2
                         caches to aid register spilling and to speed up function calls.
                             We call the on-chip memory that is local to each multithreaded SIMD Proces-
                         sor local memory. It is a small scratchpad memory with low latency (a few dozen
                         clocks) and high bandwidth (128 bytes/clock) where the programmer can store
                         data that needs to be reused, either by the same thread or another thread in the same

  CUDA thread

                 Per-CUDA thread private memory

  Thread block

                           Per-block
                         local memory

     Grid 0                                                                  Sequence

                                   ...

              Inter-grid synchronization                      GPU memory
     Grid 1

                                   ...

Figure 4.18 GPU memory structures. GPU memory is shared by all Grids (vectorized
loops), local memory is shared by all threads of SIMD instructions within a Thread Block
(body of a vectorized loop), and private memory is private to a single CUDA Thread.
Pascal allows preemption of a Grid, which requires that all local and private memory
be able to be saved in and restored from global memory. For completeness sake,
the GPU can also access CPU memory via the PCIe bus. This path is commonly used
for a final result when its address is in host memory. This option eliminates a final copy
from the GPU memory to the host memory.

Thread Block. Local memory is limited in size, typically to 48 KiB. It carries no
state between Thread Blocks executed on the same processor. It is shared by the
SIMD Lanes within a multithreaded SIMD Processor, but this memory is not
shared between multithreaded SIMD Processors. The multithreaded SIMD
Processor dynamically allocates portions of the local memory to a Thread Block
when it creates the Thread Block, and frees the memory when all the threads of the
Thread Block exit. That portion of local memory is private to that Thread Block.
    Finally, we call the off-chip DRAM shared by the whole GPU and all Thread
Blocks GPU Memory. Our vector multiply example used only GPU Memory.
    The system processor, called the host, can read or write GPU Memory. Local
memory is unavailable to the host, as it is private to each multithreaded SIMD
Processor. Private memories are unavailable to the host as well.

                             Rather than rely on large caches to contain the whole working sets of an
                         application, GPUs traditionally use smaller streaming caches and, because their work-
                         ing sets can be hundreds of megabytes, rely on extensive multithreading of threads of
                         SIMD instructions to hide the long latency to DRAM. Given the use of multithreading
                         to hide DRAM latency, the chip area used for large L2 and L3 caches in system pro-
                         cessors is spent instead on computing resources and on the large number of registers to
                         hold the state of many threads of SIMD instructions. In contrast, as mentioned, vector
                         loads and stores amortize the latency across many elements because they pay the
                         latency only once and then pipeline the rest of the accesses.
                             Although hiding memory latency behind many threads was the original philos-
                         ophy of GPUs and vector processors, all recent GPUs and vector processors have
                         caches to reduce latency. The argument follows Little’s Law from queuing theory:
                         the longer the latency, the more threads need to run during a memory access, which
                         in turn requires more registers. Thus GPU caches are added to lower average
                         latency and thereby mask potential shortages of the number of registers.
                             To improve memory bandwidth and reduce overhead, as mentioned, PTX data
                         transfer instructions in cooperation with the memory controller coalesce individual
                         parallel thread requests from the same SIMD Thread together into a single memory
                         block request when the addresses fall in the same block. These restrictions are
                         placed on the GPU program, somewhat analogous to the guidelines for system pro-
                         cessor programs to engage hardware prefetching (see Chapter 2). The GPU mem-
                         ory controller will also hold requests and send ones together to the same open page
                         to improve memory bandwidth (see Section 4.6). Chapter 2 describes DRAM in
                         sufficient detail for readers to understand the potential benefits of grouping related
                         addresses.

                         Innovations in the Pascal GPU Architecture
                         The multithreaded SIMD Processor of Pascal is more complicated than the simpli-
                         fied version in Figure 4.20. To increase hardware utilization, each SIMD Processor
                         has two SIMD Thread Schedulers, each with multiple instruction dispatch units
                         (some GPUs have four thread schedulers). The dual SIMD Thread Scheduler
                         selects two threads of SIMD instructions and issues one instruction from each
                         to two sets of 16 SIMD Lanes, 16 load/store units, or 8 special function units. With
                         multiple execution units available, two threads of SIMD instructions are scheduled
                         each clock cycle, allowing 64 lanes to be active. Because the threads are indepen-
                         dent, there is no need to check for data dependences in the instruction stream. This
                         innovation would be analogous to a multithreaded vector processor that can issue
                         vector instructions from two independent threads. Figure 4.19 shows the Dual
                         Scheduler issuing instructions, and Figure 4.20 shows the block diagram of the
                         multithreaded SIMD Processor of a Pascal GP100 GPU.
                             Each new generation of GPU typically adds some new features that increase
                         performance or make it easier for programmers. Here are the four main innovations
                         of Pascal:

                  SIMD thread scheduler                SIMD thread scheduler

                 Instruction dispatch unit            Instruction dispatch unit

               SIMD thread 8 instruction 11         SIMD thread 9 instruction 11

               SIMD thread 2 instruction 42         SIMD thread 3 instruction 33

               SIMD thread 14 instruction 95        SIMD thread 15 instruction 95

        Time
               SIMD thread 8 instruction 12         SIMD thread 9 instruction 12

               SIMD thread 14 instruction 96        SIMD thread 3 instruction 34

               SIMD thread 2 instruction 43         SIMD thread 15 instruction 96

Figure 4.19 Block diagram of Pascal’s dual SIMD Thread scheduler. Compare this
design to the single SIMD Thread design in Figure 4.16.

■   Fast single-precision, double-precision, and half-precision floating-point
    arithmetic—Pascal GP100 chip has significant floating-point performance
    in three sizes, all part of the IEEE standard for floating-point. The single-
    precision floating-point of the GPU runs at a peak of 10 TeraFLOP/s.
    Double-precision is roughly half-speed at 5 TeraFLOP/s, and half-precision
    is about double-speed at 20 TeraFLOP/s when expressed as 2-element vectors.
    The atomic memory operations include floating-point add for all three sizes.
    Pascal GP100 is the first GPU with such high performance for half-precision.
■   High-bandwidth memory—The next innovation of the Pascal GP100 GPU is
    the use of stacked, high-bandwidth memory (HBM2). This memory has a wide
    bus with 4096 data wires running at 0.7 GHz offering a peak bandwidth of 732
    GB/s, which is more than twice as fast as previous GPUs.
■   High-speed chip-to-chip interconnect—Given the coprocessor nature of
    GPUs, the PCI bus can be a communications bottleneck when trying to use
    multiple GPUs with one CPU. Pascal GP100 introduces the NVLink commu-
    nications channel that supports data transfers of up to 20 GB/s in each direc-
    tion. Each GP100 has 4 NVLink channels, providing a peak aggregate chip-to-
    chip bandwidth of 160 GB/s per chip. Systems with 2, 4, and 8 GPUs are
    available for multi-GPU applications, where each GPU can perform load, store,
    and atomic operations to any GPU connected by NVLink. Additionally, an
    NVLink channel can communicate with the CPU in some cases. For example,
    the IBM Power9 CPU supports CPU-GPU communication. In this chip,
    NVLink provides a coherent view of memory between all GPUs and CPUs
    connected together. It also provides cache-to-cache communication instead
    of memory-to-memory communication.

                                                                   Instruction Cache

                              Instruction Buffer                                                       Instruction Buffer

                        SIMD Thread Scheduler                                                   SIMD Thread Scheduler
      Dispatch           Dispatch         Dispatch              Dispatch       Dispatch          Dispatch          Dispatch              Dispatch
       Units              Units            Units                 Units          Units             Units             Units                 Units

                       Register File (32,768 × 32-bit)                                        Register File (32,768 × 32-bit)

    SIMD   SIMD        DP       SIMD     SIMD      DP                        SIMD      SIMD     DP       SIMD    SIMD       DP
                                                           LD/ST     SFU                                                            LD/ST     SFU
    Lane   Lane        Unit     Lane     Lane      Unit                      Lane      Lane     Unit     Lane    Lane       Unit
    SIMD   SIMD        DP       SIMD     SIMD      DP                        SIMD      SIMD     DP       SIMD    SIMD       DP
                                                           LD/ST     SFU                                                            LD/ST     SFU
    Lane   Lane        Unit     Lane     Lane      Unit                      Lane      Lane     Unit     Lane    Lane       Unit
    SIMD   SIMD        DP       SIMD     SIMD      DP                        SIMD      SIMD     DP       SIMD    SIMD       DP
                                                           LD/ST     SFU                                                            LD/ST     SFU
    Lane   Lane        Unit     Lane     Lane      Unit                      Lane      Lane     Unit     Lane    Lane       Unit
    SIMD   SIMD        DP       SIMD     SIMD      DP                        SIMD      SIMD     DP       SIMD    SIMD       DP
                                                           LD/ST     SFU                                                            LD/ST     SFU
    Lane   Lane        Unit     Lane     Lane      Unit                      Lane      Lane     Unit     Lane    Lane       Unit
    SIMD   SIMD        DP       SIMD     SIMD      DP                        SIMD      SIMD     DP       SIMD    SIMD       DP
                                                           LD/ST     SFU                                                            LD/ST     SFU
    Lane   Lane        Unit     Lane     Lane      Unit                      Lane      Lane     Unit     Lane    Lane       Unit
    SIMD   SIMD        DP       SIMD     SIMD      DP                        SIMD      SIMD     DP       SIMD    SIMD       DP
                                                           LD/ST     SFU                                                            LD/ST     SFU
    Lane   Lane        Unit     Lane     Lane      Unit                      Lane      Lane     Unit     Lane    Lane       Unit
    SIMD   SIMD        DP       SIMD     SIMD      DP                        SIMD      SIMD     DP       SIMD    SIMD       DP
                                                           LD/ST     SFU                                                            LD/ST     SFU
    Lane   Lane        Unit     Lane     Lane      Unit                      Lane      Lane     Unit     Lane    Lane       Unit
    SIMD   SIMD        DP       SIMD     SIMD      DP                        SIMD      SIMD     DP       SIMD    SIMD       DP
                                                           LD/ST     SFU                                                            LD/ST     SFU
    Lane   Lane        Unit     Lane     Lane      Unit                      Lane      Lane     Unit     Lane    Lane       Unit

                                                                  Texture / L1 Cache

                 Tex                                      Tex                             Tex                                      Tex

                                                                64KB Shared Memory

Figure 4.20 Block diagram of the multithreaded SIMD Processor of a Pascal GPU. Each of the 64 SIMD Lanes
(cores) has a pipelined floating-point unit, a pipelined integer unit, some logic for dispatching instructions and oper-
ands to these units, and a queue for holding results. The 64 SIMD Lanes interact with 32 double-precision ALUs (DP
units) that perform 64-bit floating-point arithmetic, 16 load-store units (LD/STs), and 16 special function units (SFUs)
that calculate functions such as square roots, reciprocals, sines, and cosines.

                                     ■    Unified virtual memory and paging support—The Pascal GP100 GPU adds
                                          page-fault capabilities within a unified virtual address space. This feature
                                          allows a single virtual address for every data structure that is identical across
                                          all the GPUs and CPUs in a single system. When a thread accesses an address
                                          that is remote, a page of memory is transferred to the local GPU for subsequent
                                          use. Unified memory simplifies the programming model by providing demand
                                          paging instead of explicit memory copying between the CPU and GPU or

    between GPUs. It also allows allocating far more memory than exists on the
    GPU to solve problems with large memory requirements. As with any virtual
    memory system, care must be taken to avoid excessive page movement.

Similarities and Differences Between Vector
Architectures and GPUs
As we have seen, there really are many similarities between vector architectures
and GPUs. Along with the quirky jargon of GPUs, these similarities have contrib-
uted to the confusion in architecture circles about how novel GPUs really are. Now
that you’ve seen what is under the covers of vector computers and GPUs, you can
appreciate both the similarities and the differences. Because both architectures are
designed to execute data-level parallel programs, but take different paths, this com-
parison is in depth in order to provide a better understanding of what is needed for
DLP hardware. Figure 4.21 shows the vector term first and then the closest equiv-
alent in a GPU.
    A SIMD Processor is like a vector processor. The multiple SIMD Processors
in GPUs act as independent MIMD cores, just as many vector computers have
multiple vector processors. This view will consider the NVIDIA Tesla P100 as
a 56-core machine with hardware support for multithreading, where each core
has 64 lanes. The biggest difference is multithreading, which is fundamental to
GPUs and missing from most vector processors.
    Looking at the registers in the two architectures, the RV64V register file in our
implementation holds entire vectors—that is, a contiguous block of elements. In
contrast, a single vector in a GPU will be distributed across the registers of all SIMD
Lanes. A RV64V processor has 32 vector registers with perhaps 32 elements, or
1024 elements total. A GPU thread of SIMD instructions has up to 256 registers with
32 elements each, or 8192 elements. These extra GPU registers support
multithreading.
    Figure 4.22 is a block diagram of the execution units of a vector processor on
the left and a multithreaded SIMD Processor of a GPU on the right. For pedagogic
purposes, we assume the vector processor has four lanes and the multithreaded
SIMD Processor also has four SIMD Lanes. This figure shows that the four SIMD
Lanes act in concert much like a four-lane vector unit, and that a SIMD Processor
acts much like a vector processor.
    In reality, there are many more lanes in GPUs, so GPU “chimes” are shorter.
While a vector processor might have 2 to 8 lanes and a vector length of, say, 32—
making a chime 4 to 16 clock cycles—a multithreaded SIMD Processor might have
8 or 16 lanes. A SIMD Thread is 32 elements wide, so a GPU chime would just be 2
or 4 clock cycles. This difference is why we use “SIMD Processor” as the more
descriptive term because it is closer to a SIMD design than it is to a traditional vec-
tor processor design.

                                               Closest CUDA/NVIDIA
Type                             Vector term   GPU term                  Comment
                                 Vectorized    Grid                      Concepts are similar, with the GPU using the less descriptive term
                                 Loop
abstractions
 Program

                                 Chime         —                         Because a vector instruction (PTX instruction) takes just 2 cycles
                                                                         on Pascal to complete, a chime is short in GPUs. Pascal has two
                                                                         execution units that support the most common floating-point
                                                                         instructions that are used alternately, so the effective issue rate is 1
                                                                         instruction every clock cycle
                                 Vector        PTX Instruction           A PTX instruction of a SIMD Thread is broadcast to all SIMD
                                 Instruction                             Lanes, so it is similar to a vector instruction
                                 Gather/       Global load/store (ld.    All GPU loads and stores are gather and scatter, in that each SIMD
Machine objects

                                 Scatter       global/st.global)         Lane sends a unique address. It’s up to the GPU Coalescing Unit to
                                                                         get unit-stride performance when addresses from the SIMD Lanes
                                                                         allow it
                                 Mask          Predicate Registers and   Vector mask registers are explicitly part of the architectural state,
                                 Registers     Internal Mask Registers   while GPU mask registers are internal to the hardware. The GPU
                                                                         conditional hardware adds a new feature beyond predicate registers
                                                                         to manage masks dynamically
                                 Vector        Multithreaded SIMD        These are similar, but SIMD Processors tend to have many lanes,
                                 Processor     Processor                 taking a few clock cycles per lane to complete a vector, while
                                                                         vector architectures have few lanes and take many cycles to
                                                                         complete a vector. They are also multithreaded where vectors
                                                                         usually are not
                                 Control       Thread Block Scheduler    The closest is the Thread Block Scheduler that assigns Thread
Processing and memory hardware

                                 Processor                               Blocks to a multithreaded SIMD Processor. But GPUs have no
                                                                         scalar-vector operations and no unit-stride or strided data transfer
                                                                         instructions, which Control Processors often provide in vector
                                                                         architectures
                                 Scalar        System Processor          Because of the lack of shared memory and the high latency to
                                 Processor                               communicate over a PCI bus (1000s of clock cycles), the system
                                                                         processor in a GPU rarely takes on the same tasks that a scalar
                                                                         processor does in a vector architecture
                                 Vector Lane   SIMD Lane                 Very similar; both are essentially functional units with registers
                                 Vector        SIMD Lane Registers       The equivalent of a vector register is the same register in all 16
                                 Registers                               SIMD Lanes of a multithreaded SIMD Processor running a thread
                                                                         of SIMD instructions. The number of registers per SIMD Thread is
                                                                         flexible, but the maximum is 256 in Pascal, so the maximum
                                                                         number of vector registers is 256
                                 Main          GPU Memory                Memory for GPU versus system memory in vector case
                                 Memory

Figure 4.21 GPU equivalent to vector terms.

                                                                                    PC                      SIMD thread scheduler
          Instruction                                                              PC    Instruction
  PC        cache                                                                 PC       cache                    Dispatch unit
                                                                                  PC

                                        Instruction register                                                     Instruction register

                                       Mask        Mask        Mask        Mask                                  Mask        Mask        Mask          Mask

  Control                         FU0         FU1         FU2         FU3                                  FU0          FU1          FU2         FU3
 processor
                                  0            1          2           3                                     0            0           0           0
               Vector registers

                                  4            5          6           7                                     1            1           1           1

                                                                                               Registers
                                   •           •          •           •                                     •            •           •           •
                                   •           •          •           •                                     •            •           •           •
                                   •           •          •           •                                     •            •           •           •

                                  60          61          62          63                                   1023         1023        1023        1023

                                         Vector load/store unit                                                   SIMD load/store unit

                                                                                                                 Address coalescing unit

                                           Memory interface
                                                                                                                  Memory interface unit
                                                unit

Figure 4.22 A vector processor with four lanes on the left and a multithreaded SIMD Processor of a GPU with four
SIMD Lanes on the right. (GPUs typically have 16 or 32 SIMD Lanes.) The Control Processor supplies scalar operands
for scalar-vector operations, increments addressing for unit and nonunit stride accesses to memory, and performs
other accounting-type operations. Peak memory performance occurs only in a GPU when the Address Coalescing
Unit can discover localized addressing. Similarly, peak computational performance occurs when all internal mask bits
are set identically. Note that the SIMD Processor has one PC per SIMD Thread to help with multithreading.

                                                  The closest GPU term to a vectorized loop is Grid, and a PTX instruction is the
                                              closest to a vector instruction because a SIMD Thread broadcasts a PTX instruction
                                              to all SIMD Lanes.
                                                  With respect to memory access instructions in the two architectures, all GPU
                                              loads are gather instructions and all GPU stores are scatter instructions. If data
                                              addresses of CUDA Threads refer to nearby addresses that fall into the same
                                              cache/memory block at the same time, the Address Coalescing Unit of the GPU
                                              will ensure high memory bandwidth. The explicit unit-stride load and store instruc-
                                              tions of vector architectures versus the implicit unit stride of GPU programming is
                                              why writing efficient GPU code requires that programmers think in terms of SIMD
                                              operations, even though the CUDA programming model looks like MIMD.
                                              Because CUDA Threads can generate their own addresses, strided as well as
                                              gather-scatter, addressing vectors are found in both vector architectures and GPUs.

                             As we mentioned several times, the two architectures take very different
                         approaches to hiding memory latency. Vector architectures amortize it across all
                         the elements of the vector by having a deeply pipelined access, so you pay the
                         latency only once per vector load or store. Therefore vector loads and stores are
                         like a block transfer between memory and the vector registers. In contrast, GPUs
                         hide memory latency using multithreading. (Some researchers are investigating
                         adding multithreading to vector architectures to try to capture the best of both
                         worlds.)
                             With respect to conditional branch instructions, both architectures implement
                         them using mask registers. Both conditional branch paths occupy time and/or space
                         even when they do not store a result. The difference is that the vector compiler
                         manages mask registers explicitly in software while the GPU hardware and assem-
                         bler manages them implicitly using branch synchronization markers and an inter-
                         nal stack to save, complement, and restore masks.
                             The Control Processor of a vector computer plays an important role in the exe-
                         cution of vector instructions. It broadcasts operations to all the Vector Lanes and
                         broadcasts a scalar register value for vector-scalar operations. It also does implicit
                         calculations that are explicit in GPUs, such as automatically incrementing memory
                         addresses for unit-stride and nonunit-stride loads and stores. The Control Processor
                         is missing in the GPU. The closest analogy is the Thread Block Scheduler, which
                         assigns Thread Blocks (bodies of vector loop) to multithreaded SIMD Processors.
                         The runtime hardware mechanisms in a GPU that both generate addresses and then
                         discover if they are adjacent, which is commonplace in many DLP applications, are
                         likely less power-efficient than using a Control Processor.
                             The scalar processor in a vector computer executes the scalar instructions of a
                         vector program; that is, it performs operations that would be too slow to do in the
                         vector unit. Although the system processor that is associated with a GPU is the
                         closest analogy to a scalar processor in a vector architecture, the separate address
                         spaces plus transferring over a PCIe bus means thousands of clock cycles of
                         overhead to use them together. The scalar processor can be slower than a vector
                         processor for floating-point computations in a vector computer, but not by the same
                         ratio as the system processor versus a multithreaded SIMD Processor (given the
                         overhead).
                             Therefore each “vector unit” in a GPU must do computations that you would
                         expect to do using a scalar processor in a vector computer. That is, rather than
                         calculate on the system processor and communicate the results, it can be faster
                         to disable all but one SIMD Lane using the predicate registers and built-in masks
                         and do the scalar work with one SIMD Lane. The relatively simple scalar pro-
                         cessor in a vector computer is likely to be faster and more power-efficient than
                         the GPU solution. If system processors and GPUs become more closely tied
                         together in the future, it will be interesting to see if system processors can play
                         the same role as scalar processors do for vector and multimedia SIMD
                         architectures.

                             Similarities and Differences Between Multimedia SIMD
                             Computers and GPUs
                             At a high level, multicore computers with multimedia SIMD instruction extensions
                             do share similarities with GPUs. Figure 4.23 summarizes the similarities and
                             differences.
                                 Both are multiprocessors whose processors use multiple SIMD Lanes, although
                             GPUs have more processors and many more lanes. Both use hardware multithread-
                             ing to improve processor utilization, although GPUs have hardware support for
                             many more threads. Both have roughly 2:1 performance ratios between peak perfor-
                             mance of single-precision and double-precision floating-point arithmetic. Both use
                             caches, although GPUs use smaller streaming caches, and multicore computers
                             use large multilevel caches that try to contain whole working sets completely. Both
                             use a 64-bit address space, although the physical main memory is much smaller in
                             GPUs. Both support memory protection at the page level as well as demand paging,
                             which allows them to address far more memory than they have on board.
                                 In addition to the large numerical differences in processors, SIMD Lanes, hard-
                             ware thread support, and cache sizes, there are many architectural differences. The
                             scalar processor and multimedia SIMD instructions are tightly integrated in tradi-
                             tional computers; they are separated by an I/O bus in GPUs, and they even have
                             separate main memories. The multiple SIMD Processors in a GPU use a single
                             address space and can support a coherent view of all memory on some systems
                             given support from CPU vendors (such as the IBM Power9). Unlike GPUs, mul-
                             timedia SIMD instructions historically did not support gather-scatter memory
                             accesses, which Section 4.7 shows is a significant omission.

Feature                                                             Multicore with SIMD            GPU
SIMD Processors                                                             4–8                    8–32
SIMD Lanes/Processor                                                        2–4                   up to 64
Multithreading hardware support for SIMD Threads                            2–4                   up to 64
Typical ratio of single-precision to double-precision performance           2:1                     2:1
Largest cache size                                                         40 MB                   4 MB
Size of memory address                                                     64-bit                  64-bit
Size of main memory                                                    up to 1024 GB            up to 24 GB
Memory protection at level of page                                          Yes                     Yes
Demand paging                                                               Yes                     Yes
Integrated scalar processor/SIMD Processor                                  Yes                     No
Cache coherent                                                              Yes             Yes on some systems

Figure 4.23 Similarities and differences between multicore with multimedia SIMD extensions and recent GPUs.

                         Summary
                         Now that the veil has been lifted, we can see that GPUs are really just multi-
                         threaded SIMD Processors, although they have more processors, more lanes
                         per processor, and more multithreading hardware than do traditional multicore
                         computers. For example, the Pascal P100 GPU has 56 SIMD Processors with
                         64 lanes per processor and hardware support for 64 SIMD Threads. Pascal
                         embraces instruction-level parallelism by issuing instructions from two SIMD
                         Threads to two sets of SIMD Lanes. GPUs also have less cache memory—Pas-
                         cal’s L2 cache is 4 MiB—and it can be coherent with a cooperative distant scalar
                         processor or distant GPUs.
                              The CUDA programming model wraps up all these forms of parallelism
                         around a single abstraction, the CUDA Thread. Thus the CUDA programmer
                         can think of programming thousands of threads, although they are really executing
                         each block of 32 threads on the many lanes of the many SIMD Processors. The
                         CUDA programmer who wants good performance keeps in mind that these threads
                         are organized in blocks and executed 32 at a time and that addresses need to be to
                         adjacent addresses to get good performance from the memory system.
                              Although we’ve used CUDA and the NVIDIA GPU in this section, rest assured
                         that the same ideas are found in the OpenCL programming language and in GPUs
                         from other companies.
                              Now that you understand better how GPUs work, we reveal the real jargon.
                         Figures 4.24 and 4.25 match the descriptive terms and definitions of this section
                         with the official CUDA/NVIDIA and AMD terms and definitions. We also include
                         the OpenCL terms. We believe the GPU learning curve is steep in part because of
                         using terms such as “streaming multiprocessor” for the SIMD Processor, “thread
                         processor” for the SIMD Lane, and “shared memory” for local memory—
                         especially because local memory is not shared between SIMD Processors! We
                         hope that this two-step approach gets you up that curve quicker, even if it’s a
                         bit indirect.

               4.5       Detecting and Enhancing Loop-Level Parallelism
                         Loops in programs are the fountainhead of many of the types of parallelism we
                         previously discussed here and in Chapter 5. In this section, we discuss compiler
                         technology used for discovering the amount of parallelism that we can exploit
                         in a program as well as hardware support for these compiler techniques. We define
                         precisely when a loop is parallel (or vectorizable), how a dependence can prevent a
                         loop from being parallel, and techniques for eliminating some types of depen-
                         dences. Finding and manipulating loop-level parallelism is critical to exploiting
                         both DLP and TLP, as well as the more aggressive static ILP approaches (e.g.,
                         VLIW) that we examine in Appendix H.

                       More           Official
                       descriptive    CUDA/
                       name used in   NVIDIA        Short explanation and AMD and
Type                   this book      term          OpenCL terms                                 Official CUDA/NVIDIA definition
                       Vectorizable   Grid          A vectorizable loop, executed on the         A Grid is an array of Thread Blocks
                       loop                         GPU, made up of one or more “Thread          that can execute concurrently,
                                                    Blocks” (or bodies of vectorized loop)       sequentially, or a mixture
                                                    that can execute in parallel. OpenCL
                                                    name is “index range.” AMD name is
                                                    “NDRange”
Program abstractions

                       Body of        Thread        A vectorized loop executed on a              A Thread Block is an array of CUDA
                       Vectorized     Block         multithreaded SIMD Processor, made           Threads that execute concurrently
                       loop                         up of one or more threads of SIMD            and can cooperate and communicate
                                                    instructions. These SIMD Threads can         via shared memory and barrier
                                                    communicate via local memory. AMD            synchronization. A Thread Block has
                                                    and OpenCL name is “work group”              a Thread Block ID within its Grid
                       Sequence of    CUDA          A vertical cut of a thread of SIMD           A CUDA Thread is a lightweight
                       SIMD Lane      Thread        instructions corresponding to one            thread that executes a sequential
                       operations                   element executed by one SIMD Lane.           program and that can cooperate with
                                                    Result is stored depending on mask.          other CUDA Threads executing in
                                                    AMD and OpenCL call a CUDA Thread            the same Thread Block. A CUDA
                                                    a “work item”                                Thread has a thread ID within its
                                                                                                 Thread Block
                       A thread of    Warp          A traditional thread, but it contains just   A warp is a set of parallel CUDA
                       SIMD                         SIMD instructions that are executed on a     Threads (e.g., 32) that execute the
Machine object

                       instructions                 multithreaded SIMD Processor. Results        same instruction together in a
                                                    are stored depending on a per-element        multithreaded SIMT/SIMD
                                                    mask. AMD name is “wavefront”                Processor
                       SIMD           PTX           A single SIMD instruction executed           A PTX instruction specifies an
                       instruction    instruction   across the SIMD Lanes. AMD name is           instruction executed by a CUDA
                                                    “AMDIL” or “FSAIL” instruction               Thread

Figure 4.24 Conversion from terms used in this chapter to official NVIDIA/CUDA and AMD jargon. OpenCL names
are given in the book’s definitions.

                                             Loop-level parallelism is normally investigated at the source level or
                                         close to it, while most analysis of ILP is done once instructions have been
                                         generated by the compiler. Loop-level analysis involves determining what
                                         dependences exist among the operands in a loop across the iterations of that
                                         loop. For now, we will consider only data dependences, which arise when an
                                         operand is written at some point and read at a later point. Name dependences
                                         also exist and may be removed by the renaming techniques discussed in
                                         Chapter 3.
                                             The analysis of loop-level parallelism focuses on determining whether data
                                         accesses in later iterations are dependent on data values produced in earlier itera-
                                         tions; such dependence is called a loop-carried dependence. Most of the examples
                      More
                      descriptive     Official
                      name used in    CUDA/            Short explanation and AMD and
Type                  this book       NVIDIA term      OpenCL terms                           Official CUDA/NVIDIA definition
                      Multithreaded   Streaming        Multithreaded SIMD Processor that      A streaming multiprocessor (SM) is
                      SIMD            multiprocessor   executes thread of SIMD                a multithreaded SIMT/SIMD
                      processor                        instructions, independent of other     Processor that executes warps of
                                                       SIMD Processors. Both AMD and          CUDA Threads. A SIMT program
                                                       OpenCL call it a “compute unit.”       specifies the execution of one
                                                       However, the CUDA programmer           CUDA Thread, rather than a vector
                                                       writes program for one lane rather     of multiple SIMD Lanes
                                                       than for a “vector” of multiple SIMD
                                                       Lanes
                      Thread Block    Giga Thread      Assigns multiple bodies of             Distributes and schedules Thread
Processing hardware

                      Scheduler       Engine           vectorized loop to multithreaded       Blocks of a grid to streaming
                                                       SIMD Processors. AMD name is           multiprocessors as resources
                                                       “Ultra-Threaded Dispatch Engine”       become available
                      SIMD Thread     Warp             Hardware unit that schedules and       A warp scheduler in a streaming
                      scheduler       scheduler        issues threads of SIMD instructions    multiprocessor schedules warps for
                                                       when they are ready to execute;        execution when their next
                                                       includes a scoreboard to track SIMD    instruction is ready to execute
                                                       Thread execution. AMD name is
                                                       “Work Group Scheduler”
                      SIMD Lane       Thread           Hardware SIMD Lane that executes       A thread processor is a datapath and
                                      processor        the operations in a thread of SIMD     register file portion of a streaming
                                                       instructions on a single element.      multiprocessor that executes
                                                       Results are stored depending on        operations for one or more lanes of a
                                                       mask. OpenCL calls it a “processing    warp
                                                       element.” AMD name is also “SIMD
                                                       Lane”
                      GPU Memory      Global           DRAM memory accessible by all          Global memory is accessible by all
                                      memory           multithreaded SIMD Processors in a     CUDA Threads in any Thread Block
                                                       GPU. OpenCL calls it “global           in any grid; implemented as a region
                                                       memory”                                of DRAM, and may be cached
                      Private         Local memory     Portion of DRAM memory private         Private “thread-local” memory for a
                      memory                           to each SIMD Lane. Both AMD and        CUDA Thread; implemented as a
                                                       OpenCL call it “private memory”
Memory hardware

                                                                                              cached region of DRAM
                      Local memory    Shared           Fast local SRAM for one                Fast SRAM memory shared by the
                                      memory           multithreaded SIMD Processor,          CUDA Threads composing a Thread
                                                       unavailable to other SIMD              Block, and private to that Thread
                                                       Processors. OpenCL calls it “local     Block. Used for communication
                                                       memory.” AMD calls it “group           among CUDA Threads in a Thread
                                                       memory”                                Block at barrier synchronization
                                                                                              points
                      SIMD Lane       Registers        Registers in a single SIMD Lane        Private registers for a CUDA
                      registers                        allocated across body of vectorized    Thread; implemented as
                                                       loop. AMD also calls them              multithreaded register file for certain
                                                       “registers”                            lanes of several warps for each
                                                                                              thread processor

Figure 4.25 Conversion from terms used in this chapter to official NVIDIA/CUDA and AMD jargon. Note that our
descriptive terms “local memory” and “private memory” use the OpenCL terminology. NVIDIA uses SIMT (single-
instruction multiple-thread) rather than SIMD to describe a streaming multiprocessor. SIMT is preferred over SIMD
because the per-thread branching and control flow are unlike any SIMD machine.

          we considered in Chapters 2 and 3 had no loop-carried dependences and thus are
          loop-level parallel. To see that a loop is parallel, let us first look at the source
          representation:

              for (i=999; i>=0; i=i-1)
                    x[i] = x[i] + s;
              In this loop, the two uses of x[i] are dependent, but this dependence is within a
          single iteration and is not loop-carried. There is a loop-carried dependence between
          successive uses of i in different iterations, but this dependence involves an induc-
          tion variable that can be easily recognized and eliminated. We saw examples of
          how to eliminate dependences involving induction variables during loop unrolling
          in Section 2.2 of Chapter 2, and we will look at additional examples later in this
          section.
              Because finding loop-level parallelism involves recognizing structures
          such as loops, array references, and induction variable computations, a com-
          piler can do this analysis more easily at or near the source level, in contrast to
          the machine-code level. Let’s look at a more complex example.

Example   Consider a loop like this one:

             for (i=0; i<100; i=i+1) {
                   A[i+1] = A[i] + C[i];   /* S1 */
                   B[i+1] = B[i] + A[i+1]; /* S2 */
             }

          Assume that A, B, and C are distinct, nonoverlapping arrays. (In practice, the arrays
          may sometimes be the same or may overlap. Because the arrays may be passed as
          parameters to a procedure that includes this loop, determining whether arrays over-
          lap or are identical often requires sophisticated, interprocedural analysis of the pro-
          gram.) What are the data dependences among the statements S1 and S2 in
          the loop?

 Answer   There are two different dependences:
          1. S1 uses a value computed by S1 in an earlier iteration, because iteration i com-
             putes A[i + 1], which is read in iteration i + 1. The same is true of S2 for B[i] and
             B[i + 1].
          2. S2 uses the value A[i + 1] computed by S1 in the same iteration.
          These two dependences are distinct and have different effects. To see how they
          differ, let’s assume that only one of these dependences exists at a time. Because
          the dependence of statement S1 is on an earlier iteration of S1, this dependence
          is loop-carried. This dependence forces successive iterations of this loop to execute
          in series.

                            The second dependence (S2 depending on S1) is within an iteration
                         and is not loop-carried. Thus, if this were the only dependence, multiple iter-
                         ations of the loop would execute in parallel, as long as each pair of state-
                         ments in an iteration were kept in order. We saw this type of dependence
                         in an example in Section 2.2, where unrolling could expose the parallelism.
                         These intra-loop dependences are common; for example, a sequence of vector
                         instructions that uses chaining exhibits exactly this sort of dependence.
                            It is also possible to have a loop-carried dependence that does not prevent
                         parallelism, as the next example shows.

             Example     Consider a loop like this one:
                            for (i=0; i<100; i=i+1) {
                                  A[i] = A[i] + B[i];   /* S1 */
                                  B[i+1] = C[i] + D[i]; /* S2 */
                            }
                        What are the dependences between S1 and S2? Is this loop parallel? If not, show
                        how to make it parallel.

               Answer    Statement S1 uses the value assigned in the previous iteration by statement S2, so
                         there is a loop-carried dependence between S2 and S1. Despite this loop-carried
                         dependence, this loop can be made parallel. Unlike the earlier loop, this depen-
                         dence is not circular; neither statement depends on itself, and although S1 depends
                         on S2, S2 does not depend on S1. A loop is parallel if it can be written without a
                         cycle in the dependences because the absence of a cycle means that the depen-
                         dences give a partial ordering on the statements.
                            Although there are no circular dependences in the preceding loop, it must be
                         transformed to conform to the partial ordering and expose the parallelism. Two
                         observations are critical to this transformation:
                         1. There is no dependence from S1 to S2. If there were, then there would be a
                            cycle in the dependences and the loop would not be parallel. Because this other
                            dependence is absent, interchanging the two statements will not affect the exe-
                            cution of S2.
                         2. On the first iteration of the loop, statement S2 depends on the value of B[0]
                            computed prior to initiating the loop.
                         These two observations allow us to replace the preceding loop with the following
                         code sequence:

                            A[0] = A[0] + B[0];
                            for (i=0; i<99; i=i+1) {

           B[i+1] = C[i] + D[i];
           A[i+1] = A[i+1] + B[i+1];
   }
   B[100] = C[99] + D[99];
    The dependence between the two statements is no longer loop-carried so that
iterations of the loop may be overlapped, provided the statements in each iteration
are kept in order.

Our analysis needs to begin by finding all loop-carried dependences. This depen-
dence information is inexact, in the sense that it tells us that such dependence may
exist. Consider the following example:
    for (i=0;i<100;i=i+1) {
         A[i] = B[i] + C[i]
         D[i] = A[i] * E[i]
    }
     The second reference to A in this example need not be translated to a load
instruction because we know that the value is computed and stored by the previous
statement. Thus the second reference to A can simply be a reference to the register
into which A was computed. Performing this optimization requires knowing that
the two references are always to the same memory address and that there is no
intervening access to the same location. Normally, data dependence analysis tells
that only one reference may depend on another; a more complex analysis is
required to determine that two references must be to the exact same address. In
the preceding example, a simple version of this analysis suffices because the
two references are in the same basic block.
     Often loop-carried dependences are in the form of a recurrence. A recurrence
occurs when a variable is defined based on the value of that variable in an earlier
iteration, usually the one immediately preceding, as in the following code fragment:
    for (i=1;i<100;i=i+1) {
         Y[i] = Y[i-1] + Y[i];
    }
    Detecting a recurrence can be important for two reasons: some architectures
(especially vector computers) have special support for executing recurrences,
and in an ILP context, it may still be possible to exploit a fair amount of parallelism.

Finding Dependences
Clearly, finding the dependences in a program is important both to determine
which loops might contain parallelism and to eliminate name dependences. The
complexity of dependence analysis arises also because of the presence of arrays

                         and pointers in languages such as C or C++, or pass-by-reference parameter pass-
                         ing in Fortran. Because scalar variable references explicitly refer to a name, they
                         can usually be analyzed quite easily with aliasing because of pointers and reference
                         parameters causing some complications and uncertainty in the analysis.
                             How does the compiler detect dependences in general? Nearly all dependence
                         analysis algorithms work on the assumption that array indices are affine. In sim-
                         plest terms, a one-dimensional array index is affine if it can be written in the form
                         a ? i + b, where a and b are constants and i is the loop index variable. The index of a
                         multidimensional array is affine if the index in each dimension is affine. Sparse
                         array accesses, which typically have the form x[y[i]], are one of the major exam-
                         ples of nonaffine accesses.
                             Determining whether there is a dependence between two references to the same
                         array in a loop is thus equivalent to determining whether two affine functions can
                         have the identical value for different indices between the bounds of the loop. For
                         example, suppose we have stored to an array element with index value a ? i + b and
                         loaded from the same array with index value c ? i + d, where i is the for-loop index
                         variable that runs from m to n. A dependence exists if two conditions hold:

                         1. There are two iteration indices, j and k, that are both within the limits of the for-
                            loop. That is, m ? j ? n, m ? k ? n.
                         2. The loop stores into an array element indexed by a ? j + b and later fetches from
                            that same array element when it is indexed by c ? k + d, that is, a ? j + b ¼ c ? k + d.

                         In general, we cannot determine whether dependence exists at compile time. For
                         example, the values of a, b, c, and d may not be known (they could be values in
                         other arrays), making it impossible to tell if a dependence exists. In other cases, the
                         dependence testing may be very expensive but decidable at compile time; for
                         example, the accesses may depend on the iteration indices of multiple nested loops.
                         Many programs, however, contain primarily simple indices where a, b, c, and d are
                         all constants. For these cases, it is possible to devise reasonable compile time tests
                         for dependence.
                              As an example, a simple and sufficient test for the absence of a dependence is
                         the greatest common divisor (GCD) test. It is based on the observation that if a
                         loop-carried dependence exists, then GCD (c, a) must divide (d – b). (Recall that
                         an integer, x, divides another integer, y, if we get an integer quotient when we do
                         the division y/x and there is no remainder.)

             Example     Use the GCD test to determine whether dependences exist in the following loop:
                            for (i=0; i<100; i=i+1) {
                                 X[2*i+3] = X[2*i] * 5.0;
                            }

               Answer    Given the values a ¼ 2, b ¼ 3, c ¼ 2, and d ¼ 0, then GCD(a, c) ¼ 2, and d ? b ¼ ? 3.
                         Because 2 does not divide ?3, no dependence is possible.

          The GCD test is sufficient to guarantee that no dependence exists; however, there
          are cases where the GCD test succeeds but no dependence exists. This can arise, for
          example, because the GCD test does not consider the loop bounds.
              In general, determining whether a dependence actually exists is NP-complete.
          In practice, however, many common cases can be analyzed precisely at low cost.
          Recently, approaches using a hierarchy of exact tests increasing in generality and
          cost have been shown to be both accurate and efficient. (A test is exact if it pre-
          cisely determines whether a dependence exists. Although the general case is
          NP-complete, there exist exact tests for restricted situations that are much cheaper.)
              In addition to detecting the presence of a dependence, a compiler wants to clas-
          sify the type of dependence. This classification allows a compiler to recognize
          name dependences and eliminate them at compile time by renaming and copying.

Example   The following loop has multiple types of dependences. Find all the true depen-
          dences, output dependences, and antidependences, and eliminate the output
          dependences and antidependences by renaming.
             for (i=0; i<100; i=i+1) {
                 Y[i] = X[i] / c; /* S1                 */
                 X[i] = X[i] + c; /* S2                 */
                 Z[i] = Y[i] + c; /* S3                 */
                 Y[i] = c - Y[i]; /* S4                 */
             }

 Answer   The following dependences exist among the four statements:
          1. There are true dependences from S1 to S3 and from S1 to S4 because of Y[i].
             These are not loop-carried, so they do not prevent the loop from being consid-
             ered parallel. These dependences will force S3 and S4 to wait for S1 to
             complete.
          2. There is an antidependence from S1 to S2, based on X[i].
          3. There is an antidependence from S3 to S4 for Y[i].
          4. There is an output dependence from S1 to S4, based on Y[i].
          The following version of the loop eliminates these false (or pseudo) dependences.
             for (i=0; i<100; i=i+1 {
                 T[i] = X[i] / c; /* Y renamed to T to remove output
             dependence */
                 X1[i] = X[i] + c;/* X renamed to X1 to remove
             antidependence */
                 Z[i] = T[i] + c;/* Y renamed to T to remove
             antidependence */
                 Y[i] = c - T[i];
             }

                            After the loop, the variable X has been renamed X1. In code that follows the
                         loop, the compiler can simply replace the name X by X1. In this case, renaming
                         does not require an actual copy operation, as it can be done by substituting names
                         or by register allocation. In other cases, however, renaming will require copying.

                         Dependence analysis is a critical technology for exploiting parallelism, as well as
                         for the transformation-like blocking that Chapter 2 covers. For detecting loop-level
                         parallelism, dependence analysis is the basic tool. Effectively compiling programs
                         for vector computers, SIMD computers, or multiprocessors depends critically on
                         this analysis. The major drawback of dependence analysis is that it applies only
                         under a limited set of circumstances, namely, among references within a single
                         loop nest and using affine index functions. Thus there are many situations where
                         array-oriented dependence analysis cannot tell us what we want to know; for
                         example, analyzing accesses done with pointers, rather than with array indices
                         can be much harder. (This is one reason why Fortran is still preferred over C
                         and C++ for many scientific applications designed for parallel computers.) Simi-
                         larly, analyzing references across procedure calls is extremely difficult. Thus,
                         while analysis of code written in sequential languages remains important, we also
                         need approaches such as OpenMP and CUDA that write explicitly parallel loops.

                         Eliminating Dependent Computations
                         As previously mentioned, one of the most important forms of dependent compu-
                         tations is a recurrence. A dot product is a perfect example of a recurrence:
                             for (i=9999; i>=0; i=i-1)
                                   sum = sum + x[i] * y[i];
                             This loop is not parallel because it has a loop-carried dependence on the var-
                         iable sum. We can, however, transform it to a set of loops, one of which is
                         completely parallel and the other partly parallel. The first loop will execute the
                         completely parallel portion of this loop. It looks like this:
                             for (i=9999; i>=0; i=i-1)
                                   sum[i] = x[i] * y[i];
                             Notice that sum has been expanded from a scalar into a vector quantity (a trans-
                         formation called scalar expansion) and that this transformation makes this new
                         loop completely parallel. When we are done, however, we need to do the reduce
                         step, which sums up the elements of the vector. It looks like this:
                             for (i=9999; i>=0; i=i-1)
                                   finalsum = finalsum + sum[i];
                             Although this loop is not parallel, it has a very specific structure called a reduc-
                         tion. Reductions are common in linear algebra, and as we will see in Chapter 6,
                                                      4.6   Cross-Cutting Issues      ■   345

      they are also a key part of the primary parallelism primitive MapReduce used in
      warehouse-scale computers. In general, any function can be used as a reduction
      operator, and common cases include operators such as max and min.
          Reductions are sometimes handled by special hardware in a vector and SIMD
      architecture that allows the reduce step to be done much faster than it could be done
      in scalar mode. These work by implementing a technique similar to what can be
      done in a multiprocessor environment. While the general transformation works
      with any number of processors, suppose for simplicity we have 10 processors.
      In the first step of reducing the sum, each processor executes the following (with
      p as the processor number ranging from 0 to 9):
          for (i=999; i>=0; i=i-1)
                finalsum[p] = finalsum[p] + sum[i+1000*p];
           This loop, which sums up 1000 elements on each of the 10 processors, is
      completely parallel. A simple scalar loop can then complete the summation of
      the last 10 sums. Similar approaches are used in vector processors and SIMD
      Processors.
           It is important to observe that the preceding transformation relies on associa-
      tivity of addition. Although arithmetic with unlimited range and precision is asso-
      ciative, computer arithmetic is not associative, for either integer arithmetic,
      because of limited range, or floating-point arithmetic, because of both range
      and precision. Thus using these restructuring techniques can sometimes lead to
      erroneous behavior, although such occurrences are rare. For this reason, most
      compilers require that optimizations that rely on associativity be explicitly enabled.

4.6   Cross-Cutting Issues
      Energy and DLP: Slow and Wide Versus Fast and Narrow
      A fundamental power advantage of data-level parallel architectures comes from the
      energy equation in Chapter 1. Assuming ample data-level parallelism, the performance
      is the same if we halve the clock rate and double the execution resources: twice the num-
      ber of lanes for a vector computer, wider registers and ALUs for multimedia SIMD, and
      more SIMD Lanes for GPUs. If we can lower the voltage while dropping the clock
      rate, we can actually reduce energy as well as the power for the computation while main-
      taining the same peak performance. Thus GPUs tend to have lower clock rates than
      system processors, which rely on high clock rates for performance (see Section 4.7).
           Compared to out-of-order processors, DLP processors can have simpler control
      logic to launch a large number of operations per clock cycle; for example, the con-
      trol is identical for all lanes in vector processors, and there is no logic to decide on
      multiple instruction issues or speculative execution logic. They also fetch and
      decode far fewer instructions. Vector architectures can also make it easier to turn
      off unused portions of the chip. Each vector instruction explicitly describes all the
      resources it needs for a number of cycles when the instruction issues.

                         Banked Memory and Graphics Memory
                         Section 4.2 noted the importance of substantial memory bandwidth for vector
                         architectures to support unit stride, nonunit stride, and gather-scatter accesses.
                             To achieve the highest memory performance, stacked DRAMs are used in the
                         top-end GPUs from AMD and NVIDIA. Intel also uses stacked DRAM in its Xeon
                         Phi product. Also known as high bandwidth memory (HBM, HBM2), the memory
                         chips are stacked and placed in the same package as the processing chip. The exten-
                         sive width (typically 1024–4096 data wires) provides high bandwidth, while plac-
                         ing the memory chips in the same package as the processor chip reduces latency
                         and power consumption. The capacity of stacked DRAM is typically 8–32 GB.
                             Given all the potential demands on the memory from both the computation
                         tasks and the graphics acceleration tasks, the memory system could see a large
                         number of uncorrelated requests. Unfortunately, this diversity hurts memory per-
                         formance. To cope, the GPU’s memory controller maintains separate queues of
                         traffic bound for different banks, waiting until there is enough traffic to justify
                         opening a row and transferring all requested data at once. This delay improves
                         bandwidth but stretches latency, and the controller must ensure that no processing
                         units starve while waiting for data, for otherwise neighboring processors could
                         become idle. Section 4.7 shows that gather-scatter techniques and memory-
                         bank-aware access techniques can deliver substantial increases in performance
                         versus conventional cache-based architectures.

                         Strided Accesses and TLB Misses
                         One problem with strided accesses is how they interact with the translation looka-
                         side buffer (TLB) for virtual memory in vector architectures or GPUs. (GPUs also
                         use TLBs for memory mapping.) Depending on how the TLB is organized and the
                         size of the array being accessed in memory, it is even possible to get one TLB miss
                         for every access to an element in the array! The same type of collision can happen
                         with caches, but the performance impact is probably less.

               4.7       Putting It All Together: Embedded Versus Server GPUs
                         and Tesla Versus Core i7
                         Given the popularity of graphics applications, GPUs are now found in both mobile
                         clients and traditional servers and heavy-duty desktop computers. Figure 4.26 lists
                         the key characteristics of the NVIDIA Tegra Parker system on a chip for embedded
                         clients, which is popular in automobiles, and the Pascal GPU for servers. GPU
                         server engineers hope to be able to do live animation within five years after a movie
                         is released. GPU-embedded engineers in turn want to do what a server or game
                         console does today on their hardware within five more years.
                             The NVIDIA Tegra P1 has six ARMv8 cores and a smaller Pascal GPU (capa-
                         ble of 750 GFLOPS) and 50 GB/s of memory bandwidth. It is the key component
           Comparison of a GPU and a MIMD With Multimedia SIMD               ■   347

                                NVIDIA Tegra 2               NVIDIA Tesla P100
Market                      Automotive, Embedded,              Desktop, server
                               Console, Tablet
System processor           Six-Core ARM (2 Denver2              Not applicable
                                    + 4 A57)
System interface                 Not applicable            PCI Express ? 16 Gen 3
System interface                 Not applicable            16 GB/s (each direction),
bandwidth                                                      32 GB/s (total)
Clock rate                          1.5 GHz                        1.4 GHz
SIMD multiprocessors                   2                              56
SIMD Lanes/SIMD                       128                             64
multiprocessor
Memory interface               128-bit LP-DDR4                 4096-bit HBM2
Memory bandwidth                    50 GB/s                       732 GB/s
Memory capacity                   up to 16 GB                    up to 16 GB
Transistors                         7 billion                    15.3 billion
Process                       TSMC 16 nm FinFET             TSMC 16 nm FinFET
Die area                            147 mm2                       645 mm2
Power                                20 W                           300 W

Figure 4.26 Key features of the GPUs for embedded clients and servers.

of the NVIDIA DRIVE PX2 computing platform that is used in cars for autono-
mous driving. The NVIDIA Tegra X1 is the previous generation and is used in
several high-end tablets, such as the Google Pixel C and the NVIDIA Shield
TV. It has a Maxwell-class GPU capable of 512 GFLOPS.
     The NVIDIA Tesla P100 is the Pascal GPU discussed extensively in this chap-
ter. (Tesla is Nvidia’s name for products targeting general-purpose computing.)
The clock rate is 1.4 GHz, and it includes 56 SIMD Processors. The path to
HBM2 memory is 4096-bits wide, and it transfers data on both the rising and
falling edge of a 0.715 GHz clock, which means a peak memory bandwidth
of 732 GB/s. It connects to the host system processor and memory via a PCI
Express ? 16 Gen 3 link, which has a peak bidirectional rate of 32 GB/s.
     All physical characteristics of the P100 die are impressively large: it contains
15.3 billion transistors, the die size is 645 mm2 in a 16-nm TSMC process, and the
typical power is 300 W.

Comparison of a GPU and a MIMD With Multimedia SIMD
A group of Intel researchers published a paper (Lee et al., 2010) comparing a quad-
core Intel i7 with multimedia SIMD extensions to the Tesla GTX 280. Although
the study did not compare the latest versions of CPUs and GPUs, it was the most

                                                             Core i7-960             GTX 280             Ratio 280/i7
Number of processing elements (cores or SMs)                       4                    30                    7.5
Clock frequency (GHz)                                             3.2                   1.3                  0.41
Die size                                                          263                  576                    2.2
Technology                                                    Intel 45 nm         TSMC 65 nm                  1.6
Power (chip, not module)                                          130                  130                    1.0
Transistors                                                     700 M                1400 M                   2.0
Memory bandwidth (GB/s)                                           32                   141                    4.4
Single-precision SIMD width                                        4                     8                    2.0
Double-precision SIMD width                                        2                     1                    0.5
Peak single-precision scalar FLOPS (GFLOP/S)                      26                   117                    4.6
Peak single-precision SIMD FLOPS (GFLOP/S)                        102                311–933               3.0–9.1
(SP 1 add or multiply)                                           N.A.                  (311)                 (3.0)
(SP 1 instruction fused multiply-adds)                           N.A.                  (622)                 (6.1)
(Rare SP dual issue fused multiply-add and multiply)             N.A.                  (933)                 (9.1)
Peak double-precision SIMD FLOPS (GFLOP/S)                        51                    78                    1.5

Figure 4.27 Intel Core i7-960 and NVIDIA GTX 280. The rightmost column shows the ratios of GTX 280 to Core i7. For
single-precision SIMD FLOPS on the GTX 280, the higher speed (933) comes from a very rare case of dual issuing of
fused multiply-add and multiply. More reasonable is 622 for single fused multiply-adds. Note that these memory
bandwidths are higher than in Figure 4.28 because these are DRAM pin bandwidths and those in Figure 4.28 are
at the processors as measured by a benchmark program. From Table 2 in Lee, W.V., et al., 2010. Debunking the
100 ? GPU vs. CPU myth: an evaluation of throughput computing on CPU and GPU. In: Proc. 37th Annual Int’l. Sym-
posium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), June 19–23, 2010, Saint-Malo, France.

                              in-depth comparison of the two styles in that it explained the reasons behind the
                              differences in performance. Moreover, the current versions of these architectures
                              share many similarities to the ones in the study.
                                  Figure 4.27 lists the characteristics of the two systems. Both products were pur-
                              chased in the fall of 2009. The Core i7 is in Intel’s 45-nanometer semiconductor
                              technology, while the GPU is in TSMC’s 65-nanometer technology. Although it
                              might have been fairer to have a comparison done by a neutral party or by both
                              interested parties, the purpose of this section is not to determine how much faster
                              one product is than the other, but to try to understand the relative value of features
                              of these two contrasting architecture styles.
                                  The rooflines of the Core i7 920 and GTX 280 in Figure 4.28 illustrate the dif-
                              ferences in the computers. The 920 has a slower clock rate than the 960 (2.66 GHz
                              vs. 3.2 GHz), but the rest of the system is the same. Not only does the GTX 280
                              have much higher memory bandwidth and double-precision floating-point perfor-
                              mance, but also its double-precision ridge point is considerably to the left. As pre-
                              viously mentioned, it is much easier to hit peak computational performance the
                              further the ridge point of the roofline is to the left. The double-precision ridge point
                                                                                               Comparison of a GPU and a MIMD With Multimedia SIMD                                                            ■   349

                                                                   Core i7 920
                                      128                                                                                                     128                                 NVIDIA GTX280
                                                                   (Nehalem)

                                       64                                                                                                      64
                                                                                Peak = 42.66 GFLOP/s
           Double-precision GFLOP/s

                                                                                                                  Double-precision GFLOP/s
                                       32                                                                                                      32
                                                                            s
                                                                          B/                                                                                                                          78 GF/s
                                       16                         4    G                                                                       16
                                                               6.                                                                                                                 s
                                                             =1                                                                                                               B/
                                                         m
                                        8             ea                                                                                        8                         7G
                                                 St
                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                                    =   12
                                        4                                                                                                       4              am
                                                                                                                                                             re
                                                                                                                                                          St
                                        2                                                                                                       2

                                        1                                                                                                       1
                                         1/8   1/4       1/2    1       2     4                       8      16                                     1/8       1/4            1/2    1       2     4       8       16
                                                           Arithmetic intensity                                                                                                Arithmetic intensity

                                                                   Core i7 920
                                  1024                                                                                                       1024                                 NVIDIA GTX280
                                                                   (Nehalem)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      624 GF/s
                                      512                                                                                                     512
  Single-precision GFLOP/s

                                                                                                                  Single-precision GFLOP/s

                                      256                                                                                                     256

                                                                                                                                                                                        s
                                      128
                                                                                                85.33 GF/s
                                                                                                                                              128                                     B/
                                                                                                                                                                                  G
                                                                                                                                                                               27                 78 GF/s
                                       64                                                                                                      64                            =1
                                                                                             s 42.66 GF/s                                                               am
                                                                                          B/                                                                        re
                                                                                     4   G                                                                        St
                                       32                                         6.                                                           32
                                                                                =1
                                                                          m
                                                                      rea
                                       16                         St                                                                           16

                                        8                                                                                                       8
                                         1/8   1/4       1/2    1       2     4                       8      16                                     1/8       1/4            1/2    1       2     4       8       16
                                                           Arithmetic intensity                                                                                                Arithmetic intensity

Figure 4.28 Roofline model (Williams et al. 2009). These rooflines show double-precision floating-point perfor-
mance in the top row and single-precision performance in the bottom row. (The DP FP performance ceiling is also
in the bottom row to give perspective.) The Core i7 920 on the left has a peak DP FP performance of 42.66 GFLOP/s, a
SP FP peak of 85.33 GFLOP/s, and a peak memory bandwidth of 16.4 GB/s. The NVIDIA GTX 280 has a DP FP peak of
78 GFLOP/s, SP FP peak of 624 GFLOP/s, and 127 GB/s of memory bandwidth. The dashed vertical line on the left
represents an arithmetic intensity of 0.5 FLOP/byte. It is limited by memory bandwidth to no more than
8 DP GFLOP/s or 8 SP GFLOP/s on the Core i7. The dashed vertical line to the right has an arithmetic intensity of
4 FLOP/byte. It is limited only computationally to 42.66 DP GFLOP/s and 64 SP GFLOP/s on the Core i7 and to 78
DP GFLOP/s and 512 DP GFLOP/s on the GTX 280. To hit the highest computation rate on the Core i7, you need
to use all 4 cores and SSE instructions with an equal number of multiplies and adds. For the GTX 280, you need
to use fused multiply-add instructions on all multithreaded SIMD Processors.

                         is 0.6 for the GTX 280 versus 2.6 for the Core i7. For single-precision performance,
                         the ridge point moves far to the right, as it’s considerably harder to hit the roof of
                         single-precision performance because it is so much higher. Note that the arithmetic
                         intensity of the kernel is based on the bytes that go to main memory, not the bytes
                         that go to cache memory. Thus caching can change the arithmetic intensity of a
                         kernel on a particular computer, presuming that most references really go to the
                         cache. The Rooflines help explain the relative performance in this case study. Note
                         also that this bandwidth is for unit-stride accesses in both architectures. Real
                         gather-scatter addresses that are not coalesced are slower on the GTX 280 and
                         on the Core i7, as we will see.
                              The researchers said that they selected the benchmark programs by analyzing
                         the computational and memory characteristics of four recently proposed bench-
                         mark suites and then “formulated the set of throughput computing kernels that cap-
                         ture these characteristics.” Figure 4.29 describes these 14 kernels, and Figure 4.30
                         shows the performance results, with larger numbers meaning faster.
                              Given that the raw performance specifications of the GTX 280 vary from 2.5?
                         slower (clock rate) to 7.5 ? faster (cores per chip) while the performance varies
                         from 2.0? slower (Solv) to 15.2? faster (GJK), the Intel researchers explored
                         the reasons for the differences:

                         ■   Memory bandwidth. The GPU has 4.4 ? the memory bandwidth, which helps
                             explain why LBM and SAXPY run 5.0 and 5.3? faster; their working sets are
                             hundreds of megabytes and thus don’t fit into the Core i7 cache. (To access
                             memory intensively, they did not use cache blocking on SAXPY.) Thus the
                             slope of the rooflines explains their performance. SpMV also has a large work-
                             ing set, but it only runs 1.9? because the double-precision floating point of the
                             GTX 280 is just 1.5 ? faster than the Core i7.
                         ■   Compute bandwidth. Five of the remaining kernels are compute bound:
                             SGEMM, Conv, FFT, MC, and Bilat. The GTX is faster by 3.9, 2.8, 3.0,
                             1.8, and 5.7, respectively. The first three of these use single-precision
                             floating-point arithmetic, and GTX 280 single-precision is 3–6? faster.
                             (The 9 ? faster than the Core i7 as shown in Figure 4.27 occurs only in the very
                             special case when the GTX 280 can issue a fused multiply-add and a multiply
                             per clock cycle.) MC uses double-precision, which explains why it’s just 1.8?
                             faster since DP performance is only 1.5? faster. Bilat uses transcendental func-
                             tions, which the GTX 280 supports directly (see Figure 4.17). The Core i7
                             spends two-thirds of its time calculating transcendental functions, so the
                             GTX 280 is 5.7 ? faster. This observation helps point out the value of hardware
                             support for operations that occur in your workload: double-precision floating-
                             point and perhaps even transcendentals.
                         ■   Cache benefits. Ray casting (RC) is only 1.6 ? faster on the GTX because
                             cache blocking with the Core i7 caches prevents it from becoming memory
                             bandwidth bound, as it is on GPUs. Cache blocking can help Search, too. If
                             the index trees are small so that they fit into the cache, the Core i7 is twice
                                         Comparison of a GPU and a MIMD With Multimedia SIMD                ■    351

Kernel                     Application       SIMD           TLP           Characteristics
SGEMM (SGEMM)              Linear algebra    Regular        Across 2D     Compute bound after tiling
                                                            tiles
Monte Carlo (MC)           Computational     Regular        Across        Compute bound
                           finance                          paths
Convolution (Conv)         Image analysis    Regular        Across        Compute bound; BW bound for small filters
                                                            pixels
FFT (FFT)                  Signal            Regular        Across        Compute bound or BW bound depending
                           processing                       smaller       on size
                                                            FFTs
SAXPY (SAXPY)              Dot product       Regular        Across        BW bound for large vectors
                                                            vector
LBM (LBM)                  Time migration    Regular        Across        BW bound
                                                            cells
Constraint solver (Solv)   Rigid body        Gather/        Across        Synchronization bound
                           physics           Scatter        constraints
SpMV (SpMV)                Sparse solver     Gather         Across        BW bound for typical large matrices
                                                            nonzero
GJK (GJK)                  Collision         Gather/        Across        Compute bound
                           detection         Scatter        objects
Sort (Sort)                Database          Gather/        Across        Compute bound
                                             Scatter        elements
Ray casting (RC)           Volume            Gather         Across        4–8 MB first level working set; over
                           rendering                        rays          500 MB last level working set
Search (Search)            Database          Gather/        Across        Compute bound for small tree, BW bound at
                                             Scatter        queries       bottom of tree for large tree
Histogram (Hist)           Image analysis    Requires       Across        Reduction/synchronization bound
                                             conflict       pixels
                                             detection
Bilateral (Bilat)          Image analysis    Regular        Across        Compute bound
                                                            pixels

Figure 4.29 Throughput computing kernel characteristics. The name in parentheses identifies the benchmark
name in this section. The authors suggest that code for both machines had equal optimization effort. From
Table 1 in Lee, W.V., et al., 2010. Debunking the 100 ? GPU vs. CPU myth: an evaluation of throughput computing
on CPU and GPU. In: Proc. 37th Annual Int’l. Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), June 19–23, 2010, Saint-
Malo, France.

                                 as fast. Larger index trees make them memory bandwidth bound. Overall, the
                                 GTX 280 runs Search 1.8 ? faster. Cache blocking also helps Sort. While most
                                 programmers wouldn’t run Sort on a SIMD Processor, it can be written with a
                                 1-bit Sort primitive called split. However, the split algorithm executes many
                                 more instructions than a scalar sort does. As a result, the GTX 280 runs only
                                 0.8? as fast as the Core i7. Note that caches also help other kernels on the Core
                                 i7 because cache blocking allows SGEMM, FFT, and SpMV to become

                                                                                                     GTX 280/
                         Kernel            Units                   Core i7-960        GTX 280         i7-960
                         SGEMM             GFLOP/s                      94              364              3.9
                         MC                Billion paths/s              0.8              1.4             1.8
                         Conv              Million pixels/s            1250             3500             2.8
                         FFT               GFLOP/s                     71.4             213              3.0
                         SAXPY             GB/s                        16.8             88.8             5.3
                         LBM               Million lookups/s            85              426              5.0
                         Solv              Frames/s                    103               52              0.5
                         SpMV              GFLOP/s                      4.9              9.1             1.9
                         GJK               Frames/s                     67              1020            15.2
                         Sort              Million elements/s          250              198              0.8
                         RC                Frames/s                     5                8.1             1.6
                         Search            Million queries/s            50               90              1.8
                         Hist              Million pixels/s            1517             2583             1.7
                         Bilat             Million pixels/s             83              475              5.7

Figure 4.30 Raw and relative performance measured for the two platforms. In this
                         study, SAXPY is used only as a measure of memory bandwidth, so the right unit is
                         GB/s and not GFLOP/s. Based on Table 3 in Lee, W.V., et al., 2010. Debunking the
                         100 ? GPU vs. CPU myth: an evaluation of throughput computing on CPU and GPU.
                         In: Proc. 37th Annual Int’l. Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), June 19–23,
                         2010, Saint-Malo, France.

                                compute bound. This observation reemphasizes the importance of cache block-
                                ing optimizations in Chapter 2.
                         ■      Gather-Scatter. The multimedia SIMD extensions are of little help if the data
                                are scattered throughout main memory; optimal performance comes only when
                                data are aligned on 16-byte boundaries. Thus GJK gets little benefit from
                                SIMD on the Core i7. As previously mentioned, GPUs offer gather-scatter
                                addressing that is found in a vector architecture but omitted from SIMD exten-
                                sions. The Address Coalescing Unit helps as well by combining accesses to the
                                same DRAM line, thereby reducing the number of gathers and scatters. The
                                memory controller also batches together accesses to the identical DRAM page.
                                This combination means the GTX 280 runs GJK a startling 15.2 ? faster than
                                the Core i7, which is larger than any single physical parameter in Figure 4.27.
                                This observation reinforces the importance of gather-scatter to vector and GPU
                                architectures that is missing from SIMD extensions.
                         ■      Synchronization. The performance synchronization of Hist is limited by atomic
                                updates, which are responsible for 28% of the total runtime on the Core i7
                                despite its having a hardware fetch-and-increment instruction. Thus Hist is
                                                        4.8   Fallacies and Pitfalls   ■   353

             only 1.7? faster on the GTX 280. Solv solves a batch of independent con-
             straints in a small amount of computation followed by barrier synchronization.
             The Core i7 benefits from the atomic instructions and a memory consistency
             model that ensures the right results even if not all previous accesses to memory
             hierarchy have completed. Without the memory consistency model, the GTX
             280 version launches some batches from the system processor, which leads to
             the GTX 280 running 0.5? as fast as the Core i7. This observation points out
             how synchronization performance can be important for some data parallel
             problems.

          It was interesting that the gather-scatter support of vector architectures, which pre-
          date the SIMD instructions by decades, was so important to the effective usefulness
          of these SIMD extensions, which some had predicted before the comparison (Gebis
          and Patterson, 2007). The Intel researchers noted that 6 of the 14 kernels would
          exploit SIMD better with more efficient gather-scatter support on the Core i7.
              Note that an important feature missing from this comparison was describing the
          level of effort to get the results for the two systems. Ideally, future comparisons
          would release the code used on both systems so that others could re-create the same
          experiments on different hardware platforms and possibly improve on the results.

          Comparison Update
          In the intervening years, the weaknesses of the Core i7 and Tesla GTX 280 have
          been addressed by their successors. Intel’s ACV2 added gather instructions, and
          AVX/512 added scatter instructions, both of which are found in the Intel Skylake
          series. Nvidia Pascal has double-precision floating-point performance that is one-
          half instead of one-eighth the speed of single precision, fast atomic operations, and
          caches.
              Figure 4.31 lists the characteristics of these two successors, Figure 4.32 com-
          pares performance using 3 of the 14 benchmarks in the original paper (those were
          the ones for which we could find source code), and Figure 4.33 shows the two new
          roofline models. The new GPU chip is 15 to 50 times faster and the new CPU chips
          is 50 times faster than their predecessors, and the new GPU is 2–5 times faster than
          the new CPU.

4.8       Fallacies and Pitfalls
          While data-level parallelism is the easiest form of parallelism after ILP from the
          programmer’s perspective, and plausibly the simplest from the architect’s perspec-
          tive, it still has many fallacies and pitfalls.
Fallacy   GPUs suffer from being coprocessors.
          Although the split between main memory and GPU memory has disadvantages,
          there are advantages to being at a distance from the CPU.

                                                    Xeon Platinum 8180           P100               Ratio P100/Xeon
Number of processing elements (cores or SMs)                 28                      56                   2.0
Clock frequency (GHz)                                        2.5                     1.3                 0.52
Die size                                                    N.A.               610 mm2                    –
Technology                                               Intel 14 nm         TSMC 16 nm                   1.1
Power (chip, not module)                                    80 W                 300 W                    3.8
Transistors                                                 N.A.                 15.3 B                   –
Memory bandwidth (GB/s)                                     199                     732                   3.7
Single-precision SIMD width                                  16                      8                    0.5
Double-precision SIMD width                                   8                      4                    0.5
Peak single-precision SIMD FLOPS (GFLOP/s)                  4480                10,608                    2.4
Peak double-precision SIMD FLOPS (GFLOP/s)                  2240                 5304                     2.4

Figure 4.31 Intel Xeon ?? and NVIDIA P100. The rightmost column shows the ratios of P100 to the Xeon. Note that
these memory bandwidths are higher than in Figure 4.28 because these are DRAM pin bandwidths and those in
Figure 4.28 are at the processors as measured by a benchmark program.

                                                                                                        GTX 280/i7-
                              Kernel      Units       Xeon Platinum 8180     P100          P100/Xeon       960
                              SGEMM       GFLOP/s             3494            6827            2.0             3.9
                              DGEMM       GFLOP/s             1693            3490            2.1             —
                              FFT-S       GFLOP/s             410             1820            4.4             3.0
                              FFT-D       GFLOP/s             190             811             4.2             —
                              SAXPY       GB/s                207             544             2.6             5.3
                              DAXPY       GB/s                212             556             2.6             —

Figure 4.32 Raw and relative performance measured for modern versions of the two
                              platforms as compared to the relative performance of the original platforms. Like
Figure 4.30, SAXPY and DAXPY are used only as a measure of memory bandwidth, so
                              the proper unit is GB/s and not GFLOP/s.

                                  For example, PTX exists in part because of the I/O device nature of GPUs. This
                              level of indirection between the compiler and the hardware gives GPU architects
                              much more flexibility than system processor architects. It’s often hard to know in
                              advance whether an architecture innovation will be well supported by compilers
                              and libraries and be important to applications. Sometimes a new mechanism will
                              even prove useful for one or two generations and then fade in importance as the
                              IT world changes. PTX allows GPU architects to try innovations speculatively
                              and drop them in subsequent generations if they disappoint or fade in impor-
                              tance, which encourages experimentation. The justification for inclusion is under-
                              standably considerably higher for system processors—and thus much less
                                                                                                                         4.8        Fallacies and Pitfalls   ■    355

  16,384                                                                                16,384
                                                                                                                                                      8944 GF/s
          8192                                                                              8192
                                 Xeon                                                                                             NVIDIA P100
                                 Platinum 8180                       4480 GF/s                                                      (Pascal)
          4096                   (Skylake)                                                  4096
                                                                                                                                                       3696 GF/s

          2048                                                                              2048

          1024                                                                              1024
                                                                                                                                         s
                                                                                                                                     B/                624 GF/s
                                                        s                                                                           G
           512                                       B/                                           512                          58
GFLOP/s

                                             9
                                                 G                                                                        =5

                                                                                        GFLOP/s
                                            9                                                                        m
                                         =1                                                                      rea
           256
                                    am
                                                                                                  256       St
                               tre                                                                                                        s
                           S                                                                                                            B/
           128                                                                                    128                             G
                                                                      85 GF/s                                                  27
                                                                                                                             =1                         78 GF/s
                                                                                                                         m
            64
                                                            s
                                                                                                  64
                                                                                                                     rea
                                                         B/           43 GF/s                                   St
                                                  4G
            32                                  6.                                                32
                                           =1                   Core i7 920                                                         NVIDIA GTX280
                                      am                        (Nehalem)                                                               (Tesla)
            16                  Stre                                                              16

             8                                                                                      8
             1/8   1/4   1/2           1             2          4     8       16   32               1/8   1/4            1/2    1      2      4        8     16    32
                                     Arithmetic intensity                                                                  Arithmetic intensity

Figure 4.33 Roofline models of older and newer CPUs versus older and newer GPUs. The higher roofline for each
computer is single-precision floating-point performance, and the lower one is double-precision performance.

                                                experimentation can occur—as distributing binary machine code normally implies
                                                that new features must be supported by all future generations of that architecture.
                                                    A demonstration of the value of PTX is that the different generation architec-
                                                ture radically changed the hardware instruction set—from being memory-oriented
                                                like x86 to being register-oriented like RISC-V as well as doubling the address size
                                                to 64 bits—without disrupting the NVIDIA software stack.
                         Pitfall                Concentrating on peak performance in vector architectures and ignoring start-up
                                                overhead.
                                                Early memory-memory vector processors such as the TI ASC and the CDC STAR-
                                                100 had long start-up times. For some vector problems, vectors had to be longer than
                                                100 for the vector code to be faster than the scalar code! On the CYBER 205—
                                                derived from the STAR-100—the start-up overhead for DAXPY is 158 clock cycles,
                                                which substantially increases the break-even point. If the clock rates of the Cray-1
                                                and the CYBER 205 were identical, the Cray-1 would be faster until the vector
                                                length was greater than 64. Because the Cray-1 clock rate was also higher (even
                                                though the 205 was newer), the crossover point was a vector length over 100.

                Pitfall   Increasing vector performance, without comparable increases in scalar
                          performance.
                          This imbalance was a problem on many early vector processors, and a place where
                          Seymour Cray (the architect of the Cray computers) rewrote the rules. Many of the
                          early vector processors had comparatively slow scalar units (as well as large start-
                          up overheads). Even today, a processor with lower vector performance but better
                          scalar performance can outperform a processor with higher peak vector perfor-
                          mance. Good scalar performance keeps down overhead costs (strip mining, for
                          example) and reduces the impact of Amdahl’s law.
                              An excellent example of this comes from comparing a fast scalar processor and a
                          vector processor with lower scalar performance. The Livermore Fortran kernels are a
                          collection of 24 scientific kernels with varying degrees of vectorization. Figure 4.34
                          shows the performance of two different processors on this benchmark. Despite the
                          vector processor’s higher peak performance, its low scalar performance makes it
                          slower than a fast scalar processor as measured by the harmonic mean.
                              The flip of this danger today is increasing vector performance—say, by
                          increasing the number of lanes—without increasing scalar performance. Such
                          myopia is another path to an unbalanced computer.
                              The next fallacy is closely related.
               Fallacy    You can get good vector performance without providing memory bandwidth.
                          As we saw with the DAXPY loop and the Roofline model, memory bandwidth is
                          quite important to all SIMD architectures. DAXPY requires 1.5 memory references
                          per floating-point operation, and this ratio is typical of many scientific codes. Even
                          if the floating-point operations took no time, a Cray-1 could not increase the
                          performance of the vector sequence used, because it is memory-limited. The
                          Cray-1 performance on Linpack jumped when the compiler used blocking to
                          change the computation so that values could be kept in the vector registers. This
                          approach lowered the number of memory references per FLOP and improved the
                          performance by nearly a factor of two! Thus the memory bandwidth on the Cray-1
                          became sufficient for a loop that formerly required more bandwidth.

                                       Minimum rate for          Maximum rate for          Harmonic mean of all
                          Processor    any loop (MFLOPS)         any loop (MFLOPS)         24 loops (MFLOPS)
                          MIPS M/               0.80                       3.89                      1.85
                          120-5
                          Stardent-             0.41                     10.08                       1.72
                          1500

Figure 4.34 Performance measurements for the Livermore Fortran kernels on two
                          different processors. Both the MIPS M/120-5 and the Stardent-1500 (formerly the
                          Ardent Titan-1) use a 16.7 MHz MIPS R2000 chip for the main CPU. The Stardent-
                          1500 uses its vector unit for scalar FP and has about half the scalar performance (as mea-
                          sured by the minimum rate) of the MIPS M/120-5, which uses the MIPS R2010 FP chip.
                          The vector processor is more than a factor of 2.5 ? faster for a highly vectorizable loop
                          (maximum rate). However, the lower scalar performance of the Stardent-1500 negates
                          the higher vector performance when total performance is measured by the harmonic
                          mean on all 24 loops.

Fallacy   On GPUs, just add more threads if you don’t have enough memory performance.
          GPUs use many CUDA Threads to hide the latency to main memory. If memory
          accesses are scattered or not correlated among CUDA Threads, the memory system
          will get progressively slower in responding to each individual request. Eventually,
          even many threads will not cover the latency. For the “more CUDA Threads” strat-
          egy to work, not only do you need lots of CUDA Threads, but the CUDA Threads
          themselves also must be well behaved in terms of locality of memory accesses.

4.9       Concluding Remarks
          Data-level parallelism is increasing in importance for personal mobile devices,
          given the popularity of applications showing the importance of audio, video,
          and games on these devices. When combined with a model that is easier to program
          than task-level parallelism and with potentially better energy efficiency, it’s easy to
          see why there has been a renaissance for data-level parallelism in this decade.
              We are seeing system processors take on more of the characteristics of GPUs,
          and vice versa. One of the biggest differences in performance between conven-
          tional processors and GPUs has been for gather-scatter addressing. Traditional vec-
          tor architectures show how to add such addressing to SIMD instructions, and we
          expect to see more ideas added from the well-proven vector architectures to SIMD
          extensions over time.
              As we said in the opening of Section 4.4, the GPU question is not simply which
          architecture is best, but given the hardware investment to do graphics well, how
          can it be enhanced to support computation that is more general? Although vector
          architectures have many advantages on paper, it remains to be proven whether vec-
          tor architectures can be as good a foundation for graphics as GPUs. RISC-V has
          embraced vector over SIMD. Thus, like architecture debates of the past, the mar-
          ketplace will help determine the importance of the strengths and weaknesses of two
          styles of data parallel architectures.

4.10      Historical Perspective and References
          Section M.6 (available online) features a discussion on the Illiac IV (a representative
          of the early SIMD architectures) and the Cray-1 (a representative of vector architec-
          tures). We also look at multimedia SIMD extensions and the history of GPUs.

          Case Study and Exercises by Jason D. Bakos
          Case Study: Implementing a Vector Kernel on a Vector
          Processor and GPU
          Concepts illustrated by this case study
          ■   Programming Vector Processors
          ■   Programming GPUs
          ■   Performance Estimation

                         MrBayes is a popular computational biology application for inferring the evolu-
                         tionary histories among a set of input species based on their prealigned DNA
                         sequence data of length n. MrBayes works by performing an heuristic search over
                         the space of all binary tree topologies for which the inputs are the leaves. In order to
                         evaluate a particular tree, the application must compute an n ? 4 conditional like-
                         lihood table (named clP) for each interior node. The table is a function of the con-
                         ditional likelihood tables of the node’s two descendent nodes (clL and clR, single
                         precision floating point) and the 4 ? 4 transition probability table (tiPL and
                         tiPR, single precision floating point). One of this application’s kernels is the com-
                         putation of this conditional likelihood table and is shown as follows:

                         for (k=0; k <seq_length; k++) {
                             clP[h++] = (tiPL[AA]*clL[A] + tiPL[AC]*clL[C] +
                                         tiPL[AG]*clL[G] + tiPL[AT]*clL[T])*
                                        (tiPR[AA]*clR[A] + tiPR[AC]*clR[C] +
                                         tiPR[AG]*clR[G] + tiPR[AT]*clR[T]);
                             clP[h++] = (tiPL[CA]*clL[A] + tiPL[CC]*clL[C] +
                                         tiPL[CG]*clL[G] + tiPL[CT]*clL[T])*
                                        (tiPR[CA]*clR[A] + tiPR[CC]*clR[C] +
                                         tiPR[CG]*clR[G] + tiPR[CT]*clR[T]);
                             clP[h++] = (tiPL[GA]*clL[A] + tiPL[GC]*clL[C] +
                                         tiPL[GG]*clL[G] + tiPL[GT]*clL[T])*
                                        (tiPR[GA]*clR[A] + tiPR[GC]*clR[C] +
                                         tiPR[GG]*clR[G] + tiPR[GT]*clR[T]);
                             clP[h++] = (tiPL[TA]*clL[A] + tiPL[TC]*clL[C] +
                                         tiPL[TG]*clL[G] + tiPL[TT]*clL[T])*
                                        (tiPR[TA]*clR[A] + tiPR[TC]*clR[C] +
                                         tiPR[TG]*clR[G] + tiPR[TT]*clR[T]);
                             clL += 4;
                             clR += 4;
                         }

                   4.1   [25] <4.1, 4.2> Assume the constants shown as follows.

                                              Constants                        Values
                                              AA,AC,AG,AT                      0,1,2,3
                                              CA,CC,CG,CT                      4,5,6,7
                                              GA,GC,GG,GT                      8,9,10,11
                                              TA,TC,TG,TT                      12,13,14,15
                                              A,C,G,T                          0,1,2,3

          Write code for RISC-V and RV64V. Assume the starting addresses of tiPL,
      tiPR, clL, clR, and clP are in RtiPL, RtiPR, RclL, RclR, and RclP,
      respectively. Do not unroll the loop. To facilitate vector addition reductions,
      assume that we add the following instructions to RV64V:
      Vector Summation Reduction Single Precision:
         vsum Fd, Vs
          This instruction performs a summation reduction on a vector register Vs, writ-
      ing to the sum into scalar register Fd.
4.2   [5] <4.1, 4.2> Assuming seq_length == 500, what is the dynamic instruction
      count for both implementations?
4.3   [25] <4.1, 4.2> Assume that the vector reduction instruction is executed on the
      vector functional unit, similar to a vector add instruction. Show how the code
      sequence lays out in convoys assuming a single instance of each vector functional
      unit. How many chimes will the code require? How many cycles per FLOP are
      needed, ignoring vector instruction issue overhead?
4.4   [15] <4.1, 4.2> Consider the possibility of unrolling the loop and mapping mul-
      tiple iterations to vector operations. Assume that you can use scatter-gather loads
      and stores (vldi and vsti). How does this affect the way you can write the
      RV64Vcode for this kernel?
4.5   [25] <4.4> Now assume we want to implement the MrBayes kernel on a GPU
      using a single thread block. Rewrite the C code of the kernel using CUDA.
      Assume that pointers to the conditional likelihood and transition probability
      tables are specified as parameters to the kernel. Invoke one thread for each iter-
      ation of the loop. Load any reused values into shared memory before performing
      operations on it.
4.6   [15] <4.4> With CUDA we can use coarse-grain parallelism at the block level
      to compute the conditional likelihood of multiple nodes in parallel. Assume
      that we want to compute the conditional likelihood from the bottom of the tree
      up. Assume seq_length ¼¼ 500 for all notes and that the group of tables for
      each of the 12 leaf nodes is stored in consecutive memory locations in the
      order of node number (e.g., the mth element of clP on node n is at clP
      [n*4*seq_length + m*4]). Assume that we want to compute the conditional
      likelihood for nodes 12–17, as shown in Figure 4.35. Change the method
      by which you compute the array indices in your answer from Exercise 4.5
      to include the block number.
4.7   [15] <4.4> Convert your code from Exercise 4.6 into PTX code. How many
      instructions are needed for the kernel?
4.8   [10] <4.4> How well do you expect this code to perform on a GPU? Explain
      your answer.

                                                                                                    22

                                                                21

                                                  18                              19                              20

                                         12                13            14                15            16                 17

                                     0        1        2        3    4        5        6        7    8        9        10        11

Figure 4.35 Sample tree.

                         Exercises
                   4.9   [10/20/20/15/15] <4.2> Consider the following code, which multiplies two vec-
                         tors that contain single-precision complex values:
                             for (i=0;i <300;i++) {
                                    c_re[i] = a_re[i] * b_re[i] ? a_im[i] * b_im[i];
                                    c_im[i] = a_re[i] * b_im[i] + a_im[i] * b_re[i];
                             }
                             Assume that the processor runs at 700 MHz and has a maximum vector length
                         of 64. The load/store unit has a start-up overhead of 15 cycles; the multiply unit,
                         8 cycles; and the add/subtract unit, 5 cycles.
                         a. [10] <4.3> What is the arithmetic intensity of this kernel? Justify your answer.
                         b. [20] <4.2> Convert this loop into RV64V assembly code using strip mining.
                         c. [20] <4.2> Assuming chaining and a single memory pipeline, how many
                            chimes are required? How many clock cycles are required per complex result
                            value, including start-up overhead?
                         d. [15] <4.2> If the vector sequence is chained, how many clock cycles are
                            required per complex result value, including overhead?
                         e. [15] <4.2> Now assume that the processor has three memory pipelines and
                            chaining. If there are no bank conflicts in the loop’s accesses, how many clock
                            cycles are required per result?

4.10   [30] <4.2,4.3,4.4> In this problem, we will compare the performance of a vector
       processor with a hybrid system that contains a scalar processor and a GPU-based
       coprocessor. In the hybrid system, the host processor has superior scalar perfor-
       mance to the GPU, so in this case all scalar code is executed on the host processor
       while all vector code is executed on the GPU. We will refer to the first system as the
       vector computer and the second system as the hybrid computer. Assume that your
       target application contains a vector kernel with an arithmetic intensity of 0.5
       FLOPs per DRAM byte accessed; however, the application also has a scalar com-
       ponent that must be performed before and after the kernel in order to prepare the
       input vectors and output vectors, respectively. For a sample dataset, the scalar por-
       tion of the code requires 400 ms of execution time on both the vector processor and
       the host processor in the hybrid system. The kernel reads input vectors consisting
       of 200 MB of data and has output data consisting of 100 MB of data. The vector
       processor has a peak memory bandwidth of 30 GB/s and the GPU has a peak mem-
       ory bandwidth of 150 GB/s. The hybrid system has an additional overhead that
       requires all input vectors to be transferred between the host memory and GPU local
       memory before and after the kernel is invoked. The hybrid system has a direct
       memory access (DMA) bandwidth of 10 GB/s and an average latency of 10 ms.
       Assume that both the vector processor and GPU are performance bound by mem-
       ory bandwidth. Compute the execution time required by both computers for this
       application.
4.11   [15/25/25] <4.4, 4.5> Section 4.5 discussed the reduction operation that reduces a
       vector down to a scalar by repeated application of an operation. A reduction is a
       special type of a loop recurrence. An example is shown as follows:
           dot=0.0;
           for (i=0;i <64;i++) dot = dot + a[i] * b[i];
           A vectorizing compiler might apply a transformation called scalar expansion,
       which expands dot into a vector and splits the loop such that the multiply can be
       performed with a vector operation, leaving the reduction as a separate scalar
       operation:
           for (i=0;i <64;i++) dot[i] = a[i] * b[i];
           for (i=1;i <64;i++) dot[0] = dot[0] + dot[i];
           As mentioned in Section 4.5, if we allow the floating-point addition to be asso-
       ciative, there are several techniques available for parallelizing the reduction.
       a. [15] <4.4, 4.5> One technique is called recurrence doubling, which adds
          sequences of progressively shorter vectors (ie, two 32-element vectors, then
          two 16-element vectors, and so on). Show how the C code would look for exe-
          cuting the second loop in this way.
       b. [25] <4.4, 4.5> In some vector processors, the individual elements within the vec-
          tor registers are addressable. In this case, the operands to a vector operation may be
          two different parts of the same vector register. This allows another solution for the
          reduction called partial sums. The idea is to reduce the vector to m sums where m is

                            the total latency through the vector functional unit, including the operand read and
                            write times. Assume that the VMIPS vector registers are addressable (e.g., you can
                            initiate a vector operation with the operand V1(16), indicating that the input oper-
                            and begins with element 16). Also, assume that the total latency for adds, including
                            the operand read and result write, is eight cycles. Write a VMIPS code sequence
                            that reduces the contents of V1 to eight partial sums.
                         c. [25] <4.4, 4.5> When performing a reduction on a GPU, one thread is associ-
                            ated with each element in the input vector. The first step is for each thread to
                            write its corresponding value into shared memory. Next, each thread enters a
                            loop that adds each pair of input values. This reduces the number of elements
                            by half after each iteration, meaning that the number of active threads also
                            reduces by half after each iteration. In order to maximize the performance of
                            the reduction, the number of fully populated warps should be maximized
                            throughout the course of the loop. In other words, the active threads should
                            be contiguous. Also, each thread should index the shared array in such a
                            way as to avoid bank conflicts in the shared memory. The following loop vio-
                            lates only the first of these guidelines and also uses the modulo operator, which
                            is very expensive for GPUs:
                           unsigned int tid = threadIdx.x;
                            for(unsigned int s=1; s <blockDim.x; s * ¼ 2) {
                            if ((tid % (2*s)) == 0) {
                            sdata[tid] += sdata[tid + s];
                            }
                            __syncthreads();
                            }
                            Rewrite the loop to meet these guidelines and eliminate the use of the modulo
                         operator. Assume that there are 32 threads per warp and a bank conflict occurs
                         whenever two or more threads from the same warp reference an index whose
                         modulo by 32 are equal.
                  4.12   [10/10/10/10] <4.3> The following kernel performs a portion of the finite-
                         difference time-domain (FDTD) method for computing Maxwell’s equations in
                         a three-dimensional space, part of one of the SPEC06fp benchmarks:
                            for (int x=0; x <NX ?1; x++) {
                             for (int y=0; y <NY ?1; y++) {
                             for (int z=0; z <NZ ?1; z++) {
                             int index = x*NY*NZ + y*NZ + z;
                             if (y >0 && x >0) {
                             material = IDx[index];
                             dH1 = (Hz[index] ?Hz[index-incrementY])/dy[y];
                             dH2 = (Hy[index] ?Hy[index-incrementZ])/dz[z];
                             Ex[index] = Ca[material]*Ex[index]+Cb[material]*
                             (dH2 ?dH1);
                            }}}}

           Assume that dH1, dH2, Hy, Hz, dy, dz, Ca, Cb, and Ex are all single-
       precision floating-point arrays. Assume IDx is an array of unsigned int.
       a. [10] <4.3> What is the arithmetic intensity of this kernel?
       b. [10] <4.3> Is this kernel amenable to vector or SIMD execution? Why or
          why not?
       c. [10] <4.3> Assume this kernel is to be executed on a processor that has
          30 GB/s of memory bandwidth. Will this kernel be memory bound or
          compute bound?
       d. [10] <4.3> Develop a roofline model for this processor, assuming it has a peak
          computational throughput of 85 GFLOP/s.
4.13   [10/15] <4.4> Assume a GPU architecture that contains 10 SIMD processors.
       Each SIMD instruction has a width of 32 and each SIMD processor contains 8 lanes
       for single-precision arithmetic and load/store instructions, meaning that each nondi-
       verged SIMD instruction can produce 32 results every 4 cycles. Assume a kernel that
       has divergent branches that causes, on average, 80% of threads to be active. Assume
       that 70% of all SIMD instructions executed are single-precision arithmetic and 20%
       are load/store. Because not all memory latencies are covered, assume an average
       SIMD instruction issue rate of 0.85. Assume that the GPU has a clock speed of
       1.5 GHz.
       a. [10] <4.4> Compute the throughput, in GFLOP/s, for this kernel on this GPU.
       b. [15] <4.4> Assume that you have the following choices:
          (1) Increasing the number of single-precision lanes to 16
          (2) Increasing the number of SIMD processors to 15 (assume this change
              doesn’t affect any other performance metrics and that the code scales to
              the additional processors)
          (3) Adding a cache that will effectively reduce memory latency by 40%, which
              will increase instruction issue rate to 0.95
       What is speedup in throughput for each of these improvements?
4.14   [10/15/15] <4.5> In this exercise, we will examine several loops and analyze their
       potential for parallelization.
       a. [10] <4.5> Does the following loop have a loop-carried dependency?

             for (i=0;i <100;i++) {
              A[i] = B[2*i+4];
              B[4*i+5] = A[i];
             }

       b. [15] <4.5> In the following loop, find all the true dependences, output depen-
          dences, and antidependences. Eliminate the output dependences and antidepen-
          dences by renaming.
             for (i=0;i <100;i++) {
             A[i] = A[i] * B[i]; /* S1 */

                               B[i] = A[i] + c; /* S2 */
                               A[i] = C[i] * c; /* S3 */
                               C[i] = D[i] * A[i]; /* S4 */

                         c. [15] <4.5> Consider the following loop:
                            for (i=0;i <100;i++) {
                             A[i] = A[i] + B[i]; /* S1 */
                             B[i+1] = C[i] + D[i]; /* S2 */
                            }
                            Are there dependences between S1 and S2? Is this loop parallel? If not, show
                         how to make it parallel.
                  4.15   [10] <4.4> List and describe at least four factors that influence the performance of
                         GPU kernels. In other words, which runtime behaviors that are caused by the ker-
                         nel code cause a reduction in resource utilization during kernel execution?
                  4.16   [10] <4.4> Assume a hypothetical GPU with the following characteristics:
                         ■   Clock rate 1.5 GHz
                         ■   Contains 16 SIMD processors, each containing 16 single-precision floating-
                             point units
                         ■   Has 100 GB/s off-chip memory bandwidth
                         Without considering memory bandwidth, what is the peak single-precision
                         floating-point throughput for this GPU in GLFOP/s, assuming that all memory
                         latencies can be hidden? Is this throughput sustainable given the memory band-
                         width limitation?
                  4.17   [60] <4.4> For this programming exercise, you will write and characterize the
                         behavior of a CUDA kernel that contains a high amount of data-level parallelism
                         but also contains conditional execution behavior. Use the NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit
                         along with GPU-SIM from the University of British Columbia (http://www.gpgpu-
                         sim.org/) or the CUDA Profiler to write and compile a CUDA kernel that performs
                         100 iterations of Conway’s Game of Life for a 256 ? 256 game board and returns
                         the final state of the game board to the host. Assume that the board is initialized by
                         the host. Associate one thread with each cell. Make sure you add a barrier after each
                         game iteration. Use the following game rules:
                         ■   Any live cell with fewer than two live neighbors dies.
                         ■   Any live cell with two or three live neighbors lives on to the next generation.
                         ■   Any live cell with more than three live neighbors dies.
                         ■   Any dead cell with exactly three live neighbors becomes a live cell.
                         After finishing the kernel answer the following questions:
                         a. [60] <4.4> Compile your code using the –ptx option and inspect the PTX rep-
                            resentation of your kernel. How many PTX instructions make up the PTX

   implementation of your kernel? Did the conditional sections of your kernel
   include branch instructions or only predicated nonbranch instructions?
b. [60] <4.4> After executing your code in the simulator, what is the dynamic
   instruction count? What is the achieved instructions per cycle (IPC) or instruc-
   tion issue rate? What is the dynamic instruction breakdown in terms of control
   instructions, arithmetic-logical unit (ALU) instructions, and memory instruc-
   tions? Are there any shared memory bank conflicts? What is the effective
   off-chip memory bandwidth?
c. [60] <4.4> Implement an improved version of your kernel where off-chip
   memory references are coalesced and observe the differences in runtime
   performance.
5.1    Introduction                                                          368
5.2    Centralized Shared-Memory Architectures                               377
5.3    Performance of Symmetric Shared-Memory Multiprocessors                393
5.4    Distributed Shared-Memory and Directory-Based Coherence               404
5.5    Synchronization: The Basics                                           412
5.6    Models of Memory Consistency: An Introduction                         417
5.7    Cross-Cutting Issues                                                  422
5.8    Putting It All Together: Multicore Processors and Their Performance   426
5.9    Fallacies and Pitfalls                                                438
5.10   The Future of Multicore Scaling                                       442
5.11   Concluding Remarks                                                    444
5.12   Historical Perspectives and References                                445
       Case Studies and Exercises by Amr Zaky and David A. Wood              446
