7.4    Google’s Tensor Processing Unit, an Inference Data Center Accelerator 557
       Case Studies and Exercises by Cliff Young                             606
              7
                                 Domain-Specific Architectures

                                 Moore’s Law can’t continue forever … We have another 10 to
                                 20 years before we reach a fundamental limit
                                                                               Gordon Moore,
                                                                       Intel Co-Founder (2005)

Computer Architecture. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-811905-1.00007-9
© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

               7.1       Introduction
                         Gordon Moore not only predicted the amazing growth of transistors per chip in
                         1965, but the opening chapter quote shows that he also predicted its demise
                         50 years later. As evidence, Figure 7.1 shows that even the company he
                         founded—which for decades proudly used Moore’s Law as a guideline for capital
                         investment—is slowing its development of new semiconductor processes.
                             During the semiconductor boom time, architects rode Moore’s Law to create
                         novel mechanisms that could turn the cornucopia of transistors into higher perfor-
                         mance. The resources for a five-stage pipeline, 32-bit RISC processor—which
                         needed as little as 25,000 transistors in the 1980s—grew by a factor of 100,000
                         to enable features that accelerated general-purpose code on general-purpose
                         processors, as earlier chapters document:

                         ■   1st-level, 2nd-level, 3rd-level, and even 4th-level caches
                         ■   512-bit SIMD floating-point units
                         ■   15+ stage pipelines
                         ■   Branch prediction
                         ■   Out-of-order execution
                         ■   Speculative prefetching
                         ■   Multithreading
                         ■   Multiprocessing

                         These sophisticated architectures targeted million-line programs written in effi-
                         cient languages like C++. Architects treated such code as black boxes, generally

                                                               180
                                                                     130
                                                         100
                                    Intel process (nm)

                                                                           90
                                                                                65
                                                                                     45
                                                                                          32
                                                                                               22

                                                                                                    14
                                                         10
                                                          2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016

Figure 7.1 Time before new Intel semiconductor process technology measured
                         in nm. The y-axis is log scale. Note that the time stretched previously from about
                         24 months per new process step to about 30 months since 2010.

without understanding either the internal structure of the programs or even what
they were trying to do. Benchmark programs like those in SPEC2017 were just
artifacts to measure and accelerate. Compiler writers were the people at the
hardware-software interface, which dates back to the RISC revolution in the
1980s, but they have limited understanding of the high-level application behavior;
that’s why compilers cannot even bridge the semantic gap between C or C++ and
the architecture of GPUs.
     As Chapter 1 described, Dennard scaling ended much earlier than Moore’s
Law. Thus more transistors switching now means more power. The energy budget
is not increasing, and we’ve already replaced the single inefficient processor with
multiple efficient cores. Hence, we have nothing left up our sleeves to continue
major improvements in cost-performance and energy efficiency for general-
purpose architectures. Because the energy budget is limited (because of electromi-
gration, mechanical and thermal limits of chips), if we want higher performance
(higher operations/second), we need to lower the energy per operation.
     Figure 7.2 is another take on the relative energy costs of memory and logic
mentioned in Chapter 1, this time calculated as overhead for an arithmetic instruc-
tion. Given this overhead, minor twists to existing cores may get us 10% improve-
ments, but if we want order-of-magnitude improvements while offering
programmability, we need to increase the number of arithmetic operations per
instruction from one to hundreds. To achieve that level of efficiency, we need a
drastic change in computer architecture from general-purpose cores to domain-
specific architectures (DSAs).
     Thus, just as the field switched from uniprocessors to multiprocessors in the
past decade out of necessity, desperation is the reason architects are now working
on DSAs. The new normal is that a computer will consist of standard processors to
run conventional large programs such as operating systems along with domain-
specific processors that do only a narrow range of tasks, but they do them
extremely well. Thus such computers will be much more heterogeneous than
the homogeneous multicore chips of the past.

     RISC instruction                  Overhead            ALU        125 pJ

     Load/Store          D-$           Overhead            ALU        150 pJ

     SP floating point                                       +      15–20 pJ
     32-bit addition                                         +            7 pJ

     8-bit addition                                          +    0.2–0.5 pJ

Figure 7.2 Energy costs in picoJoules for a 90 nm process to fetch instructions or
access a data cache compared to the energy cost of arithmetic operations
(Qadeer et al., 2015).

                              Part of the argument is that the preceding architecture innovations from the past
                         few decades that leveraged Moore’s Law (caches, out-of-order execution, etc.)
                         may not be a good match to some domains—especially in terms of energy
                         usage—so their resources can be recycled to make the chip a better match to
                         the domain. For example, caches are excellent for general-purpose architectures,
                         but not necessarily for DSAs; for applications with easily predictable memory
                         access patterns or huge data sets like video that have little data reuse, multilevel
                         caches are overkill, hording area and energy that could be put to better use. There-
                         fore the promise of DSAs is both improved silicon efficiency and better energy
                         efficiency, with the latter typically being the more important attribute today.
                              Architects probably won’t create a DSA for a large C++ program like a com-
                         piler as found in the SPEC2017 benchmark. Domain-specific algorithms are
                         almost always for small compute-intensive kernels of larger systems, such as
                         for object recognition or speech understanding. DSAs should focus on the subset
                         and not plan to run the entire program. In addition, changing the code of the bench-
                         mark is no longer breaking the rules; it is a perfectly valid source of speedup for
                         DSAs. Consequently, if they are going to make useful contributions, architects
                         interested in DSA must now shed their blinders and learn application domains
                         and algorithms.
                              In addition to needing to expand their areas of expertise, a challenge for
                         domain-specific architects is to find a target whose demand is large enough to jus-
                         tify allocating dedicated silicon on an SOC or even a custom chip. The nonrecur-
                         ring engineering (NRE) costs of a custom chip and supporting software are
                         amortized over the number of chips manufactured, so it is unlikely to make eco-
                         nomic sense if you need only 1000 chips.
                              One way to accommodate smaller volume applications is to use reconfigurable
                         chips such as FPGAs because they have lower NRE than custom chips and because
                         several different applications may be able to reuse the same reconfigurable hard-
                         ware to amortize its costs (see Section 7.5). However, since the hardware is less
                         efficient than custom chips, the gains from FPGAs are more modest.
                              Another DSA challenge is how to port software to it. Familiar programming
                         environments like the C++ programming language and compiler are rarely the
                         right vehicles for a DSA.
                              The rest of this chapter provides five guidelines for the design of DSAs and
                         then a tutorial on our example domain, which is deep neural networks (DNNs).
                         We chose DNNs because they are revolutionizing many areas of computing today.
                         Unlike some hardware targets, DNNs are applicable to a wide range of problems,
                         so we can reuse a DNN-specific architecture for solutions in speech, vision, lan-
                         guage, translation, search ranking, and many more areas.
                              We follow with four examples of DSAs: two custom chips for the data center
                         that accelerate DNNs, an FPGA for the data center that accelerates many domains,
                         and an image-processing unit designed for personal mobile devices (PMDs). We
                         then compare the cost-performance of the DSAs along with CPUs and GPUs using
                         DNN benchmarks, and conclude with a prediction of an upcoming renaissance for
                         computer architecture.

                     7.2        Guidelines for DSAs
                                Here are five principles that generally guided the designs of the four DSAs we’ll
                                see in Sections 7.4–7.7. Not only do these five guidelines lead to increased area and
                                energy efficiency, they also provide two valuable bonus effects. First, they lead to
                                simpler designs, which reduce the cost of NRE of DSAs (see the fallacy in
                                Section 7.10). Second, for user-facing applications that are commonplace with
                                DSAs, accelerators that follow these principles are a better match to the 99th-
                                percentile response-time deadlines than the time-varying performance optimiza-
                                tions of traditional processors, as we will see in Section 7.9. Figure 7.3 shows
                                how the four DSAs followed these guidelines.

                                1. Use dedicated memories to minimize the distance over which data is moved.
                                   The many levels of caches in general-purpose microprocessors use a great deal
                                   of area and energy trying to move data optimally for a program. For example, a
                                   two-way set associative cache uses 2.5 times as much energy as an equivalent
                                   software-controlled scratchpad memory. By definition, the compiler writers
                                   and programmers of DSAs understand their domain, so there is no need for
                                   the hardware to try to move data for them. Instead, data movement is reduced
                                   with software-controlled memories that are dedicated to and tailored for specific
                                   functions within the domain.
                                2. Invest the resources saved from dropping advanced microarchitectural optimi-
                                   zations into more arithmetic units or bigger memories.
                                   As Section 7.1 describes, architects turned the bounty from Moore’s Law into
                                   the resource-intensive optimizations for CPUs and GPUs (out-of-order execu-
                                   tion, multithreading, multiprocessing, prefetching, address coalescing, etc.).

Guideline             TPU                       Catapult                Crest                  Pixel Visual Core
Design target         Data center ASIC          Data center FPGA        Data center ASIC       PMD ASIC/SOC IP
1. Dedicated          24 MiB Unified Buffer,    Varies                  N.A.                   Per core: 128 KiB line
   memories           4 MiB Accumulators                                                       buffer, 64 KiB P.E.
                                                                                               memory
2. Larger             65,536 Multiply-          Varies                  N.A.                   Per core: 256 Multiply-
   arithmetic unit    accumulators                                                             accumulators (512 ALUs)
3. Easy               Single-threaded, SIMD,    SIMD, MISD              N.A.                   MPMD, SIMD, VLIW
   parallelism        in-order
4. Smaller data       8-Bit, 16-bit integer     8-Bit, 16-bit integer   21-bit Fl. Pt.         8-bit, 16-bit, 32-bit integer
   size                                         32-bit Fl. Pt.
5. Domain-            TensorFlow                Verilog                 TensorFlow             Halide/TensorFlow
   specific lang.

Figure 7.3 The four DSAs in this chapter and how closely they followed the five guidelines. Pixel Visual Core typ-
ically has 2–16 cores. The first implementation of Pixel Visual Core does not support 8-bit arithmetic.

                            Given the superior understanding of the execution of programs in these nar-
                            rower domains, these resources are much better spent on more processing units
                            or larger on-chip memory.
                         3. Use the easiest form of parallelism that matches the domain.
                            Target domains for DSAs almost always have inherent parallelism. The key deci-
                            sions for a DSA are how to take advantage of that parallelism and how to expose it
                            to the software. Design the DSA around the natural granularity of the parallelism
                            of the domain and expose that parallelism simply in the programming model. For
                            example, with respect to data-level parallelism, if SIMD works in the domain, it’s
                            certainly easier for the programmer and the compiler writer than MIMD. Simi-
                            larly, if VLIW can express the instruction-level parallelism for the domain, the
                            design can be smaller and more energy-efficient than out-of-order execution.
                         4. Reduce data size and type to the simplest needed for the domain.
                            As we will see, applications in many domains are typically memory-bound, so
                            you can increase the effective memory bandwidth and on-chip memory utiliza-
                            tion by using narrower data types. Narrower and simpler data also let’s you pack
                            more arithmetic units into the same chip area.
                         5. Use a domain-specific programming language to port code to the DSA.
                            As Section 7.1 mentions, a classic challenge for DSAs is getting applications to
                            run on your novel architecture. A long-standing fallacy is assuming that your
                            new computer is so attractive that programmers will rewrite their code just for
                            your hardware. Fortunately, domain-specific programming languages were
                            becoming popular even before architects were forced to switch their attention
                            to DSAs. Examples are Halide for vision processing and TensorFlow for DNNs
                            (Ragan-Kelley et al., 2013; Abadi et al., 2016). Such languages make porting
                            applications to your DSA much more feasible. As previously mentioned, only a
                            small, compute-intensive portion of the application needs to run on the DSA in
                            some domains, which also simplifies porting.
                         DSAs introduce many new terms, mostly from the new domains but also from
                         novel architecture mechanisms not seen in conventional processors. As we did
                         in Chapter 4, Figure 7.4 lists the new acronyms, terms, and short explanations
                         to aid the reader.

               7.3       Example Domain: Deep Neural Networks
                         Artificial intelligence (AI) is not only the next big wave in computing—it’s the
                         next major turning point in human history… the Intelligence Revolution will be
                         driven by data, neural networks and computing power. Intel is committed to
                         AI [thus]… we’ve added a set of leading-edge accelerants required for the
                         growth and widespread adoption of AI.
                                                                                       Brian Krzanich,
                                                                                      Intel CEO (2016)
Area                   Term               Acronym   Short explanation
                       Domain-specific    DSA       A special-purpose processor designed for a particular domain. It relies on
                       architectures                other processors to handle processing outside that domain
                       Intellectual       IP        A portable design block that can be integrated into an SOC. They enable a
General

                       property block               marketplace where organizations offer IP blocks to others who compose them
                                                    into SOCs
                       System on a chip   SOC       A chip that integrates all the components of a computer; commonly found in
                                                    PMDs
                       Activation         —         Result of “activating” the artificial neuron; the output of the nonlinear
                                                    functions
                       Batch              —         A collection of datasets processed together to lower the cost of fetching
                                                    weights
                       Convolutional      CNN       A DNN that takes as inputs a set of nonlinear functions of spatially nearby
                       neural network               regions of outputs from the prior layer, which are multiplied by the weights
                       Deep neural        DNN       A sequence of layers that are collections of artificial neurons, which consist of
Deep neural networks

                       network                      a nonlinear function applied to products of weights times the outputs of the
                                                    prior layer
                       Inference          —         The production phase of DNNs; also called prediction
                       Long short-term    LSTM      An RNN well suited to classify, process, and predict time series. It is a
                       memory                       hierarchical design consisting of modules called cells
                       MultiLayer         MLP       A DNN that takes as inputs a set of nonlinear functions of all outputs from the
                       perceptron                   prior layer multiplied by the weights. These layers are called fully connected
                       Rectified linear   ReLU      A nonlinear function that performs f(x) ¼ max(x,0). Other popular
                       unit                         nonlinear functions are sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent (tanh)
                       Recurrent neural   RNN       A DNN whose inputs are from the prior layer and the previous state
                       network
                       Training           —         The development phase of DNNs; also called learning
                       Weights            —         The values learned during training that are applied to inputs; also called
                                                    parameters
                       Accumulators       —         The 4096 256 ? 32-bit registers (4 MiB) that collect the output of the MMU
                                                    and are input to the Activation Unit
                       Activation unit    —         Performs the nonlinear functions (ReLU, sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent, max
                                                    pool, and average pool). Its input comes from the Accumulators and its output
                                                    goes to the Unified Buffer
                       Matrix multiply    MMU       A systolic array of 256 ? 256 8-bit arithmetic units that perform multiply-add.
                       unit                         Its inputs are the Weight Memory and the Unified Buffer, and its output is the
TPU

                                                    Accumulators
                       Systolic array     —         An array of processing units that in lockstep input data from upstream
                                                    neighbors, compute partial results, and pass some inputs and results to
                                                    downstream neighbors
                       Unified buffer     UB        A 24 MiB on-chip memory that holds the activations. It was sized to try to
                                                    avoid spilling activations to DRAM when running a DNN
                       Weight memory      —         An 8 MiB external DRAM chip containing the weights for the MMU. Weights
                                                    are transferred to a Weight FIFO before entering the MMU

Figure 7.4 A handy guide to DSA terms used in Sections 7.3–7.6. Figure 7.29 on page 472 has a guide for
Section 7.7.

                         Artificial intelligence (AI) has made a dramatic comeback since the turn of the cen-
                         tury. Instead of building artificial intelligence as a large set of logical rules, the
                         focus switched to machine learning from example data as the path to artificial intel-
                         ligence. The amount of data needed to learn was much greater than thought. The
                         warehouse scale computers (WSCs) of this century, which harvest and store peta-
                         bytes of information found on the Internet from the billions of users and their
                         smartphones, supply the ample data. We also underestimated the amount of com-
                         putation needed to learn from the massive data, but GPUs—which have excellent
                         single-precision floating-point cost-performance—embedded in the thousands of
                         servers of WSCs deliver sufficient computing.
                              One part of machine learning, called DNNs, has been the AI star for the past
                         five years. Example DNN breakthroughs are in language translation, which DNNs
                         improved more in a single leap than all the advances from the prior decade (Tung,
                         2016; Lewis-Kraus, 2016); the switch to DNNs in the past five years reduced the
                         error rate in an image recognition competition from 26% to 3.5% (Krizhevsky
                         et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al., 2016); and in 2016, DNNs enabled
                         a computer program for the first time to beat a human champion at Go (Silver
                         et al., 2016). Although many of these run in the cloud, they have also enabled Goo-
                         gle Translate on smartphones, which we described in Chapter 1. In 2017 new, sig-
                         nificant DNN results appear nearly every week.
                              Readers interested in learning more about DNNs than found in this section
                         should download and try the tutorials in TensorFlow (TensorFlow Tutorials,
                         2016), or for the less adventurous, consult a free online textbook on DNNs
                         (Nielsen, 2016).

                         The Neurons of DNNs
                         DNNs were inspired by the neuron of the brain. The artificial neuron used for neu-
                         ral networks simply computes the sum over a set of products of weights or param-
                         eters and data values that is then put through a nonlinear function to determine its
                         output. As we will see, each artificial neuron has a large fan-in and a large fan-out.
                             For an image-processing DNN, the input data would be the pixels of a photo,
                         with the pixel values multiplied by the weights. Although many nonlinear func-
                         tions have been tried, a popular one today is simply f(x) ¼ max(x,0), which
                         returns 0 if the x is negative or the original value if positive or zero. (This simple
                         function goes by the complicated name rectified linear unit or ReLU.) The output
                         of a nonlinear function is called an activation, in that it is the output of the artificial
                         neuron that has been “activated.”
                             A cluster of artificial neurons might process different portions of the input, and
                         the output of that cluster becomes the input to the next layer of artificial neurons. The
                         layers between the input layer and the output layer are called hidden layers. For
                         image processing, you can think of each layer as looking for different types of fea-
                         tures, going from lower-level ones like edges and angles to higher-level ones like
                         eyes and ears. If the image-processing application was trying to decide if the image

Name                DNN layers              Weights              Operations/Weight
MLP0                     5                    20M                         200
MLP1                     4                      5M                        168
LSTM0                   58                    52M                          64
LSTM1                   56                    34M                          96
CNN0                    16                      8M                      2888
CNN1                    89                   100M                       1750

Figure 7.5 Six DNN applications that represent 95% of DNN workloads for inference
at Google in 2016, which we use in Section 7.9. The columns are the DNN name, the
number of layers in the DNN, the number of weights, and operations per weight (oper-
ational intensity). Figure 7.41 on page 595 goes into more detail on these DNNs.

contained a dog, the output of the last layer could be a probability number between
0 and 1 or perhaps a list of probabilities corresponding to a list of dog breeds.
    The number of layers gave DNNs their name. The original lack of data
and computing horsepower kept most neural networks relatively shallow.
Figure 7.5 shows the number of layers for a variety of recent DNNs, the number
of weights, and the number of operations per weight fetched. In 2017 some DNNs
have 150 layers.

Training Versus Inference
The preceding discussion concerns DNNs that are in production. DNN develop-
ment starts by defining the neural network architecture, picking the number and
type of layers, the dimensions of each layer, and the size of the data. Although
experts may develop new neural network architectures, most practitioners will
choose among the many existing designs (e.g., Figure 7.5) that have been shown
to perform well on problems similar to theirs.
    Once the neural architecture has been selected, the next step is to learn the
weights associated with each edge in the neural network graph. The weights deter-
mine the behavior of the model. Depending on the choice of neural architecture,
there can be anywhere from thousands to hundreds of millions of weights in a sin-
gle model (see Figure 7.5). Training is the costly process of tuning these weights so
that the DNN approximates the complex function (e.g., mapping from pictures to
the objects in that picture) described by the training data.
    This development phase is universally called training or learning, whereas
the production phase has many names: inference, prediction, scoring, implemen-
tation, evaluation, running, or testing. Most DNNs use supervised learning in
that they are given a training set to learn from where the data is preprocessed
in order to have the correct labels. Thus, in the ImageNet DNN competition
(Russakovsky et al., 2015), the training set consists of 1.2 million photos, and
each photo has been labeled as one of 1000 categories. Several of these categories

                             are quite detailed, such as specific breeds of dogs and cats. The winner is deter-
                             mined by evaluating a separate secret set of 50,000 photos to see which DNN has
                             the lowest error rate.
                                 Setting the weights is an iterative process that goes backward through the neu-
                             ral network using the training set. This process is called backpropagation. For
                             example, because you know the breed of a dog image in the training set, you
                             see what your DNN says about the image, and then you adjust the weights to
                             improve the answer. Amazingly, the weights at the start of the training process
                             should be set to random data, and you just keep iterating until you’re satisfied with
                             the DNN accuracy using the training set.
                                 For the mathematically inclined, the goal of learning is to find a function that
                             maps the inputs to the correct outputs over the multilayer neural network architec-
                             ture. Backpropagation stands for “back propagation of errors.” It calculates a gra-
                             dient over all the weights as input to an optimization algorithm that tries to
                             minimize the errors by updating the weights. The most popular optimization
                             algorithm for DNNs is stochastic gradient descent. It adjusts the weights propor-
                             tionally to maximize the descent of the gradient obtained from backpropagation.
                             Readers interested in learning more should see Nielsen (2016) or TensorFlow
                             Tutorials (2016).
                                 Training can take weeks of computation, as Figure 7.6 shows. The inference
                             phase is often below 100 ms per data sample, which is a million times less.
                             Although training takes much longer than a single inference, the total compute time
                             for inference is a product of the number of customers of the DNN and how
                             frequently they invoke it.
                                 After training, you deploy your DNN, hoping that your training set is
                             representative of the real world, and that your DNN will be so popular that
                             your users will spend much more time employing it than you’ve put into devel-
                             oping it!

                                               Size of
                                            benchmark’s              DNN                               Training
 Type of data        Problem area           training set         architecture         Hardware           time
      text [1]      Word prediction       100 billion words      2-layer skip    1 NVIDIA Titan X      6.2 hours
                     (word2vec)             (Wikipedia)              gram             GPU
   audio [2]       Speech recognition     2000 hours (Fisher    11-layer RNN     1 NVIDIA K1200        3.5 days
                                               Corpus)                                GPU
   images [3]             Image            1 million images     22-layer CNN        1 NVIDIA K20       3 weeks
                      classification         (ImageNet)                                 GPU
   video [4]       activity recognition    1 million videos      8-layer CNN     10 NVIDIA GPUs        1 month
                                             (Sports-1M)

Figure 7.6 Training set sizes and training time for several DNNs (Iandola, 2016).

    There are tasks that don’t have training datasets, such as when trying to predict
the future of some real-world event. Although we won’t cover it here, reinforce-
ment learning (RL) is a popular algorithm for such learning in 2017. Instead of a
training set to learn from, RL acts on the real world and then gets a signal from a
reward function, depending on whether that action made the situation better
or worse.
    Although it’s hard to imagine a faster changing field, only three types
of DNNs reign as most popular in 2017: MultiLayer Perceptrons (MLPs),
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), and Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs). They are all examples of supervised learning, which rely on
training sets.

Multilayer Perceptron
MLPs were the original DNNs. Each new layer is a set of nonlinear functions F of
weighted sum of all outputs from a prior one yn ¼ F(W ? yn?1). The weighted sum
consists of a vector-matrix multiply of the outputs with the weights (see
Figure 7.7). Such a layer is called fully connected because each output neuron
result depends on all input neurons of the prior layer.
    We can calculate the number of neurons, operations, and weights per layer for
each of the DNN types. The easiest is MLP because it is just a vector-matrix

                   Layer[i-1]                              Layer[i]

                    Dim[i-1]
                      Input
                                                                      Dim[i]
                                          VMX                 nlf     Output

                                                             Dim[i]
                                                Dim[i-1]

            VMX Vector matrix multiply
                                                            Weights

             nlf   Nonlinear function

Figure 7.7 MLP showing the input Layer[i21] on the left and the output Layer[i] on
the right. ReLU is a popular nonlinear function for MLPs. The dimensions of the input
and output layers are often different. Such a layer is called fully connected because it
depends on all the inputs from the prior layer, even if many of them are zeros. One study
suggested that 44% were zeros, which presumably is in part because ReLU turns neg-
ative numbers into zeros.

                         multiply of the input vector times the weights array. Here are the parameters and
                         the equations to determine weights and operations for inference (we count multiply
                         and add as two operations):

                         ■   Dim[i]: Dimension of the output vector, which is the number of neurons
                         ■   Dim[i?1]: Dimension of the input vector
                         ■   Number of weights: Dim[i?1] ? Dim[i]
                         ■   Operations: 2 ? Number of weights
                         ■   Operations/Weight: 2

                         This final term is the operational intensity from the Roofline model discussed in
                         Chapter 4. We use operations per weight because there can be millions of
                         weights, which usually don’t fit on the chip. For example, the dimensions of
                         one stage of an MLP in Section 7.9 has Dim[i?1] ¼ 4096 and Dim[i] ¼ 2048,
                         so for that layer, the number of neurons is 2048, number of weights is
                         8,388,608, the number of operations is 16,777,216, and the operational intensity
                         is 2. As we recall from the Roofline model, low operational intensity makes it
                         harder to deliver high performance.

                         Convolutional Neural Network
                         CNNs are widely used for computer vision applications. As images have a two-
                         dimensional structure, neighboring pixels are the natural place to look to find rela-
                         tionships. CNNs take as inputs a set of nonlinear functions from spatially nearby
                         regions of outputs from the prior layer and then multiplies by the weights, which
                         reuses the weights many times.
                             The idea behind CNNs is that each layer raises the level of abstraction of the
                         image. For example, the first layer might identify only horizontal lines and vertical
                         lines. The second layer might combine them to identify corners. The next step
                         might be rectangles and circles. The following layer could use that input to detect
                         portions of a dog, like eyes or ears. The higher layers would be trying to identify
                         characteristics of different breeds of dogs.
                             Each neural layer produces a set of two-dimensional feature maps, where each
                         cell of the two-dimensional feature map is trying to identify one feature in the cor-
                         responding area of the input.
                             Figure 7.8 shows the starting point where a 2 ? 2 stencil computation from the
                         input image creates the elements of the first feature map. A stencil computation
                         uses neighboring cells in a fixed pattern to update all the elements of an array.
                         The number of output feature maps will depend on how many different features
                         you are trying to capture from the image and the stride used to apply the stencil.
                             The process is actually more complicated because the image is usually not just
                         a single, flat two-dimensional layer. Typically, a color image will have three levels
                         for red, green, and blue. For example, a 2 ? 2 stencil will access 12 elements: 2 ? 2

                  Input image                                 Output feature map

                                                VMX           nlf

         VMX Vector matrix multiply           Weights

           nlf   Nonlinear function

Figure 7.8 Simplified first step of a CNN. In this example, every group of four pixels of
the input image are multiplied by the same four weights to create the cells of the output
feature map. The pattern depicted shows a stride of two between the groups of input
pixels, but other strides are possible. To relate this figure to MLP, you can think of each
2 ? 2 convolution as a tiny fully connected operation to produce one point of the output
feature map. Figure 7.9 shows how multiple feature maps turn the points into a vector in
the third dimension.

of red pixels, 2 ? 2 of green pixels, and 2 ? 2 of blue pixels. In this case, you need
12 weights per output feature map for a 2 ? 2 stencil on three input levels of
an image.
    Figure 7.9 shows the general case of an arbitrary number of input and output
feature maps, which occurs after that first layer. The calculation is a three-
dimensional stencil over all the input feature maps with a set of weights to produce
one output feature map.
    For the mathematically oriented, if the number of input feature maps and output
feature maps both equal 1 and the stride is 1, then a single layer of a two-dimensional
CNN is the same calculation as a two-dimensional discrete convolution.
    As we see in Figure 7.9, CNNs are more complicated than MLPs. Here are the
parameter and the equations to calculate the weights and operations:

■   DimFM[i?1]: Dimension of the (square) input Feature Map
■   DimFM[i]: Dimension of the (square) output Feature Map
■   DimSten[i]: Dimension of the (square) stencil
■   NumFM[i?1]: Number of input Feature Maps
■   NumFM[i]: Number of output Feature Maps
■   Number of neurons: NumFM[i] ? DimFM[i]2

                                             Layer[i-1]                                Layer[i]
                                       (input feature maps)                     (output feature maps)
                                                           Dim                                                                Dim

                                                                                                                       [i ]
                                                      ]
                                                              FM                                                                 FM

                                                       1

                                                                                                                   FM
                                                                 [i-1                                                               [i ]

                                                   [i-
                                                                      ]

                                            FM

                                                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                  Di
                                  NumFM[i-1] Dim

                                                                                                                                      NumFM[i]
                                                                                  VMX                     nlf

                                                                                         DimSten[i ]
                                                                                                  DimSten[i ]

                                                                                          NumFM[i -1]
                                                   VMX Vector matrix multiply

                                                                                                        Weights
                                                    nlf    Nonlinear function

Figure 7.9 CNN general step showing input feature maps of Layer[i21] on the left,
                         the output feature maps of Layer[i] on the right, and a three-dimensional stencil over
                         input feature maps to produce a single output feature map. Each output feature map
                         has its own unique set of weights, and the vector-matrix multiply happens for every one.
                         The dotted lines show future output feature maps in this figure. As this figure illustrates,
                         the dimensions and number of the input and output feature maps are often different. As
                         with MLPs, ReLU is a popular nonlinear function for CNNs.

                         ■   Number of weights per output Feature Map: NumFM[i?1] ? DimSten[i]2
                         ■   Total number of weights per layer: NumFM[i] ? Number of weights per output
                             Feature Map
                         ■   Number of operations per output Feature Map: 2 ? DimFM[i]2 ? Number of
                             weights per output Feature Map
                         ■   Total number of operations per layer: NumFM[i] ? Number of operations per
                             output Feature Map ¼ 2 ? DimFM[i]2 ? NumFM[i] ? Number of weights per
                             output Feature Map ¼ 2 ? DimFM[i]2 ? Total number of weights per layer
                         ■   Operations/Weight: 2 ? DimFM[i]2

                         A CNN in Section 7.9 has a layer with DimFM[i?1] ¼ 28, DimFM[i] ¼ 14, Dim-
                         Sten[i] ¼ 3, NumFM[i?1] ¼ 64 (number of input feature maps), and NumFM[i] ¼
                         128 (number of output feature maps). That layer has 25,088 neurons, 73,728
                         weights, does 28,901,376 operations, and has an operational intensity of 392.
                         As our example indicates, CNN layers generally have fewer weights and greater
                         operational intensity than the fully connected layers found in MLPs.

Recurrent Neural Network
The third type of DNN is RNNs, which are popular for speech recognition or lan-
guage translation. RNNs add the ability to explicitly model sequential inputs by
adding state to the DNN model so that RNNs can remember facts. It’s analogous
to the difference in hardware between combinational logic and a state machine. For
example, you might learn the gender of the person, which you would want to pass
along to remember later when translating words. Each layer of an RNN is a col-
lection of weighted sums of inputs from the prior layer and the previous state. The
weights are reused across time steps.
     Long short-term memory (LSTM) is by far the most popular RNN today.
LSTMs mitigate a problem that previous RNNs had with their inability to remem-
ber important long-term information.
     Unlike the other two DNNs, LSTM is a hierarchical design. LSTM consists of
modules called cells. You can think of cells as templates or macros that are linked
together to create the full DNN model, similar to how layers of an MLP line up to
form a complete DNN model.
     Figure 7.10 shows how the LSTM cells are linked together. They are hooked
up from left to right, connecting the output of one cell to the input of the next. They
are also unrolled in time, which runs top down in Figure 7.10. Thus a sentence is
input a word at a time per iteration of the unrolled loop. The long-term and short-
term memory information that gives the LSTM its name is also passed top-down
from one iteration to the next.
     Figure 7.11 shows the contents of an LSTM cell. As we would expect from
Figure 7.10, the input is on the left, the output is on the right, the two memory
inputs are at the top, and the two memory outputs are at the bottom.
     Each cell does five vector-matrix multiplies using five unique sets of weights.
The matrix multiply on the input is just like the MLP in Figure 7.7. Three others are
called gates in that they gate or limit how much information from one source is
passed along to the standard output or the memory output. The amount of infor-
mation sent per gate is set by their weights. If the weights are mostly zeros or small
values, then little gets through; conversely, if they are mostly large, then the gate
lets most information flow. The three gates are called the input gate, the output
gate, and the forget gate. The first two filter the input and output, and the last
one determines what to forget along the long-term memory path.
     The short-term memory output is a vector-matrix multiply using the Short
Term Weights and the output of this cell. The short-term label is applied because
it does not directly use any of the inputs to the cell.
     Because the LSTM cell inputs and outputs are all connected together, the size
of the three input-output pairs must be the same. Looking inside the cell, there are
enough dependencies that all of the inputs and outputs are often the same size.
Let’s assume they are all the same size, called Dim.
     Even so, the vector-matrix multiplies are not all the same size. The vectors for
the three gate multiplies are 3 ? Dim, because the LSTM concatenates all three
inputs. The vector for the input multiply is 2 ? Dim, because the LSTM

                                          “now”    LSTM0        LSTM1        ...      LSTMn

                                            “is”   LSTM0        LSTM1        ...      LSTMn

                             Time
                                          “the”    LSTM0        LSTM1        ...      LSTMn

                                         “time”    LSTM0        LSTM1        ...      LSTMn

                                    <end_input>    LSTM0        LSTM1        ...      LSTMn        “momento”

                                     “momento”     LSTM0        LSTM1        ...      LSTMn        “el”

                                            “el”   LSTM0        LSTM1        ...      LSTMn        “es”

                                           “es”    LSTM0        LSTM1        ...      LSTMn        “ahora”

                                        “ahora”    LSTM0        LSTM1        ...      LSTMn        <end_output>
                                                    ...

                                                                 ...

                                                                              ...

                                                                                        ...
                                                    ...

                                                                 ...

                                                                                        ...
Figure 7.10 LSTM cells connected together. The inputs are on the left (English words),
                         and the outputs are on the right (the translated Spanish words). The cells can be thought
                         of as being unrolled over time, from top to bottom. Thus the short-term and long-term
                         memory of LSTM is implemented by passing information top-down between unrolled
                         cells. They are unrolled enough to translate whole sentences or even paragraphs. Such
                         sequence-to-sequence translation models delay their output until they get to the end
                         of the input (Wu et al., 2016). They produce the translation in reverse order, using the most
                         recent translated word as input to the next step, so “now is the time” becomes “ahora es el
                         momento.” (This figure and the next are often shown turned 90 degrees in LSTM litera-
                         ture, but we’ve rotated them to be consistent with Figures 7.7 and 7.8.)

                         concatenates the input with the short-term memory input as the vector. The vector
                         for the last multiply is just 1 ? Dim, because it is just the output.
                             Now we can finally calculate the weights and operations:

                         ■   Number of weights per cell: 3 ? (3 ? Dim ? Dim) + (2 ? Dim ? Dim)
                             + (1 ? Dim ? Dim) ¼ 12 ? Dim2
                         ■   Number of operations for the 5 vector-matrix multiplies per cell: 2 ? Number
                             of weights per cell ¼ 24 ? Dim2
                         ■   Number of operations for the 3 element-wise multiplies and 1 addition (vectors
                             are all the size of the output): 4 ? Dim
                         ■   Total number of operations per cell (5 vector-matrix multiplies and the 4
                             element-wise operations): 24 ? Dim2 + 4 ? Dim
                         ■   Operations/Weight: ?2

                                                         LTMemoryin        STMemoryin

                                        VMX        nlf                                   VMX        Vector matrix multiply

                                                                                           •        Element-wise multiply

                                   Output gate
                                    weights                                                +        Element-wise addition

                                                                                          nlf       Nonlinear function
                                        VMX        nlf         •
                                                                                           :        Concatenation

                                   Forget gate
                                    weights                            +          nlf           •
      Input                                                                                                  Output

                      :                 VMX        nlf

                 :

                                                               •                                       VMX
                                    Input gate
                                     weights

                                        VMX        nlf                                              Short term
                                                                                                     weights

                                      Input
                                     weights

                                                         LTMemoryout       STMemoryout

Figure 7.11 This LSTM cell contains 5 vector-matrix multiplies, 3 element-wise multiplies, 1 element-wise add,
and 6 nonlinear functions. The standard input and short-term memory input are concatenated to form the vector
operand for the input vector-matrix multiply. The standard input, long-term memory input, and short-term memory
input are concatenated to form the vector that is used in three of the other four vector-matrix multiplies. The non-
linear functions for the three gates are Sigmoids f(x) ¼ 1/(1 + exp(?x)); the others are hyperbolic tangents. (This figure
and the previous one are often shown turned 90 degrees in LSTM literature, but we’ve rotated them to be consistent
with Figures 7.7 and 7.8.)

                              Dim is 1024 for one of the six cells of an LSTM in Section 7.9. Its number of
                              weights is 12,582,912, its number of operations is 25,169,920, and its operational
                              intensity is 2.0003. Thus LSTMs are like MLPs in that they typically have more
                              weights and a lower operational intensity than CNNs.

                         Batches
                         Because DNNs can have many weights, a performance optimization is to reuse
                         the weights once they have been fetched from memory across a set of inputs,
                         thereby increasing effective operational intensity. For example, an image-
                         processing DNN might work on a set of 32 images at a time to reduce the
                         effective cost of fetching weights by a factor of 32. Such datasets are called
                         batches or minibatches. In addition to improving the performance of inference,
                         backpropagation needs a batch of examples instead of one at a time in order to
                         train well.
                             Looking at an MLP in Figure 7.7, a batch can be seen as a sequence of input
                         row vectors, which you can think of as a matrix with a height dimension that
                         matches the batch size. A sequence of row vector inputs to the five matrix multi-
                         plies of LSTMs in Figure 7.11 can also be considered a matrix. In both cases, com-
                         puting them as matrices instead of sequentially as independent vectors improves
                         computing efficiency.

                         Quantization
                         Numerical precision is less important for DNNs than for many applications. For
                         example, there is no need for double-precision floating-point arithmetic, which
                         is the standard bearer of high-performance computing. It’s even unclear that
                         you need the full accuracy of the IEEE 754 floating-point standard, which aims
                         to be accurate within one-half of a unit in the last place of the floating-point
                         significand.
                             To take advantage of the flexibility in numerical precision, some devel-
                         opers use fixed point instead of floating point for the inference phase. (Train-
                         ing is almost always done in floating-point arithmetic.) This conversion is
                         called quantization, and such a transformed application is said to be quantized
                         (Vanhoucke et al., 2011). The fixed-point data width is usually 8 or 16 bits,
                         with the standard multiply-add operation accumulating at twice the width
                         of the multiplies. This transformation typically occurs after training, and
                         it can reduce DNN accuracy by a few percentage points (Bhattacharya and
                         Lane, 2016).

                         Summary of DNNs
                         Even this quick overview suggests that DSAs for DNNs will need to perform at
                         least these matrix-oriented operations well: vector-matrix multiply, matrix-matrix
                         multiply, and stencil computations. They will also need support for the nonlinear
                         functions, which include at a minimum ReLU, Sigmoid, and tanh. These modest
                         requirements still leave open a very large design space, which the next four
                         sections explore.

                  7.4         Google’s Tensor Processing Unit, an Inference Data
                              Center Accelerator
                              The Tensor Processing Unit (TPU)1 is Google’s first custom ASIC DSA for WSCs.
                              Its domain is the inference phase of DNNs, and it is programmed using the Tensor-
                              Flow framework, which was designed for DNNs. The first TPU was been deployed
                              in Google data centers in 2015.
                                   The heart of the TPU is a 65,536 (256 ? 256) 8-bit ALU Matrix Multiply Unit
                              and a large software-managed on-chip memory. The TPU’s single-threaded, deter-
                              ministic execution model is a good match to the 99th-percentile response-time
                              requirement of the typical DNN inference application.

                              TPU Origin
                              Starting as far back as 2006, Google engineers had discussions about deploying
                              GPUs, FPGAs, or custom ASICs in their data centers. They concluded that the
                              few applications that could run on special hardware could be done virtually for free
                              using the excess capacity of the large data centers, and it’s hard to improve on free.
                              The conversation changed in 2013 when it was projected that if people used voice
                              search for three minutes a day using speech recognition DNNs, it would have
                              required Google’s data centers to double in order to meet computation demands.
                              That would be very expensive to satisfy with conventional CPUs. Google then
                              started a high-priority project to quickly produce a custom ASIC for inference
                              (and bought off-the-shelf GPUs for training). The goal was to improve cost-
                              performance by 10 ? over GPUs. Given this mandate, the TPU was designed, ver-
                              ified (Steinberg, 2015), built, and deployed in data centers in just 15 months.

                              TPU Architecture
                              To reduce the chances of delaying deployment, the TPU was designed to be a
                              coprocessor on the PCIe I/O bus, which allows it to be plugged into existing
                              servers. Moreover, to simplify hardware design and debugging, the host server
                              sends instructions over the PCIe bus directly to the TPU for it to execute, rather
                              than having the TPU fetch the instructions. Thus the TPU is closer in spirit to
                              an FPU (floating-point unit) coprocessor than it is to a GPU, which fetches instruc-
                              tions from its memory.
                                  Figure 7.12 shows the block diagram of the TPU. The host CPU sends TPU
                              instructions over the PCIe bus into an instruction buffer. The internal blocks are
                              typically connected together by 256-byte-wide (2048-bits) paths. Starting in the
                              upper-right corner, the Matrix Multiply Unit is the heart of the TPU. It contains

1
 This section is based on the paper “In-Datacenter Performance Analysis of a Tensor Processing Unit” Jouppi et al., 2017,
of which one of your book authors was a coauthor.

                                                                              DDR3 DRAM chips
                                                                                          30 GiB/s
                                                              14 GiB/s                               30 GiB/s
                                                                                   DDR3-2133                     Weight FIFO
                                                                                    interfaces                  (weight fetcher)

                                                           Control                                   Control             30 GiB/s
                PCIe Gen3 x16

                                                             10             Unified                   167        Matrix multiply
                  interface

                                                            GiB/s           buffer        Systolic    GiB/s           unit
                                          Host interface

       14                        14                                                                              (64K per cycle)
                                                                             (local        data
      GiB/s                     GiB/s
                                                                          activation       setup
                                                                           storage)

                                                           Control                                               Accumulators

                                                                                                                   Activation
                                                             Instr

                                                                                         167 GiB/s
                                                                                                                Normalize / Pool

               Off-chip I/O
               Data buffer
                                                                         Control                     Control
               Computation
               Control

Figure 7.12 TPU Block Diagram. The PCIe bus is Gen3 ?16. The main computation part is the light-shaded Matrix
Multiply Unit in the upper-right corner. Its inputs are the medium-shaded Weight FIFO and the medium-shaded Uni-
fied Buffer and its output is the medium-shaded Accumulators. The light-shaded Activation Unit performs the non-
linear functions on the Accumulators, which go to the Unified Buffer.

                                        256 ? 256 ALUs that can perform 8-bit multiply-and-adds on signed or unsigned
                                        integers. The 16-bit products are collected in the 4 MiB of 32-bit Accumulators
                                        below the matrix unit. When using a mix of 8-bit weights and 16-bit activations
                                        (or vice versa), the Matrix Unit computes at half-speed, and it computes at a
                                        quarter-speed when both are 16 bits. It reads and writes 256 values per clock cycle
                                        and can perform either a matrix multiply or a convolution. The nonlinear functions
                                        are calculated by the Activation hardware.
                                            The weights for the matrix unit are staged through an on-chip Weight FIFO that
                                        reads from an off-chip 8 GiB DRAM called Weight Memory (for inference,
                                        weights are read-only; 8 GiB supports many simultaneously active models).
                                        The intermediate results are held in the 24 MiB on-chip Unified Buffer, which
                                        can serve as inputs to the Matrix Multiply Unit. A programmable DMA controller
                                        transfers data to or from CPU Host memory and the Unified Buffer.

       TPU Instruction Set Architecture
       As instructions are sent over the relatively slow PCIe bus, TPU instructions follow
       the CISC tradition, including a repeat field. The TPU does not have a program
       counter, and it has no branch instructions; instructions are sent from the host
       CPU. The clock cycles per instruction (CPI) of these CISC instructions are typi-
       cally 10–20. It has about a dozen instructions overall, but these five are the key
       ones:

       1. Read_Host_Memory reads data from the CPU host memory into the
          Unified Buffer.
       2. Read_Weights reads weights from Weight Memory into the Weight FIFO as
          input to the Matrix Unit.
       3. MatrixMultiply/Convolve causes the Matrix Multiply Unit to perform a
          matrix-matrix multiply, a vector-matrix multiply, an element-wise matrix multi-
          ply, an element-wise vector multiply, or a convolution from the Unified Buffer
          into the Accumulators. A matrix operation takes a variable-sized B*256 input,
          multiplies it by a 256 ? 256 constant input, and produces a B*256 output, taking
          B pipelined cycles to complete. For example, if the input were 4 vectors of 256
          elements, B would be 4, so it would take 4 clock cycles to complete.
       4. Activate performs the nonlinear function of the artificial neuron, with
          options for ReLU, Sigmoid, tanh, and so on. Its inputs are the Accumulators,
          and its output is the Unified Buffer.
       5. Write_Host_Memory writes data from the Unified Buffer into the CPU host
          memory.

       The other instructions are alternate host memory read/write, set configuration, two
       versions of synchronization, interrupt host, debug-tag, nop, and halt. The CISC
       MatrixMultiply instruction is 12 bytes, of which 3 are Unified Buffer address; 2
       are accumulator address; 4 are length (sometimes 2 dimensions for convolutions);
       and the rest are opcode and flags.
           The goal is to run whole inference models in the TPU to reduce interactions
       with the host CPU and to be flexible enough to match the DNN needs of 2015
       and beyond, instead of just what was required for 2013 DNNs.

       TPU Microarchitecture
       The microarchitecture philosophy of the TPU is to keep the Matrix Multiply Unit
       busy. The plan is to hide the execution of the other instructions by overlapping their
       execution with the MatrixMultiply instruction. Thus each of the preceding
       four general categories of instructions have separate execution hardware (with read
       and write host memory combined into the same unit). To increase instruction par-
       allelism further, the Read_Weights instruction follows the decoupled access/

                         execute philosophy (Smith, 1982b) in that they can complete after sending their
                         addresses but before the weights are fetched from Weight Memory. The matrix unit
                         has not-ready signals from the Unified Buffer and the Weight FIFO that will cause
                         the matrix unit to stall if their data are not yet available.
                             Note that a TPU instruction can execute for many clock cycles, unlike the
                         traditional RISC pipeline with one clock cycle per stage.
                             Because reading a large SRAM is much more expensive than arithmetic,
                         the Matrix Multiply Unit uses systolic execution to save energy by reducing
                         reads and writes of the Unified Buffer (Kung and Leiserson, 1980;
                         Ramacher et al., 1991; Ovtcharov et al., 2015b). A systolic array is a two-
                         dimensional collection of arithmetic units that each independently compute a
                         partial result as a function of inputs from other arithmetic units that are con-
                         sidered upstream to each unit. It relies on data from different directions arriv-
                         ing at cells in an array at regular intervals where they are combined. Because
                         the data flows through the array as an advancing wave front, it is similar to
                         blood being pumped through the human circulatory system by the heart, which
                         is the origin of the systolic name.
                             Figure 7.13 demonstrates how a systolic array works. The six circles at the bot-
                         tom are the multiply-accumulate units that are initialized with the weights wi. The
                         staggered input data xi are shown coming into the array from above. The 10 steps of
                         the figure represent 10 clock cycles moving down from top to bottom of the page.
                         The systolic array passes the inputs down and the products and sums to the right.
                         The desired sum of products emerges as the data completes its path through the
                         systolic array. Note that in a systolic array, the input data is read only once from
                         memory, and the output data is written only once to memory.
                             In the TPU, the systolic array is rotated. Figure 7.14 shows that the weights are
                         loaded from the top and the input data flows into the array in from the left. A given
                         256-element multiply-accumulate operation moves through the matrix as a diag-
                         onal wave front. The weights are preloaded and take effect with the advancing
                         wave alongside the first data of a new block. Control and data are pipelined to give
                         the illusion that the 256 inputs are read at once, and after a feed delay, they update
                         one location of each of 256 accumulator memories. From a correctness perspec-
                         tive, software is unaware of the systolic nature of the matrix unit, but for perfor-
                         mance, it does worry about the latency of the unit.

                         TPU Implementation
                         The TPU chip was fabricated using the 28-nm process. The clock rate is 700 MHz.
                         Figure 7.15 shows the floor plan of the TPU. Although the exact die size is not
                         revealed, it is less than half the size of an Intel Haswell server microprocessor,
                         which is 662 mm2.
                             The 24 MiB Unified Buffer is almost a third of the die, and the Matrix Multiply
                         Unit is a quarter, so the datapath is nearly two-thirds of the die. The 24 MiB size
                         was picked in part to match the pitch of the Matrix Unit on the die and, given the
                                   X3                                  X3

                                                             W12
                             X2                    W11                 W13
                                                             X2

                                                   W21
                   X1                                        W22       W23
                                                   X1

                   W11       W12   W13
                                                  (E)

                   W21       W22   W23                                 X3
                                                                        *
                 (A)                                         W12
                                                   W11                 W13

                                                                   +
                                                             X2
                                   X3
                                                   W21
                                                             W22       W23

                                                         +
                                                   X1
                             X2
                                                  (F)
                   X1
                    *                                              W13
                                                   W11       W12
                   W11       W12   W13                             X3

                                                             W22
                                                   W21             W23
                   W21       W22   W23                       X2

                                                  (G)
                  (B)
                                   X3                              W13
                                                   W11       W12             y1 = w11x1 + w12x2 + w13x3
                                                                   X3
                             X2                              W22
                                                   W21             W23
                                                                   +

                                                             X2
                   W11
                             W12   W13            (H)
                   X1

                   W21       W22   W23
                                                   W11       W12   W13       y1 = w11x1 + w12x2 + w13x3
                  (C)
                                                                   W23
                                   X3              W21       W22
                                                                   X3

                                                  (I)
                             X2
                              *
                   W11                                                       y1 = w11x1 + w12x2 + w13x3
                             W12   W13             W11       W12   W13
                         +

                   X1

                                                                   W23
                   W21       W22   W23             W21       W22             y2 = w21x1 + w22x2 + w23x3
                                                                   X3

                  (D)                             (J)

Figure 7.13 Example of systolic array in action, from top to bottom on the page. In this example, the six weights
are already inside the multiply-accumulate units, as is the norm for the TPU. The three inputs are staggered in time to
get the desired effect, and in this example are shown coming in from the top. (In the TPU, the data actually comes in
from the left.) The array passes the data down to the next element and the result of the computation to the right to
the next element. At the end of the process, the sum of products is found to the right. Drawings courtesy of Yaz Sato.

                                  Control

                                                                                          Data

                                              ...
                                                                                     Partial sums

                                                                  +         +         +             +

                                                                                           ...             Done

Figure 7.14 Systolic data flow of the Matrix Multiply Unit.

                                            Local Unified Buffer for
                                                                                   Matrix multiply unit
                                                  activations
                                                                                (256x256x8b = 64K MAC)
                                            (96Kx256x8b = 24 MiB)
                                                                                          24%
                                                 29% of chip

                                         D              Host               Accumulators              D
                                         R           Interf. 2%       (4Kx256x32b = 4 MiB) 6%        R
                                         A                                                           A
                                         M                                                           M
                                       port         Control 2%        Activation pipeline 6%        port
                                       ddr3                                                         ddr3
                                        3%                PCle                                      3%
                                                      Interface 3%                Misc. I/O 1%

Figure 7.15 Floor plan of TPU die. The shading follows Figure 7.14. The light data
                         buffers are 37%, the light computation units are 30%, the medium I/O is 10%, and
                         the dark control is just 2% of the die. Control is much larger (and much more difficult
                         to design) in a CPU or GPU. The unused white space is a consequence of the emphasis
                         on time to tape-out for the TPU.

Figure 7.16 TPU printed circuit board. It can be inserted into the slot for an SATA disk
       in a server, but the card uses the PCIe bus.

       short development schedule, in part to simplify the compiler. Control is just 2%.
       Figure 7.16 shows the TPU on its printed circuit card, which inserts into existing
       servers in a SATA disk slot.

       TPU Software
       The TPU software stack had to be compatible with that developed for CPUs and
       GPUs so that applications could be ported quickly. The portion of the application
       run on the TPU is typically written using TensorFlow and is compiled into an API
       that can run on GPUs or TPUs (Larabel, 2016). Figure 7.17 shows TensorFlow
       code for a portion of an MLP.
            Like GPUs, the TPU stack is split into a User Space Driver and a Kernel
       Driver. The Kernel Driver is lightweight and handles only memory management
       and interrupts. It is designed for long-term stability. The User Space driver
       changes frequently. It sets up and controls TPU execution, reformats data into
       TPU order, and translates API calls into TPU instructions and turns them into
       an application binary. The User Space driver compiles a model the first time
       it is evaluated, caching the program image and writing the weight image into
       the TPU Weight Memory; the second and following evaluations run at full speed.
       The TPU runs most models completely from inputs to outputs, maximizing the
       ratio of TPU compute time to I/O time. Computation is often done one layer at a
       time, with overlapped execution allowing the matrix unit to hide most noncritical
       path operations.

      # Network Parameters
      n_hidden_1 = 256 # 1st layer number of features
      n_hidden_2 = 256 # 2nd layer number of features
      n_input = 784 # MNIST data input (img shape: 28*28)
      n_classes = 10 # MNIST total classes (0-9 digits)

      # tf Graph input
      x = tf.placeholder("float", [None, n_input])
      y = tf.placeholder("float", [None, n_classes])

      # Create model
      def multilayer_perceptron(x, weights, biases):
          # Hidden layer with ReLU activation
          layer_1 = tf.add(tf.matmul(x, weights[’h1’]), biases[’b1’])
          layer_1 = tf.nn.relu(layer_1)
          # Hidden layer with ReLU activation
          layer_2 = tf.add(tf.matmul(layer_1, weights[’h2’]), biases[’b2’])
          layer_2 = tf.nn.relu(layer_2)
          # Output layer with linear activation
          out_layer = tf.matmul(layer_2, weights[’out’]) + biases[’out’]
          return out_layer

      # Store layers weight & bias
      weights = {
          ’h1’: tf.Variable(tf.random_normal([n_input, n_hidden_1])),
          ’h2’: tf.Variable(tf.random_normal([n_hidden_1, n_hidden_2])),
          ’out’: tf.Variable(tf.random_normal([n_hidden_2, n_classes]))
      }
      biases = {
          ’b1’: tf.Variable(tf.random_normal([n_hidden_1])),
          ’b2’: tf.Variable(tf.random_normal([n_hidden_2])),
          ’out’: tf.Variable(tf.random_normal([n_classes]))
      }

Figure 7.17 Portion of the TensorFlow program for the MNIST MLP. It has two hidden 256 ? 256 layers, with each
layer using a ReLU as its nonlinear function.

                           Improving the TPU
                           The TPU architects looked at variations of the microarchitecture to see whether
                           they could have improved the TPU.
                               Like an FPU, the TPU coprocessor has a relatively easy microarchitecture
                           to evaluate, so the TPU architects created a performance model and estimated
                           performance as the memory bandwidth, the matrix unit size, and the clock rate
                           and number of accumulators varied. Measurements using TPU hardware coun-
                           ters found that the modeled performance was on average within 8% of the
                           hardware.

                                             3.5                                                          memory

          Performance relative to original
                                             3.0                                                          clock+
                                                                                                          clock
                                             2.5
                                                                                                          matrix+
                                             2.0                                                          matrix

                      MPU
                                             1.5

                                             1.0

                                             0.5

                                             0.0
                                                0.0   0.5   1.0    1.5    2.0    2.5    3.0   3.5   4.0
                                                            Scale relative to original MPU

Figure 7.18 Performance as metrics scale from 0.25 × to 4 ×: memory bandwidth,
       clock rate + accumulators, clock rate, matrix unit dimension + accumulators, and
       one dimension of the square matrix unit This is the average performance calculated
       from six DNN applications in Section 7.9. The CNNs tend to be computation-bound, but
       the MLPs and LSTMs are memory-bound. Most applications benefit from a faster mem-
       ory, but a faster clock makes little difference, and a bigger matrix unit actually hurts per-
       formance. This performance model is only for code running inside the TPU and does not
       factor in the CPU host overhead.

            Figure 7.18 shows the performance sensitivity of the TPU as these parameters
       scale over the range for 0.25 ? to 4 ?. (Section 7.9 lists the benchmarks used.) In
       addition to evaluating the impact of only raising clock rates (clock in Figure 7.18),
       Figure 7.18 also plots a design (clock+) that increases the clock rate and scales the
       number of accumulators correspondingly so that the compiler can keep more mem-
       ory references in flight. Likewise, Figure 7.18 plots matrix unit expansion if the
       number of accumulators increase with the square of the rise in one dimension
       (matrix+), because the matrix grows in both dimensions, as well as only increasing
       the matrix unit (matrix).
            First, increasing memory bandwidth (memory) has the biggest impact: perfor-
       mance improves 3 ? on average when memory bandwidth increases 4 ?, because it
       reduces the time waiting for weight memory. Second, clock rate has little benefit on
       average with or without more accumulators. Third, the average performance in
       Figure 7.18 slightly degrades when the matrix unit expands from 256 ? 256 to
       512 ? 512 for all applications, whether or not they get more accumulators. The
       issue is analogous to internal fragmentation of large pages, only worse because
       it’s in two dimensions.
            Consider the 600 ? 600 matrix used in LSTM1. With a 256 ? 256 matrix unit,
       it takes nine steps to tile 600 ? 600, for a total of 18 μs of time. The larger
       512 ? 512 unit requires only four steps, but each step takes four times longer,
       or 32 μs of time. The TPU’s CISC instructions are long, so decode is insignificant
       and does not hide the overhead of loading from the DRAM.

                              Given these insights from the performance model, the TPU architects next
                         evaluated an alternative and hypothetical TPU that they might have designed
                         in the same process technology if they’d had more than 15 months to do so. More
                         aggressive logic synthesis and block design might have increased the clock rate
                         by 50%. The architects found that designing an interface circuit for GDDR5
                         memory, as used by the K80, would improve Weight Memory bandwidth by
                         more than a factor of five. As Figure 7.18 shows, increasing clock rate to
                         1050 MHz, but not helping memory, made almost no change in performance.
                         If the clock is left at 700 MHz, but it uses GDDR5 instead for Weight Memory,
                         performance is increased by 3.2 ?, even accounting for the host CPU overhead of
                         invoking the DNN on the revised TPU. Doing both does not improve average
                         performance further.

                         Summary: How TPU Follows the Guidelines
                         Despite living on an I/O bus and having relatively little memory bandwidth that
                         limits full utilization of the TPU, a small fraction of a big number can, nonetheless,
                         be relatively large. As we will see in Section 7.9, the TPU delivered on its goal of a
                         tenfold improvement in cost-performance over the GPU when running DNN infer-
                         ence applications. Moreover, a redesigned TPU with the only change being a
                         switch to the same memory technology as in the GPU would be three times faster.
                             One way to explain the TPU’s success is to see how it followed the guidelines
                         in Section 7.2.

                         1. Use dedicated memories to minimize the distance over which data is moved.
                            The TPU has the 24 MiB Unified Buffer that holds the intermediate matrices and
                            vectors of MLPs and LSTMs and the feature maps of CNNs. It is optimized for
                            accesses of 256 bytes at a time. It also has the 4 MiB Accumulators, each 32-bits
                            wide, that collect the output of the Matrix Unit and act as input to the hardware
                            that calculates the nonlinear functions. The 8-bit weights are stored in a separate
                            off-chip weight memory DRAM and are accessed via an on-chip weight FIFO. In
                            contrast, all these types and sizes of data would exist in redundant copies at sev-
                            eral levels of the inclusive memory hierarchy of a general-purpose CPU.
                         2. Invest the resources saved from dropping advanced microarchitectural optimi-
                            zations into more arithmetic units or bigger memories.
                            The TPU offers 28 MiB of dedicated memory and 65,536 8-bit ALUs, which
                            means it has about 60% of the memory and 250 times as many ALUs as a
                            server-class CPU, despite being half its size and power (see Section 7.9). Com-
                            pared to a server-class GPU, the TPU has 3.5 times the on-chip memory and 25
                            times as many ALUs.
                         3. Use the easiest form of parallelism that matches the domain.
                            The TPU delivers its performance via a two-dimensional SIMD parallelism
                            with its 256 ? 256 Matrix Multiply Unit, which is internally pipelined with a
                            systolic organization, plus a simple overlapped execution pipeline of its

          instructions. GPUs rely instead on multiprocessing, multithreading, and one-
          dimensional SIMD, and CPUs rely on multiprocessing, out-of-order execution,
          and one-dimensional SIMD.
      4. Reduce data size and type to the simplest needed for the domain.
         The TPU computes primarily on 8-bit integers, although it supports 16-bit
         integers and accumulates in 32-bit integers. CPUs and GPUs also support
         64-bit integers and 32-bit and 64-bit floating point.
      5. Use a domain-specific programming language to port code to the DSA.
         The TPU is programmed using the TensorFlow programming framework,
         whereas GPUs rely on CUDA and OpenCL and CPUs must run virtually
         everything.

7.5   Microsoft Catapult, a Flexible Data Center Accelerator
      At the same time that Google was thinking about deploying a custom ASIC in its
      data centers, Microsoft was considering accelerators for theirs. The Microsoft
      perspective was that any solution had to follow these guidelines:

      ■   It had to preserve homogeneity of servers to enable rapid redeployment of
          machines and to avoid making maintenance and scheduling even more com-
          plicated, even if that notion is a bit at odds with the concept of DSAs.
      ■   It had to scale to applications that might need more resources than could fit into
          a single accelerator without burdening all applications with multiple
          accelerators.
      ■   It needed to be power-efficient.
      ■   It couldn’t become a dependability problem by being a single point of failure.
      ■   It had to fit within the available spare space and power in existing servers.
      ■   It could not hurt data center network performance or reliability.
      ■   The accelerator had to improve the cost-performance of the server.

      The first rule prevented deploying an ASIC that helped only some applications on
      some servers, which was the decision that Google made.
           Microsoft started a project called Catapult that placed an FPGA on a PCIe bus
      board into data center servers. These boards have a dedicated network for appli-
      cations that need more than one FPGA. The plan was to use the flexibility of
      the FPGA to tailor its use for varying applications both on different servers and
      to reprogram the same server to accelerate distinct applications over time. This plan
      increased the return on its investment of the accelerator. Another advantage of
      FPGAs is that they should have lower NRE than ASICs, which could again
      improve return on investment. We discuss two generations of Catapult, showing
      how the design evolved to meet the needs of WSCs.

                             One interesting upside of FPGAs is that each application—or even each phase
                         of an application—can be thought of as its own DSA, so in this section, we get to
                         see many examples of novel architectures in one hardware platform.

                         Catapult Implementation and Architecture
                         Figure 7.19 shows a PCIe board that Microsoft designed to fit within its
                         servers, which limited power and cooling to 25 W. This constraint led to
                         the selection of the 28-nm Altera Stratix V D5 FPGA for its first implemen-
                         tation of Catapult. The board also has 32 MiB of flash memory and includes
                         two banks of DDR3-1600 DRAM with a total capacity of 8 GiB. The FPGA
                         has 3926 18-bit ALUs, 5 MiB of on-chip memory, and 11 GB/s bandwidth to
                         DDR3 DRAMs.

Figure 7.19 The Catapult board design. (A) shows the block diagram, and (B) is a pho-
                         tograph of both sides of the board, which is 10 cm ? 9 cm ? 16 mm. The PCIe and inter-
                         FPGA network are wired to a connector on the bottom of the board that plugs directly
                         into the motherboard. (C) is a photograph of the server, which is 1U (4.45 cm) high and
                         half a standard rack wide. Each server has two 12-core Intel Sandy Bridge Xeon CPUs, 64
                         GiB of DRAM, 2 solid-state drives, 4 hard-disk drives, and a 10-Gbit Ethernet network
                         card. The highlighted rectangle on the right in (C) shows the location of the Catapult
                         FPGA board on the server. The cool air is sucked in from the left in (C), and the hot
                         air exhausts to the right, which passes over the Catapult board. This hot spot and
                         the amount of the power that the connector could deliver mean that the Catapult board
                         is limited to 25 watts. Forty-eight servers share an Ethernet switch that connects to the
                         data center network, and they occupy half of a data center rack.

     Each of the 48 servers in half of a data center rack contains a Catapult board.
Catapult follows the preceding guidelines about supporting applications that need
more than a single FPGA without affecting the performance of the data center net-
work. It adds a separate low-latency 20 Gbit/s network that connects 48 FPGAs.
The network topology is a two-dimensional 6 ? 8 torus network.
     To follow the guideline about not being a single point of failure, this network
can be reconfigured to operate even if one of the FPGAs fails. The board also has
SECDED protection on all memories outside the FPGA, which is required for
large-scale deployment in a data center.
     Because FPGAs use a great deal of memory on the chip to deliver programma-
bility, they are more vulnerable than ASICs to single-event upsets (SEUs) because
of radiation as the process geometries shrink. The Altera FPGA in Catapult boards
includes mechanisms to detect and correct SEUs inside the FPGA and reduces the
chances of SEUs by periodically scrubbing the FPGA configuration state.
     The separate network has an added benefit of reducing the variability of com-
munication performance as compared to a data center network. Network unpredict-
ability increases tail latency—which is especially detrimental for applications that
face end users—so a separate network makes it easier to successfully offload work
from the CPU to the accelerator. This FPGA network can run a much simpler pro-
tocol than in the data center because the error rates are considerably lower and the
network topology is well defined.
     Note that resiliency requires care when reconfiguring FPGAs so that they nei-
ther appear as failed nodes nor crash the host server or corrupt their neighbors.
Microsoft developed a high-level protocol for ensuring safety when reconfiguring
one or more FPGAs.

Catapult Software
Possibly the biggest difference between Catapult and the TPU is having to program
in a hardware-description language such as Verilog or VHDL. As the Catapult
authors write (Putnam et al., 2016):
Going forward, the biggest obstacle to widespread adoption of FPGAs in the
datacenter is likely to be programmability. FPGA development still requires
extensive hand-coding in Register Transfer Level and manual tuning.
To reduce the burden of programming Catapult FPGAs, the Register Transfer Level
(RTL) code is divided into the shell and the role, as Figure 7.20 shows. The shell
code is like the system library on an embedded CPU. It contains the RTL code that
will be reused across applications on the same FPGA board, such as data marshaling,
CPU-to-FPGA communication, FPGA-to-FPGA communication, data movement,
reconfiguration, and health monitoring. The shell RTL code is 23% of the Altera
FPGA. The role code is the application logic, which the Catapult programmer writes
using the remaining 77% of the FPGA resources. Having a shell has the added
benefit of offering a standard API and standard behavior across applications.

                                                4 GB DDR3-1333        4 GB DDR3-1333
                                                 ECC SO-DIMM           ECC SO-DIMM
                                                          72                   72

                                     Shell
                                                    DDR3 Core 0         DDR3 Core 1

                                                                                                           256 Mb
                                                                                            Config     4    QSPI
                                                                                             Flash
                                                Role                                                       Config
                                                                                            (RSU)
                                                                                                            Flash
                                                                                             JTAG

                         Host    8   x8 PCIe                                                 LEDs
                         CPU          Core                     Application
                                                                                             Temp
                                                                                            Sensors
                                       DMA
                                      Engine                                                  I2C

                                                                                              xcvr
                                                                                            reconfig
                                                         Inter-FPGA Router
                                                                                             SEU
                                                North     South        East         West
                                                SLIII     SLIII        SLIII        SLIII

                                                2          2           2            2

Figure 7.20 Components of Catapult shell and role split of the RTL code.

                         CNNs on Catapult
                         Microsoft developed a configurable CNN accelerator as an application for
                         Catapult. Configuration parameters include the number of neural network
                         layers, the dimension of those layers, and even the numerical precision to be
                         used. Figure 7.21 shows the block diagram of the CNN accelerator. Its key
                         features are:

                         ■   Run-time configurable design, without requiring recompilation using the
                             FPGA tools.
                         ■   To minimize memory accesses, it offers efficient buffering of CNN data struc-
                             tures (see Figure 7.21).
                         ■   A two-dimensional array of Processing Elements (PEs) that can scale up to
                             thousands of units.

                                                                                         Output volume
                                                                                          z

             Top
                                                    Data re-distribution                                  x
           controller

                                                                Output        Output                   Output      Output
                         Layer                                 feature       feature    y             feature     feature
                        config.                                  map           map                      map         map
                                        Layer

                                                                                         •
                                                                                         •
                                                                                         •
                                      controller              Input         Input                    Input       Input
                                                             kernel        kernel                   kernel      kernel
                                                             weight        weight                   weight      weight
                                                     Address    0             1                       M-2         M-1
                                                    generation                         Scan chain
                                        Input
                                       volume                      PE       PE                       PE          PE
    z                                 Segment 0
        Input volume                                  Broad-cast
                            x           Input
                                       volume                      PE       PE                       PE          PE
                                      Segment 1

             •
             •                            •                                             • •
             •                            •                                              •
                                          •                                             • •

                                        Input
                                       volume                      PE       PE                       PE          PE
                                     Segment N-2

    y
                                        Input
                                       volume                      PE       PE                       PE          PE
                                     Segment N-1

Figure 7.21 CNN Accelerator for Catapult. The Input Volume of the left correspond to Layer[i?1] on the left of
Figure 7.20, with NumFM[i?1] corresponding to y and DimFM[i?1] corresponding to z. Output Volume at the top
maps to Layer[i], with z mapping to NumFM[i] and DimFM[i] mapping to x. The next figure shows the inside of
the Processing Element (PE).

                                  Images are sent to DRAM and then input into a multibank buffer in the FPGA. The
                                  inputs are sent to multiple PEs to perform the stencil computations that produce the
                                  output feature maps. A controller (upper left in Figure 7.21) orchestrates the flow
                                  of data to each PE. The final results are then recirculated to the input buffers to
                                  compute the next layer of the CNN.
                                      Like the TPU, the PEs are designed to be used as a systolic array. Figure 7.22
                                  shows the details of the PE design.

                 PCle           DRAM

                Register
                interface      Umi Dram
                                Fetcher
                    Umi
                    command
                                          Single Layer
                Multi layer                                             IBW0    IBW1    IBW2                     IBWn

                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                            Control
                 control Umi command                                                             Kernel weights
                                                                                                  Buffer array

                                               IBD0                     FU0,0   FU0,0   FU0,0                    FU0,n

                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •

                                                                                                                         Functional unit array
                                               IBD0                     FU1,0   FU1,1   FU1,2                    FU1,n

                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                               IBD0                     FU2,0   FU2,1   FU2,2                    FU2,n

                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                                •                        •       •           •                     •
                                   •            •                        •       •           •                     •

                                                                                                     •
                                   •            •                        •       •           •                     •

                                                                                                      •
                                                                                                       •
                                   •

                                               IBD0                     FUn,0   FUn,1   FUn,2                    FUn,n

                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                        Input double
                                         Buffer array
                                                          Address       OB0     OB1     OB2                       OBn

                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                  Output buffer
                                                                                                     Array

                              Bias data load
                                                                        +b0     +b1         +b2                   +bn
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •

                                                                                                   Bias buffer
                                                                                                      Array
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •

                                                                          0       1          2                     n

                              Max pool command          Max pool                                   Activation
                                                         control                                 Function array

                                                                        MPE0    MPE1    MPE2                     MPEn
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                     •

                                                           Control
                                                                                                  Max pooling
                                                                                                    array
                                                            Shallow
                                                             FIFO
                                                                                        •
                                                                                        •
                                                                                        •

                                                             Array

                                                               Ring
                                                              Arbitor

Figure 7.22 The Processing Element (PE) of the CNN Accelerator for Catapult in Figure 7.21. The two-dimension
Functional Units (FU) consist of just an ALU and a few registers.

Search Acceleration on Catapult
The primary application to test the return on investment of Catapult was a critical func-
tion of the Microsoft Bing search engine called ranking. It ranks the order of the results
from a search. The output is a document score, which determines the position of the
document on the web page that is presented to the user. The algorithm has three stages:

1. Feature Extraction extracts thousands of interesting features from a document
   based on the search query, such as the frequency that the query phrase appears
   in a document.
2. Free-Form Expressions calculates thousands of combinations of features from
   the prior stage.
3. Machine-Learned Scoring uses machine-learning algorithms to evaluate the
   features from the first two stages to calculate a floating-point score of a docu-
   ment that is returned to the host search software.

The Catapult implementation of ranking produces identical results to equivalent
Bing software, even reproducing known bugs!
    Taking advantage of one of the preceding guidelines, the ranking function does
not have to fit within a single FPGA. Here is how the ranking stages are split across
eight FPGAs:

■   One FPGA does Feature Extraction.
■   Two FPGAs do Free-Form Expressions.
■   One FPGA does a compression stage that increases scoring engine efficiency.
■   Three FPGA do Machine-Learned Scoring.

The remaining FPGA is a spare used to tolerate faults. Using multiple FPGAs for
one application works well because of the dedicated FPGA network.
     Figure 7.23 shows the Feature Extraction stage organization. It uses 43 feature-
extraction state machines to compute in parallel 4500 features per document-
query pair.
     Next is the following Free-Form Expressions stage. Rather than implement the
functions directly in gates or in state machines, Microsoft developed a 60-core pro-
cessor that overcomes long-latency operations with multithreading. Unlike a GPU,
Microsoft’s processor does not require SIMD execution. It has three features that
let it match the latency target:

1. Each core supports four simultaneous threads where one can stall on a long
   operation but the others can continue. All functional units are pipelined, so they
   can accept a new operation every clock cycle.
2. Threads are statically prioritized using a priority encoder. Expressions with the
   longest latency use thread slot 0 on all cores, then the next slowest is in slot 1 on
   all cores, and so on.

                                           Hit vector
                                         preprocessing
                                             FSM

                                        Feature-
                                        gathering
                                         network

                                                                      Feature extraction FSMs

Figure 7.23 The architecture of FPGA implementation of the Feature Extraction
                         stage. A hit vector, which describes the locations of query words in each document,
                         is streamed into the hit vector preprocessing state machine and then split into control
                         and data tokens. These tokens are issued in parallel to the 43 unique feature state
                         machines. The feature-gathering network collects generated feature and value pairs
                         and forwards them to the following Free-Form Expressions stage.

                         3. Expressions that are too large to fit in the time allocated for a single FPGA can
                            be split across the two FPGAs used for free-form expressions.

                         One cost of the reprogrammability in an FPGA is a slower clock rate than custom
                         chips. Machine-Learned Scoring uses two forms of parallelism to try to overcome
                         that disadvantage. The first is to have a pipeline that matches the available pipeline
                         parallelism in the application. For ranking, the limit is 8 μs per stage. The second
                         version of parallelism is the rarely seen multiple instruction streams, single data
                         stream (MISD) parallelism, where a large number of independent instruction
                         streams operate in parallel on a single document.
                             Figure 7.24 shows the performance of the ranking function on Catapult. As we
                         will see in Section 7.9, user-facing applications often have rigid response times; it
                         doesn’t matter how high the throughput is if the application misses the deadline.
                         The x-axis shows the response-time limit, with 1.0 as the cutoff. At this maximum
                         latency, Catapult is 1.95 times as fast as the host Intel server.

                         Catapult Version 1 Deployment
                         Before populating a whole warehouse-scale computer with tens of thousands of
                         servers, Microsoft did a test deployment of 17 full racks, which contained
                         17 ? 48 ? 2 or 1632 Intel servers. The Catapult cards and network links were tested
                         at manufacture and system integration, but at deployment, seven of the 1632 cards
                         failed (0.43%), and one of the 3264 FPGA network links (0.03%) was defective.
                         After several months of deployment, nothing else failed.

                                                  95th percentile latency versus throughput
                                   5

         Throughput (normalized)
                                               FPGA
                                   4           Software
                                                                           95% more
                                   3
                                                                                   Throughput
                                   2

                                   1
                                                          29% lower latency
                                   0
                                       0               0.5             1               1.5          2
                                                  Latency (normalized to 95th percentile target)

Figure 7.24 Performance for the ranking function on Catapult for a given
latency bound. The x-axis shows the response time for the Bing ranking function.
The maximum response time at the 95th percentile for the Bing application on the
x-axis is 1.0, so data points to the right may have a higher throughput but arrive too
late to be useful. The y-axis shows the 95% throughputs on Catapult and pure software
for a given response time. At a normalized response time of 1.0, Catapult has 1.95 the
throughput of Intel server running in pure software mode. Stated alternatively, if Cat-
apult matches the throughput that the Intel server has at 1.0 normalized response time,
Catapult’s response time is 29% less.

Catapult Version 2
Although the test deployment was successful, Microsoft changed the architecture
for the real deployment to enable both Bing and Azure Networking to use the same
boards and architecture (Caulfield et al., 2016). The main problem with the V1
architecture was that the independent FPGA network did not enable the FPGA
to see and process standard Ethernet/IP packets, which prevented it from being
used to accelerate the data center network infrastructure. In addition, the cabling
was expensive and complicated, it was limited to 48 FPGAs, and the rerouting
of traffic during certain failure patterns reduced performance and could
isolate nodes.
     The solution was to place the FPGA logically between the CPU and NIC, so
that all network traffic goes through the FPGA. This “bump-on-a-wire” placement
removes many weaknesses of the FPGA network in Catapult V1. Moreover, it
enables the FPGAs to run their own low-latency network protocol that allows them
to be treated as a global pool of all the FPGAs in the data center and even across
data centers.
     Three changes occurred between V1 and V2 to overcome the original concerns
of Catapult applications interfering with data center network traffic. First, the data
center network was upgraded from 10 Gbit/s to 40 Gbit/s, increasing the headroom.
Second, Catapult V2 added a rate limiter for FPGA logic, ensuring that an FPGA
application could not overwhelm the network. The final and perhaps most

                         important change was that the networking engineers would now had their own use
                         cases for the FPGA, given its bump-in-the-wire placement. That placement trans-
                         formed these former interested bystanders into enthusiastic collaborators.
                              By deploying Catapult V2 in the majority of its new servers, Microsoft essen-
                         tially has a second supercomputer composed of distributed FPGAs that shares the
                         same network wires as the CPU servers and is at the same scale, as there is one
                         FPGA per server. Figures 7.25 and 7.26 show the block diagram and the board
                         for Catapult V2.
                              Catapult V2 follows the same shell and role split of the RTL to simplify pro-
                         gramming, but at the time of publication, the shell uses almost half of the FPGA
                         resources (44%) because of the more complicated network protocol that shares the
                         data center network wires.
                              Catapult V2 is used for both Ranking acceleration and function network accel-
                         eration. In Ranking acceleration, rather than perform nearly all of the ranking func-
                         tion inside the FPGA, Microsoft implemented only the most compute-intensive
                         portions and left the rest to the host CPU:

                         ■   The feature functional unit (FFU) is a collection of finite state machines that
                             measure standard features in search, such as counting the frequency of a par-
                             ticular search term. It is similar in concept to the Feature Extraction stage of
                             Catapult V1.

                                                        2-socket server blade

                                              DRAM                                           DRAM

                                               CPU             QPI                           CPU

                                              Gen3 x8                                  Gen3 2x8
                                                                   Accelerator card

                                                                                                    DRAM

                                                NIC                                     FPGA

                                                QSFP                                  QSFP   QSFP
                                                          40Gb/s                                    40Gb/s
                                                                                                             TOR

Figure 7.25 The Catapult V2 block diagram. All network traffic is routed through the
                         FPGA to the NIC. There is also a PCIe connector to the CPUs, which allows the FPGA to be
                         used as a local compute accelerator, as in Catapult V1.

                                                         40G QSFP Ports
                                                          (NIC and TOR)

                Stratix V
                D5 FPGA

                                                    4GB DDR3

Figure 7.26 The Catapult V2 board uses a PCIe slot. It uses the same FPGA as Catapult
V1 and has a TDP of 32 W. A 256-MB Flash chip holds the golden image for the FPGA that
is loaded at power on, as well as one application image.

■   The dynamic programming feature (DPF) creates a Microsoft proprietary set
    of features using dynamic programming and bears some similarity to the Free-
    Form Expressions stage of Catapult V1.

Both are designed so that they can use non-local FPGAs for these tasks, which
simplifies scheduling.
    Figure 7.27 shows the performance of Catapult V2 compared to software in
a format similar to Figure 7.24. The throughput can now be increased 2.25 ?
without endangering latency, whereas the speedup was previously 1.95 ?.
When ranking was deployed and measured in production, Catapult V2 had bet-
ter tail latencies than software; that is, the FPGA latencies never exceeded the
software latencies at any given demand despite being able to absorb twice the
workload.

Summary: How Catapult Follows the Guidelines
Microsoft reported that adding Catapult V1 to the servers in the pilot phase
increased the total cost of ownership (TCO) by less than 30%. Thus, for this appli-
cation, the net gain in cost-performance for Ranking was at least 1.95/1.30, or a
return on investment of about 1.5. Although no comment was made about TCO
concerning Catapult V2, the board has a similar number of the same type of chips,
so we might guess that the TCO is no higher. If so, the cost-performance of Cat-
apult V2 is about 2.25/1.30, or 1.75 for Ranking.
    Here is how Catapult followed the guidelines from Section 7.2.

                                                                  4
                                                                                                    FPGA         Software

                                        Throughput (normalized)
                                                                  3

                                                                  2

                                                                  1

                                                                  0
                                                                      0            0.5          1          1.5              2
                                                                          Latency (normalized to 99th percentile target)

Figure 7.27 Performance for the ranking function on Catapult V2 in the same format
                         as Figure 7.24. Note that this version measures 99th percentile while the earlier figure
                         plots 95th percentile.

                         1. Use dedicated memories to minimize the distance over which data is moved.
                            The Altera V FPGA has 5 MiB of memory on-chip, which an application can
                            customize for its use. For example, for CNNs, it is used for the input and output
                            feature maps of Figure 7.21.
                         2. Invest the resources saved from dropping advanced microarchitectural optimi-
                            zations into more arithmetic units or bigger memories.
                            The Altera V FPGA also has 3926 18-bit ALUs that are tailored to the appli-
                            cation. For CNNs, they are used to create the systolic array that drives the Pro-
                            cessing Elements in Figure 7.22, and they form the datapaths of the 60-core
                            multiprocessor used by Free Form Expression stage of ranking.
                         3. Use the easiest form of parallelism that matches the domain.
                            Catapult picks the form of parallelism that matches the application. For exam-
                            ple, Catapult uses two-dimensional SIMD parallelism for the CNN application
                            and MISD parallelism in the Machine Scoring phase stream Ranking.
                         4. Reduce data size and type to the simplest needed for the domain.
                            Catapult can use whatever size and type of data that the application wants, from
                            an 8-bit integer to a 64-bit floating point.
                         5. Use a domain-specific programming language to port code to the DSA.
                            In this case, programming is done in the hardware register-transfer language
                            (RTL) Verilog, which is an even less productive language than C or C++. Micro-
                            soft did not (and possibly could not) follow this guideline given its use of FPGAs.
                         Although this guideline concerns the one-time porting of an application from software
                         to FPGA, applications are not frozen in time. Almost by definition, software evolves to
                         add features or fix bugs, especially for something as important as web search.

            Maintenance of successful programs can be most of software’s development costs.
            Moreover, when programming in an RTL, software maintenance is even more burden-
            some. The Microsoft developers, like all others who use FPGAs as accelerators, hope
            that future advances in domain-specific languages and systems for hardware-software
            co-design will reduce the difficulty of programming FPGAs.

7.6         Intel Crest, a Data Center Accelerator for Training
            The quotation by the Intel CEO that opens Section 7.3 came from the press release
            announcing that Intel was going to start shipping DSAs (“accelerants”) for DNN. The
            first example was Crest, which was announced while we were writing this edition.
            Despite the limited details, we include it here because of the significance of a traditional
            microprocessor manufacturer like Intel taking this bold step of embracing DSAs.
                 Crest is aimed at DNN training. The Intel CEO said the goal is to accelerate
            DNN training a hundredfold over the next three years. Figure 7.6 shows that train-
            ing can take a month. There is likely to be a demand to decrease the DNN training
            to just eight hours, which would be 100 times quicker than the CEO predicted.
            DNNs will surely become even more complex over the next 3 years, which will
            require a much greater training effort. Thus there seems little danger that a
            100 ? improvement in training is overkill.
                 Crest instructions operate on blocks of 32 ? 32 matrices. Crest uses a number
            format called flex point, which is a scaled fixed-point representation: 32 ? 32 matri-
            ces of 16-bit data share a single 5-bit exponent that is provided as part of the
            instruction set.
                 Figure 7.28 shows the block diagram of the Lake Crest chip. To compute on these
            matrices, Crest uses the12 processing clusters of Figure 7.28. Each cluster includes a
            large SRAM, a big linear algebra processing unit, and a small amount of logic for on-
            and off-chip routing. The four 8 GiB HBM2 DRAM modules offer 1 TB/s of memory
            bandwidth, which should lead to an attractive Roofline model for the Crest chip. In
            addition to high-bandwidth paths to main memory, Lake Crest supports high band-
            width interconnects directly between compute cores inside the processing clusters,
            which facilitates quick core-to-core communication without passing through shared
            memory. Lake Crest’s goal is a factor of 10 improvement in training over GPUs.
                 Figure 7.28 shows 12 Inter-Chip Links (ICLs) and 2 Inter-Chip Controllers
            (ICCs), so Crest is clearly designed to allow many Crest chips to collaborate, sim-
            ilar in spirit to the dedicated network connecting the 48 FPGAs in Catapult. It’s
            likely that the 100 ? improvement in training will require ganging together several
            Crest chips.

7.7         Pixel Visual Core, a Personal Mobile Device Image
            Processing Unit
            Pixel Visual Core is a programmable, scalable DSA intended for image processing
            and computer vision from Google, initially for cell phones and tablets running the

      Interposer

                        ICL

                               ICL

                                     ICL

                                           ICL

                                                                    ICL

                                                                            ICL

                                                                                  ICL

                                                                                              ICL
                                                       ICC

                                      Processing    Processing      Processing
    8GB HBM2         HBM Mem            Cluster       Cluster         Cluster       Mem HBM               8GB HBM2
                     PHY Ctrlr                                                      Ctrlr PHY
                                      Processing    Processing      Processing
                                        Cluster       Cluster         Cluster
                     SPI, IC2,                                                            MGMT
                      GPIO                                                                 CPU
                                      Processing    Processing      Processing
                                        Cluster       Cluster         Cluster
                     HBM Mem                                                        Mem HBM
    8GB HBM2         PHY Ctrlr        Processing    Processing      Processing      Ctrlr PHY             8GB HBM2
                                        Cluster       Cluster         Cluster

                        PCle Controller & DMA        ICL

                                                             ICL

                                                                                        ICL

                                                                                                    ICL
                                                                          ICC
                          PCl Express ×16

Figure 7.28 Block diagram of the Intel Lake Crest processor. Before being acquired by Intel, Crest said that the chip
is almost a full reticle in TSMC 28 nm, which would make the die size 600–700 mm2. This chip should be available in
2017. Intel is also building Knights Crest, which is a hybrid chip containing Xeon x 86 cores and Crest accelerators.

                              Android operating system, and then potentially for Internet of Things (IoT)
                              devices. It is a multicore design, supporting between 2 and 16 cores to deliver a
                              desired cost-performance. It is designed either to be its own chip or to be part
                              of a system on a chip (SOC). It has a much smaller area and energy budget than
                              its TPU cousin. Figure 7.29 lists terms and acronyms found in this section.
                                  Pixel Visual Core is an example of a new class of domain specific architectures
                              for vision processing that we call image processing units (IPUs). IPUs solve the
                              inverse problem of GPUs: they analyze and modify an input image in contrast
                              to generating an output image. We call them IPUs to signal that, as a DSA, they
                              do not need to do everything well because there will also be CPUs (and GPUs) in
                              the system to perform non-input-vision tasks. IPUs rely on stencil computations
                              mentioned above for CNNs.
                                  The innovations of Pixel Visual Core include replacing the one-dimensional
                              SIMD unit of CPUs with a two-dimensional array of processing elements
                              (PEs). They provide a two-dimensional shifting network for the PEs that is aware
                              of the two-dimensional spatial relationship between the elements, and a two-
                              dimensional version of buffers that reduces accesses to off-chip memory. This
                              novel hardware makes it easy to perform stencil computations that are central to
                              both vision processing and CNN algorithms.

                              ISPs, the Hardwired Predecessors of IPUs
                              Most portable mobile devices (PMDs) have multiple cameras for input, which has
                              led to hardwired accelerators called image signal processors (ISPs) for enhancing

Term               Acronym         Short explanation
Core               –               A processor. Pixel Visual Core can have 2–16 cores. The first implementation has 8;
                                   also called stencil processor (STP)
Halide             –               A domain-specific programming language for image processing that separates the
                                   algorithm from its execution schedule
Halo               –               An extended region around the 16 ? 16 computation array to handle stencil computation
                                   near the borders of the array. It holds values, but doesn’t compute
Image signal       ISP             A fixed function ASIC that improves the visual quality of an image; found in virtually
processors                         all PMDs with cameras
Image processing   IPU             A DSA that solves the inverse problem of a GPU: it analyzes and modifies an input
unit                               image in contrast to generating an output image
Line buffer pool   LB              A line buffer is designed to capture a sufficient number of full lines of an intermediate image
                                   to keep the next stage busy. Pixel Visual Core uses two-dimensional line buffers, each
                                   Change 64 to 128 KiB. The Line Buffer Pool contains one LB per core plus one LB for DMA
Network on chip    NOC             The network that connects the cores in Pixel Visual Core
Physical ISA       pISA            The Pixel Visual Core instruction set architecture (ISA) that is executed by the hardware
Processing         –               The 16 ? 16 array of Processing Elements plus the halo that performs the 16-bit
element array                      multiply-add operations. Each Processing Element includes a Vector Lane and local
                                   memory. It can shift data en mass to neighbors in any of four directions
Sheet generator    SHG             Does memory accesses of blocks of 1 ? 1 to 31 ? 31 pixels, which are called sheets.
                                   The different sizes allow the option of including the space for the halo or not
Scalar lane        SCL             Same operations as the Vector Lane except it adds instructions that handle jumps,
                                   branches, and interrupts, controls instruction flow to the vector array, and schedules all
                                   the loads and stores for the sheet generator. It also has a small instruction memory. It
                                   plays the same role as the scalar processor in a vector architecture
Vector lane        VL              Portion of the Processing Element that performs the computer arithmetic
Virtual ISA        vISA            The Pixel Visual Core ISA generated by the compiler. It is mapped to pISA before execution

Figure 7.29 A handy guide to Pixel Visual Core terms in Section 7.7. Figure 7.4 on page 437 has a guide for
Sections 7.3–7.6.

                               input images. The ISP is usually a fixed function ASIC. Virtually every PMD today
                               includes an ISP.
                                   Figure 7.30 shows a typical organization of an image-processing system,
                               including the lens, sensor, ISP, CPU, DRAM, and display. The ISP receives
                               images, removes artifacts in images from the lens and the sensor, interpolates miss-
                               ing colors, and significantly improves the overall visual quality of the image.
                               PMDs tend to have small lens and thus tiny noisy pixels, so this step is critical
                               to producing high-quality photos and videos.
                                   An ISP processes the input image in raster scan order by calculating a series of
                               cascading algorithms via software configurable hardware building blocks, typi-
                               cally organized as a pipeline to minimize memory traffic. At each stage of the pipe-
                               line and for each clock cycle, a few pixels are input, and a few are output.
                               Computation is typically performed over small neighborhoods of pixels
                               (stencils). Stages are connected by buffers called line buffers. The line buffers help

                                                Sensor
                                     Lens    (CCD or CMOS)
                                                                         Image         Output
                                                                                       image
                                                               ISP                    (Display)

                                                                       Img &

                                                                                BUS
                                                                        Stats
                                        AF      AE     AWB                               DRAM

                                                              CPU

Figure 7.30 Diagram showing interconnection of the Image Signal Processor (ISP),
                         CPU, DRAM, lens, and sensor. The ISP sends statistics to the CPU as well as the
                         improved image either to the display or to DRAM for storage or later processing. The
                         CPU then processes the image statistics and sends information to let the system adapt:
                         Auto White Balance (AWB) to the ISP, Auto Exposure (AE) to the sensor, and Auto Focus
                         (AF) to the lens, known as the 3As.

                         keep the processing stages utilized via spatial locality by capturing just enough full
                         lines of an intermediate image to facilitate the computation required by the
                         next stage.
                             The enhanced image is either sent to a display or to DRAM for storage or for
                         later processing. The ISP also sends statistics about the image (e.g., color and luma
                         histograms, sharpness, and so on) to the CPU, which in turn it processes and sends
                         information to help the system adapt.
                             Although efficient, ISPs have two major downsides. Given the increasing
                         demand for improved image quality in handheld devices, the first is the inflexibil-
                         ity of an ISP, especially as it takes years to design and manufacture a new ISP
                         within an SOC. The second is that these computing resources can be used only
                         for the image-enhancing function, no matter what is needed at the time on the
                         PMD. Current generation ISPs handle workloads at up to 2 Tera-operations per
                         second on a PMD power budget, so a DSA replacement has to achieve similar per-
                         formance and efficiency.

                         Pixel Visual Core Software
                         Pixel Visual Core generalized the typical hardwired pipeline organization of ker-
                         nels of an ISP into a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of kernels. Pixel Visual Core
                         image-processing programs are typically written in Halide, which is a domain-
                         specific functional programming language for image processing. Figure 7.31 is
                         a Halide example that blurs an image. Halide has a functional section to express
                         the function being programmed and a separate schedule section to specify how
                         to optimize that function to the underlying hardware.

     Func buildBlur(Func input) {
             // Functional portion (independent of target processor)
           Func blur_x("blur_x"), blur_y("blur_y");
           blur_x(x,y) = (input(x?1,y) + input(x,y)*2 + input(x+1,y)) / 4;
           blur_y(x,y) = (blur_x(x,y?1) + blur_x(x,y)*2 + blur_x(x,y+1)) / 4;

            if (has_ipu) {
              // Schedule portion (directs how to optimize for target processor)
              blur_x.ipu(x,y);
              blur_y.ipu(x,y);
     }
            return blur_y;
     }

Figure 7.31 Portion of a Halide example to blur an image. The ipu(x,y) suffix schedules the function to Pixel
Visual Core. A blur has the effect of looking at the image through a translucent screen, which reduces noise and detail.
A Gaussian function is often used to blur the image.

                               Pixel Visual Core Architecture Philosophy
                               The power budget of PMDs is 6–8 W for bursts of 10–20 seconds, dropping down
                               to tens of milliwatts when the screen is off. Given the challenging energy goals of a
                               PMD chip, the Pixel Visual Core architecture was strongly shaped by the relative
                               energy costs for the primitive operations mentioned in Chapter 1 and made explicit
                               in Figure 7.32. Strikingly, a single 8-bit DRAM access takes as much energy as
                               12,500 8-bit additions or 7–100 8-bit SRAM accesses, depending on the organi-
                               zation of the SRAM. The 22 ? to 150 ? higher cost of IEEE 754 floating-point
                               operations over 8-bit integer operations, plus the die size and energy benefits of
                               storing narrower data, strongly favor using narrow integers whenever algorithms
                               can accommodate them.
                                    In addition to the guidelines from Section 7.2, these observations led to other
                               themes that guided the Pixel Visual Core design:

                               ■     Two-dimensional is better than one-dimensional: Two-dimensional organiza-
                                     tions can be beneficial for processing images as it minimizes communication
                                     distance and because the two- and three-dimensional nature of image data can
                                     utilize such organizations.
                               ■     Closer is better than farther: Moving data is expensive. Moreover, the relative
                                     cost of moving data to an ALU operation is increasing. And of course DRAM
                                     time and energy costs far exceed any local data storage or movement.

                               A primary goal in going from an ISP to an IPU is to get more reuse of the hardware
                               via programmability. Here are the three main features of the Pixel Visual Core:

 Operation                  Energy (pJ)     Operation            Energy (pJ)        Operation            Energy (pJ)
 8b DRAM LPDDR3                 125.00      8b SRAM                     1.2–17.1    16b SRAM                2.4–34.2
 32b Fl. Pt. muladd                2.70     8b int muladd                   0.12    16b int muladd              0.43
 32b Fl. Pt. add                   1.50     8b int add                      0.01    16b int add                 0.02

Figure 7.32 Relative energy costs per operation in picoJoules assuming TSMC 28-nm HPM process, which was
the process Pixel Visual Core used [17][18][19][20]. The absolute energy cost are less than in Figure 7.2 because of
using 28 nm instead of 90 nm, but the relative energy costs are similarly high.

                             1. Following the theme that two-dimensional is better than one-dimensional, Pixel
                                Visual Core uses a two-dimensional SIMD architecture instead of one-
                                dimensional SIMD architecture. Thus it has a two-dimensional array of indepen-
                                dent processing elements (PEs), each of which contains 2 16-bit ALUs, 1 16-bit
                                MAC unit, 10 16-bit registers, and 10 1-bit predicate registers. The 16-bit arith-
                                metic follows the guideline of providing only the precision needed by the domain.
                             2. Pixel Visual Core needs temporary storage at each PE. Following the guideline
                                from Section 7.2 of avoiding caches, this PE memory is a compiler-managed
                                scratchpad memory. The logical size of each PE memory is 128 entries of
                                16 bits, or just 256 bytes. Because it would be inefficient to implement a sep-
                                arate small SRAM in each PE, Pixel Visual Core instead groups the PE memory
                                of 8 PEs together in a single wide SRAM block. Because the PEs operate in
                                SIMD fashion, Pixel Visual Core can bind all the individual reads and writes
                                together to form a “squarer” SRAM, which is more efficient than narrow
                                and deep or wide and shallow SRAMs. Figure 7.33 shows four PEs.
                             3. To be able to perform simultaneous stencil computations in all PEs, Pixel Visual
                                Core needs to collect inputs from nearest neighbors. This communication pat-
                                tern requires a “NSEW” (North, South, East, West) shift network: it can shift
                                data en masse between the PEs in any compass direction. So that it doesn’t lose
                                pixels along the edges as it shifts images, Pixel Visual Core connects the end-
                                points of the network together to form a torus.

                             Note that the shift network is in contrast with the systolic array of processing element
                             arrays in the TPU and Catapult. In this case, software explicitly moves the data in the
                             desired direction across the array, whereas the systolic approach is a hardware-
                             controlled, two-dimensional pipeline that moves data as a wavefront that is invisible
                             to the software.

                             The Pixel Visual Core Halo
                             A 3 ? 3, 5 ? 5, or 7 ? 7 stencil is going to get inputs from 1, 2, or 3 external pixels at
                             the edges of the two-dimensional subset being computed (half of the dimension of
                             the stencil minus one-half). That leaves two choices. Either Pixel Visual Core

                     S
                         W

             E

                 N   Mem                                     Mem

                                                         S
                                                              W

                                                     E

                     Mem                             N       Mem

                     S

Figure 7.33 The two-dimensional SIMD includes two-dimensional shifting “N,” “S,” “E,” “W,” show the direction
of the shift (North, South, East, West). Each PE has a software-controlled scratchpad memory.

                               under utilizes the hardware in the elements near the border, because they only pass
                               input values, or Pixel Visual Core slightly extends the two-dimensional PEs with
                               simplified PEs that leave out the ALUs. Because the difference in size between a
                               standard PE and a simplified PE is about 2.2 ?, Pixel Visual Core has an extended
                               array. This extended region is called the halo. Figure 7.34 shows two rows of a halo
                               surrounding an 8x8 PE array and illustrates how an example 5 ? 5 stencil compu-
                               tation in the upper-left corner relies on the halo.

                               A Processor of the Pixel Visual Core
                               The collection of 16 ? 16 PEs and 4 halo lanes in each dimension, called the PE
                               array or vector array, is the main computation unit of the Pixel Visual Core. It also
                               has a load-store unit called a Sheet Generator (SHG). SHG refers to memory
                               accesses of blocks of 1 ? 1 to 256 ? 256 pixels, which are called sheets. This hap-
                               pens during downsampling, and typical values are 16 ? 16 or 20 ? 20.
                                   An implementation of Pixel Visual Core can have any even number of 2 or
                               more cores, depending on the resources available. Thus it needs a network to con-
                               nect them together, so every core also has an interface to the Network on Chip
                               (NOC). A typical NOC implementation for Pixel Visual Core will not be an expen-
                               sive cross switch, however, because those require data to travel a long distance,
                               which is expensive. Leveraging the pipeline nature of the application, the NOC
                               typically needs to communicate only to neighboring cores. It is implemented as
                               a two-dimensional mesh, which allows power gating of pairs of cores under soft-
                               ware control.

                         5 x 5 stencil

                                     pe    pe    pe    pe     pe    pe     pe     pe    pe     pe     pe    pe

                                     pe    pe    pe    pe     pe    pe     pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe

                                     pe   pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe     pe    pe     pe

                                    pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe     pe    pe     pe

                                    pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe     pe

                                    pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe     pe

                                    pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe     pe

                                    pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe

                                    pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe

                                    pe    pe    pe     pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe

                                    pe    pe    pe     pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe

                                    pe    pe    pe     pe    pe     pe     pe    pe     pe    pe     pe    pe

Figure 7.34 The two-dimensional array of full processing elements (shown as
                         unshaded circles) surrounded by two layers of simplified processing elements
                         (shaded diamonds) called a halo. In this figure, there are 8 ? 8 or 64 full PEs with 80
                         simplified PEs in the halo. (Pixel Visual Core actually has 16 ? 16 or 256 full PEs and
                         two layers in its halo and thus 144 simplified PEs.) The edges of the halo are connected
                         (shown as gray lines) to form a torus. Pixel Visual Core does a series of two-dimensional
                         shifts across all processing elements to move the neighbor portions of each stencil com-
                         putation into the center PE of the stencil. An example 5 ? 5 stencil is shown in the upper-
                         left corner. Note that 16 of the 25 pieces of data for this 5 ? 5 stencil location come from
                         halo processing elements.

                             Finally, the Pixel Visual Core also includes a scalar processor that is called a
                         scalar lane (SCL). It is identical to the vector lane, except it adds instructions that
                         handle jumps, branches, and interrupts, controls instruction flow to the vector
                         array, and schedules all the loads and stores for the sheet generator. It also has
                         a small instruction memory. Note that Pixel Visual Core has a single instruction
                         stream that controls the scalar and vector units, similar to how a CPU core has
                         a single instruction stream for its scalar and SIMD units.

          In addition to cores, there is also a DMA engine to transfer data between
      DRAM and the line buffers while efficiently converting between image memory
      layout formats (e.g., packing/unpacking). As well as sequential DRAM accesses,
      the DMA engines perform vector-like gather reads of DRAM as well as sequential
      and strided reads and writes.

      Pixel Visual Core Instruction Set Architecture
      Like GPUs, Pixel Visual Core uses a two-step compilation process. The first step is
      compiling the programs from the target language (e.g., Halide) into vISA instruc-
      tions. The Pixel Visual Core vISA (virtual Instruction Set Architecture) is inspired
      in part by the RISC-V instruction set, but it uses an image-specific memory model
      and extends the instruction set to handle image processing, and in particular, the
      two-dimensional notion of images. In vISA, the two-dimensional array of a core is
      infinite, the number of register is unbounded, and memory size is similarly unlim-
      ited. vISA instructions contain pure functions that don’t directly access DRAM
      (see Figure 7.36), which greatly simplifies mapping them onto the hardware.
          The next step is to compile the vISA program into a pISA (physical Instruction
      Set Architecture) program. Using vISA as the target of compilers allows the proces-
      sor to be software-compatible with past programs and yet accept changes to the pISA
      instruction set, so vISA plays the same role that PTX does for GPUs (see Chapter 4).
          Lowering from vISA to pISA takes two steps: compilation and mapping with
      early-bound parameters, and then patching the code with late-bound parameters.
      The parameters that must be bound include STP size, halo size, number of STPs,
      mapping of line buffers, mapping of kernels to processors, as well as register and
      local memory allocations.
          Figure 7.35 shows that pISA is a very long instruction word (VLIW) instruc-
      tion set with 119-bit-wide instructions. The first 43-bit field is for the Scalar
      Lane, the next 38-bit field specifies the computation by the two-dimensional
      PE array, and the third 12-bit field specifies the memory accesses by the two-
      dimensional PE array. The last two fields are immediates for computation or
      addressing. The operations for all the VLIW fields are what you’d expect: two’s
      complement integer arithmetic, saturating integer arithmetic, logical operations,
      shifts, data transfers, and a few special ones like divide iteration and count lead-
      ing zeros. The Scalar Lane supports a superset of the operations in the two-
      dimensional PE array, plus it adds instructions for control-flow and sheet-
      generator control. The 1-bit Predicate registers mentioned above enables condi-
      tional moves to registers (e.g., A ¼ B if C).

      Field         Scalar         Math          Memory           Imm           MemImm
      # Bits        43             38            12               16            10

Figure 7.35 VLIW format of the 119-bit pISA instruction.

                                Although the pISA VLIW instruction is very wide, Halide kernels are short,
                           often just 200–600 instructions. Recall that as an IPU, it only needs to execute
                           the compute-intensive portion of an application, leaving the rest of the function-
                           ality to CPUs and GPUs. Thus the instruction memory of a Pixel Visual Core holds
                           just 2048 pISA instructions (28.5 KiB).
                                The Scalar Lane issues sheet generator instructions that access line buffers.
                           Unlike other memory accesses within Pixel Visual Core, the latency can be more
                           than 1 clock cycle, so they have a DMA-like interface. The lane first sets up the
                           addresses and transfer size in special registers.

                           Pixel Visual Core Example
                           Figure 7.36 shows the vISA code that is output from the Halide compiler for the
                           blur example in Figure 7.31, with comments added for clarity. It calculates a blur
                           first in the x direction and then in the y direction using 16-bit arithmetic. The vISA
                           code matches the functional part of the Halide program. This code can be thought
                           of as executing across all the pixels of an image.

                           Pixel Visual Core Processing Element
                           One of the architectural decisions was how big to build the halo. Pixel Visual Core
                           uses 16 ? 16 PEs, and it adds a halo of 2 extra elements, so it can support 5 ? 5

      // vISA inner loop blur in x dimension
      input.b16 t1 <- _input[x*1+(?1)][y*1+0][0]; // t1 = input[x?1,y]
      input.b16 t2 <- _input[x*1+0][y*1+0][0]; // t2 = input[x,y]
      mov.b16     st3 <- 2;
      mul.b16     t4 <- t2, st3; //t4 = input[x,y] * 2
      add.b16     t5 <- t1, t4; //t5 = input[x?1,y] + input[x,y]*2
      input.b16 t6 <- _input[x*1+1][y*1+0][0]; // t6 = input[x+1,y]
      add.b16     t7 <- t5, t6; //t7 = input[x+1,y]+input[x,y]+input[x?1,y]*2
      mov.b16     st8 <- 4;
      div.b16     t9 <- t7, st8; //t9 = t7/4
      output.b16 _blur_x[x*1+0][y*1+0][0] <- t9; // blur_x[x,y] = t7/4
      // vISA inner loop blur in y dimension
      input.b16 t1 <- _blur_x[x*1+0][y*1+(?1)][0]; // t1 = blur_x[x,y?1]
      input.b16 t2 <- _blur_x[x*1+0][y*1+0][0]; // t2 = blur_x[x,y]
      mov.b16     st3 <- 2;
      mul.b16     t4 <- t2, st3; //t4 = blur_x[x,y] * 2
      add.b16     t5 <- t1, t4; //t5 = blur_x[x,y?1] + blur_x[x,y]*2
      input.b16 t6 <- _blur_x[x*1+0][y*1+1][0]; // t6 = blur_x[x,y+1]
      add.b16     t7 <- t5, t6; //t7 = blurx[x,y+1]+blurx[x,y?1]+blurx[x,y]*2
      mov.b16     st8 <- 4;
      div.b16     t9 <- t7, st8; //t9 = t7/4
      output.b16 _blur_y[x*1+0][y*1+0][0] <- t9; // blur_y[x,y] = t7/4

Figure 7.36 Portion of the vISA instructions compiled from the Halide Blur code in Figure 7.31. This vISA code
corresponds to the functional part of the Halide code.

                                 stencils directly. Note that the bigger the array of PEs, the less the halo overhead to
                                 support a given stencil size.
                                     For Pixel Visual Core, the smaller size of the halo PEs and the 16 ? 16 arrays
                                 means it only costs 20% more area for the halo. For a 5 ? 5 stencil, Pixel Visual
                                 Core can calculate 1.8 times as many results per clock cycle (162/122), and the ratio
                                 is 1.3 for a 3 ? 3 stencil (162/142).
                                     The design of the arithmetic unit of the PE is driven by multiply-accumulate
                                 (MAC), which is a primitive of stencil computation. Pixel Visual Core native
                                 MACs are 16-bits wide for the multiplies, but they can accumulate at a 32-bit
                                 width. Pipelining MAC would use energy unnecessarily because of the reading
                                 and writing of the added pipeline register. Thus the multiply-add hardware deter-
                                 mines the clock cycle. The other operations, previously mentioned, are the tradi-
                                 tional logical and arithmetic operations along with saturating versions of the
                                 arithmetic operations and a few specialized instructions.
                                     The PE has two 16-bit ALUs that can operate in a variety of ways within a
                                 single clock cycle:

                                 ■      Independently, producing two 16-bit results: A op B, C op D.
                                 ■      Fused, producing just one 16-bit result: A op (C op D).
                                 ■      Joined, producing one 32-bit result: A:C op B:D.

                                 Two-Dimensional Line Buffers and Their Controller
                                 Because DRAM accesses use so much energy (see Figure 7.32), the Pixel Visual
                                 Core memory system was carefully designed to minimize the number of DRAM
                                 accesses. The key innovation is the two-dimensional line buffer.
                                     Kernels are logically running on separate cores, and they are connected in a
                                 DAG with input from the sensor or DRAM and output to DRAM. The line buffers
                                 hold portions of the image being calculated between kernels. Figure 7.37 shows the
                                 logical use of line buffers in Pixel Visual Core.

           Lens                                                                              2D stencil
                                                                                             processor

                   Line                2D stencil            2D stencil
                       Buf             processor             processor                 fer                Line
                             fer                                                 Buf                             Buf         DRAM
                                                                          Line                                         fer

                                                LineBuffer                                   2D stencil
           DRAM                                                                              processor
                                fer                                       Line
                          Buf                                                 Buf                                   fer
                   Line                                                             fer                       Buf
                                                                                                          Line

Figure 7.37 Programmer view of Pixel Visual Core: a directed-acyclic graph of kernels.

                            Here are four features that the two-dimensional line buffer must support:

                         1. It must support two-dimensional stencil computations of various sizes, which
                            are unknown at design time.
                         2. Because of the halo, for the 16 ? 16 PE array in Pixel Visual Core, the STPs will
                            want to read 20 ? 20 blocks of pixels from the line buffer and write 16 ? 16
                            blocks of pixels to the line buffer. (As previously mentioned, they call these
                            blocks of pixels sheets.)
                         3. Because the DAG is programmable, we need line buffers that can be allocated
                            by software between any two cores.
                         4. Several cores may need to read data from the same line buffer. Thus a line buffer
                            should support multiple consumers, although it needs just one producer.

                         Line buffers in Pixel Visual Core are really a multi-reader, two-dimensional FIFO
                         abstraction on top of a relatively large amount of SRAM: 128 KiB per instance. It
                         contains temporary “images” that are used just once, so a small, dedicated local
                         FIFO is much more efficient than a cache for data in distant memory.
                             To accommodate the size mismatch between reading 20 ? 20 blocks of pixels
                         and writing 16 ? 16 blocks, the fundamental unit of allocation in the FIFO is a
                         group of 4 ? 4 pixels. Per stencil processor, there is one Line Buffer Pool (LBP)
                         that can have eight logical line buffers (LB), plus one LBP for DMA of I/O.
                         The LBP has three levels of abstraction:

                         1. At the top, the LBP controller supports eight LBs as logical instances. Each LB
                            has one FIFO producer and up to eight FIFO consumers per LB.
                         2. The controller keeps track of a set of head and tail pointers for each FIFO. Note
                            that the sizes of the line buffers inside the LBP are flexible and up to the
                            controller.
                         3. At the bottom are many physical memory banks to support the bandwidth
                            requirements. Pixel Visual Core has eight physical memory banks, each having
                            a 128-bit interface and 16 KiB of capacity.

                         The controller for the LBP is challenging because it must fulfill the bandwidth
                         demands of the STPs and I/O DMAs as well as schedule all their reads and writes
                         to the banks of physical SRAM memory. The LBP controller is one of the most
                         complicated pieces of Pixel Visual Core.

                         Pixel Visual Core Implementation
                         The first implementation of Pixel Visual Core was as a separate chip. Figure 7.38
                         shows the floorplan of the chip, which has 8 cores. It was fabricated in a TSMC
                         28 nm technology in 2016. The chip dimensions are 6 ? 7.2 mm, it runs at
                         426 MHz, it is stacked with 512 MB DRAM as Silicon in Package, and consumes

                                                   3 x MIPI-In
                                A53               2 x MIPI-Out

                                 LPDDR4
                                             Pixel Visual Core

                                 PCIE
                                  4x
                                 Gen3

Figure 7.38 Floor plan of the 8-core Pixel Visual Core chip. A53 is an ARMv7 core.
      LPDDR4 is a DRAM controller. PCIE and MIPI are I/O buses.

      (including the DRAM) 187–4500 mW depending on the workload. About 30% of
      the power for the chip is for an ARMv7 A53 core for control, the MIPI, the PCIe,
      the PCIe, and the LPDDR interfaces, interface is just over half this die at 23 mm2.
      Power for Pixel Visual Core running a worst case “power virus” can go as high as
      3200 mW. Figure 7.39 shows the floor plan of a core.

      Summary: How Pixel Visual Core Follows the Guidelines
      Pixel Visual Core is a multicore DSA for image and vision processing intended as a
      stand-alone chip or as an IP block for mobile device SOCs. As we will see in
      Section 7.9, its performance per watt for CNNs are factors of 25–100 better than CPUs
      and GPUs. Here is how the Pixel Visual core followed the guidelines in Section 7.2.

      1. Use dedicated memories to minimize the distance over which data is moved.
         Perhaps the most distinguishing architecture feature of Pixel Visual Core is the
         software-controlled, two-dimensional line buffers. At 128 KiB per core, they
         are a significant fraction of the area. Each core also has 64 KiB of software-
         controlled PE memory for temporary storage.
      2. Invest the resources saved from dropping advanced microarchitectural optimi-
         zations into more arithmetic units or bigger memories.
         Two other key features of Pixel Visual Core are a 16 ? 16 two-dimensional
         array of processing elements per core and a two-dimensional shifting network
         between the processing elements. It offers a halo region that acts as a buffer to
         allow full utilization of its 256 arithmetic units.

Figure 7.39 Floor plan of a Pixel Visual Core. From left to right, and top down: the sca-
                         lar lane (SCL) is 4% of the core area, NOC is 2%, the line buffer pool (LBP) is 15%, the sheet
                         generator (SHG) is 5%, the halo is 11%, and the processing element array is 62%. The torus
                         connection of the halo makes each of the four edges of the array logical neighbors. It is
                         more area-efficient to collapse the halo to just two sides, which preserves the topology.

                         3. Use the easiest form of parallelism that matches the domain.
                            Pixel Visual Core relies on two-dimensional SIMD parallelism using its PE
                            array, VLIW to express instruction-level parallelism, and multiple program
                            multiple data (MPMD) parallelism to utilize multiple cores.
                         4. Reduce data size and type to the simplest needed for the domain.
                            Pixel Visual Core relies primarily on 8-bit and 16-bit integers, but it also works
                            with 32-bit integers, albeit more slowly.
                         5. Use a domain-specific programming language to port code to the DSA.
                            Pixel Visual Core is programmed in the domain-specific language Halide for
                            image processing and in TensorFlow for CNNs.

               7.8       Cross-Cutting Issues
                         Heterogeneity and System on a Chip (SOC)
                         The easy way to incorporate DSAs into a system is over the I/O bus, which is the
                         approach of the data center accelerators in this chapter. To avoid fetching memory
                         operands over the slow I/O bus, these accelerators have local DRAM.

    Amdahl’s Law reminds us that the performance of an accelerator is limited by
the frequency of shipping data between the host memory and the accelerator mem-
ory. There will surely be applications that would benefit from the host CPU and the
accelerators to be integrated into the same system on a chip (SOC), which is one of
the goals of Pixel Visual Core and eventually the Intel Crest.
    Such a design is called an IP block, standing for Intellectual Property, but a
more descriptive name might be portable design block. IP blocks are typically
specified in a hardware description language like Verilog or VHDL to be inte-
grated into the SOC. IP blocks enable a marketplace where many companies
make IP blocks that other companies can buy to build the SOCs for their appli-
cations without having to design everything themselves. Figure 7.40 indicates
the importance of IP blocks by plotting the number of IP blocks across genera-
tions of Apple PMD SOCs; they tripled in just four years. Another indication of
the importance of IP blocks is that the CPU and GPU get only one-third of the
area of the Apple SOCs, with IP blocks occupying the remainder (Shao and
Brooks, 2015).
    Designing an SOC is like city planning, where independent groups lobby for
limited resources, and finding that the right compromise is difficult. CPUs, GPUs,
caches, video encoders, and so on have adjustable designs that can shrink or
expand to use more or less area and energy to deliver more or less performance.
Budgets will differ depending on whether the SOC is for tablets or for IoT. Thus an
IP block must be scalable in area, energy, and performance. Moreover, it is espe-
cially important for a new IP block to offer a small resource version because it may
not already have a well-established foothold in the SOC ecosystem; adoption is
much easier if the initial resource request can be modest. The Pixel Visual Core
approach is a multicore design, allowing the SOC engineer to choose between 2
and 16 cores to match the area and power budget and desired performance.

                                               30
                  # of specialized IP blocks

                                               20

                                               10

                                               0
                                                      A4       A5       A6       A7       A8
                                                    (2010)   (2011)   (2012)   (2013)   (2014)

Figure 7.40 Number of IP blocks in Apple SOCs for the iPhone and iPad between
2010 and 2014 (Shao and Brooks, 2015).

                             It will be interesting to see whether the attractiveness of integration leads to
                         most data center processors coming from traditional CPU companies with IP accel-
                         erators integrated into the CPU die, or whether systems companies will continue
                         designing their own accelerators and include IP CPUs in their ASICs.

                         An Open Instruction Set
                         One challenge for designers of DSAs is determining how to collaborate with a CPU
                         to run the rest of the application. If it’s going to be on the same SOC, then a major
                         decision is which CPU instruction set to choose, because until recently virtually
                         every instruction set belonged to a single company. Previously, the practical first
                         step of an SOC was to sign a contract with a company to lock in the instruction set.
                             The alternative was to design your own custom RISC processor and to port a
                         compiler and libraries to it. The cost and hassle of licensing IP cores led to a sur-
                         prisingly large number of do-it-yourself simple RISC processors in SOCs. One
                         AMD engineer estimated that there were 12 instruction sets in a modern
                         microprocessor!
                             RISC-V offers a third choice: a viable free and open instruction set with plenty
                         of opcode space reserved for adding instructions for domain-specific coprocessors,
                         which enables the previously mentioned tighter integration between CPUs and
                         DSAs. SOC designers can now select a standard instruction set that comes with
                         a large base of support software without having to sign a contract.
                             They still have to pick the instruction set early in the design, but they don’t have
                         to pick one company and sign a contract. They can design a RISC-V core them-
                         selves, they can buy one from the several companies that sell RISC-V IP blocks, or
                         they can download one of the free open-source RISC-V IP blocks developed by
                         others. The last case is analogous to open-source software, which offers web
                         browsers, compilers, operating systems, and so on that volunteers maintain for
                         users to download and use for free.
                             As a bonus, the open nature of the instruction set improves the business case for
                         small companies offering RISC-V technology because customers don’t have to
                         worry about the long-term viability of a company with its own unique
                         instruction set.
                             Another attraction of RISC-V for DSAs is that the instruction set is not as
                         important as it is for general-purpose processors. If DSAs are programmed at
                         higher levels using abstractions like DAGs or parallel patterns, as is the case
                         for Halide and TensorFlow, then there is less to do at the instruction set level.
                         Moreover, in a world where performance-cost and energy-cost advances come
                         from adding DSAs, binary compatibility may not play as important a role as
                         in the past.
                             At the time of this writing, the future of the open RISC-V instruction set
                         appears promising. (We wish we could peer into the future and learn the status
                         of RISC-V from now to the next edition of this book!)

                   7.9       Putting It All Together: CPUs Versus GPUs Versus
                             DNN Accelerators
                             We now use the DNN domain to compare the cost-performance of the accelerators
                             in this chapter.2 We start with a thorough comparison of the TPU to standard CPUs
                             and GPUs and then add brief comparisons to Catapult and Pixel Visual Core.
                                  Figure 7.41 shows the six benchmarks we use in this comparison. They consist
                             of two examples of each of the three types of DNNs in Section 7.3. These six
                             benchmarks represent 95% of TPU inference workload in Google data centers
                             in 2016. Typically written in TensorFlow, they are surprisingly short: just 100–
                             1500 lines of code. They are small pieces of larger applications that run on the host
                             server, which can be thousands to millions of lines of C++ code. The applications
                             are typically user-facing, which leads to rigid response-time limits, as we will see.
                                  Figures 7.42 and 7.43 show the chips and servers being compared. They are
                             server-class computers deployed in Google data centers at the same time that TPUs
                             were deployed. To be deployed in Google data centers, they must at least check for
                             internal memory errors, which excluded some choices, such as the Nvidia Maxwell
                             GPU. For Google to purchase and deploy them, the machines had to be sensibly
                             configured, and not awkward artifacts assembled solely to win benchmarks.
                                  The traditional CPU server is represented by an 18-core, dual-socket Haswell
                             processor from Intel. This platform is also the host server for GPUs or TPUs.

                                     DNN layers
                                                                                                       % deployed
Name        LOC      FC     Conv     Element      Pool     Total     Weights     TPU Ops/Weight        TPUs 2016
MLP0         100      5                                       5        20M               200
                                                                                                            61%
MLP1       1000       4                                       4         5M               168
LSTM0      1000      24                 34                  58         52M                64
                                                                                                            29%
LSTM1      1500      37                 19                  56         34M                96
CNN0       1000              16                             16          8M              2888
                                                                                                             5%
CNN1       1000       4      72                    13       89        100M              1750

Figure 7.41 Six DNN applications (two per DNN type) that represent 95% of the TPU’s workload. The 10 columns
are the DNN name; the number of lines of code; the types and number of layers in the DNN (FC is fully connected;
Conv is convolution; Element is element-wise operation of LSTM, see Section 7.3; and Pool is pooling, which is a
downsizing stage that replaces a group of elements with its average or maximum); the number of weights; TPU oper-
ational intensity; and TPU application popularity in 2016. The operational intensity varies between TPU, CPU, and GPU
because the batch sizes vary. The TPU can have larger batch sizes while still staying under the response time limit.
One DNN is RankBrain (Clark, 2015), one LSTM is GNM Translate (Wu et al., 2016), and one CNN is DeepMind AlphaGo
(Silver et al., 2016; Jouppi, 2016).

2
 This section is also largely based upon the paper “In-Datacenter Performance Analysis of a Tensor Processing Unit”
Jouppi et al., 2017, of which one of your book authors was a coauthor.

                                                           Measured         TOPS/s
                        2
Chip model         mm        nm      MHz        TDP      Idle    Busy      8b     FP        GB/s     On-chip memory
Intel Haswell        662     22      2300       145W     41W    145W        2.6   1.3        51           51 MiB
NVIDIA K80           561     28       560       150W     25W      98W       –     2.8       160           8 MiB
TPU               <331*      28       700       75W      28W      40W     92      –          34           28 MiB
*The TPU die size is less than half of the Haswell die size.

Figure 7.42 The chips used by the benchmarked servers are Haswell CPUs, K80 GPUs, and TPUs. Haswell has 18
cores, and the K80 has 13 SMX processors.

                                                                                                    Measured power
Server                            Dies/Server      DRAM                               TDP          Idle       Busy
Intel Haswell                         2            256 GiB                            504W         159W       455W
NVIDIA K80 (2 dies/card)              8            256 GiB (host) + 12 GiB ? 8    1838W            357W       991W
TPU                                   4            256 GiB (host) + 8 GiB ? 4         861W         290W       384W

Figure 7.43 Benchmarked servers that use the chips in Figure 7.42. The low-power TPU allows for better rack-level
density than the high-power GPU. The 8 GiB DRAM per TPU is Weight Memory.

                              Haswell is fabricated in an Intel 22-nm process. Both the CPU and GPU are very
                              large dies: about 600 mm2!
                                  The GPU accelerator is the Nvidia K80. Each K80 card contains two dies and
                              offers SECDED on internal memory and DRAM. Nvidia states that (Nvidia, 2016)
                              the K80 Accelerator dramatically lowers datacenter cost by delivering applica-
                              tion performance with fewer, more powerful servers.
                              DNN researchers frequently used K80s in 2015, which is when they were deployed
                              at Google. Note that K80s were also chosen for new cloud-based GPUs by Amazon
                              Web Services and by Microsoft Azure in late 2016.
                                  Because the number of dies per benchmarked server varies between 2 and 8,
                              the following figures show results normalized per die, except for Figure 7.50,
                              which compares the performance/watt of whole servers.

                              Performance: Rooflines, Response Time, and Throughput
                              To illustrate the performance of the six benchmarks on the three processors, we
                              adapt the Roofline performance model in Chapter 4. To use the Roofline model
                              for the TPU, when DNN applications are quantized, we first replace floating-point
                              operations with integer multiply-accumulate operations. As weights do not
                              normally fit in on-chip memory for DNN applications, the second change is to
                              redefine operational intensity to be integer operations per byte of weights read
                              (Figure 7.41).

          TPU log-log
                                                                                                   86.0
                                                                                                          Roofline
                                                                                                          LSTM0
                                    50
                                                                                                          LSTM1
                                                                                               14.1       MLP1
                                                                                  12.3
                                                                                                          MLP0

          TeraOps/sec (log scale)
                                    10                                                                    CNN0
                                                                                     9.7
                                                                      3.7                                 CNN1
                                     5
                                                                            2.8

                                     1

                                    0.5

                                    0.1

                                          1                10               100            1000
                                              Operational intensity: MAC Ops/weight byte (log scale)

Figure 7.44 TPU Roofline. Its ridge point is far to the right at 1350 multiply-
       accumulate operations per byte of weight memory. CNN1 is much further below
       its Roofline than the other DNNs because it spends about a third of the time waiting
       for weights to be loaded into the matrix unit and because the shallow depth of some
       layers in the CNN results in only half of the elements within the matrix unit holding use-
       ful values ( Jouppi et al., 2017).

           Figure 7.44 shows the Roofline model for a single TPU on log-log scales. The
       TPU has a long “slanted” part of its Roofline, where operational intensity means
       that performance is limited by memory bandwidth rather than by peak compute.
       Five of the six applications are happily bumping their heads against the ceiling:
       the MLPs and LSTMs are memory-bound, and the CNNs are computation-bound.
       The single DNN that is not bumping its head against the ceiling is CNN1. Despite
       CNNs having very high operational intensity, CNN1 is running at only 14.1 Tera
       Operations Per Second (TOPS), while CNN0 runs at a satisfying 86 TOPS.
           For readers interested into a deep dive into what happened with CNN1,
       Figure 7.45 uses performance counters to give partial visibility into the utilization
       of the TPU. The TPU spends less than half of its cycles performing matrix oper-
       ations for CNN1 (column 7, row 1). On each of those active cycles, only about half
       of the 65,536 MACs hold useful weights because some layers in CNN1 have shal-
       low feature depths. About 35% of cycles are spent waiting for weights to load from
       memory into the matrix unit, which occurs during the four fully connected layers
       that run at an operational intensity of just 32. This leaves roughly 19% of cycles not

Application                             MLP0      MLP1     LSTM0      LSTM1     CNN0      CNN1      Mean      Row
Array active cycles                     12.7%     10.6%      8.2%     10.5%     78.2%     46.2%     28%         1
Useful MACs in 64K matrix (% peak)      12.5%      9.4%      8.2%      6.3%     78.2%     22.5%     23%         2
Unused MACs                              0.3%      1.2%      0.0%      4.2%       0.0%    23.7%      5%         3
Weight stall cycles                     53.9%     44.2%     58.1%     62.1%       0.0%    28.1%     43%         4
Weight shift cycles                     15.9%     13.4%     15.8%     17.1%       0.0%      7.0%    12%         5
Non-matrix cycles                       17.5%     31.9%     17.9%     10.3%     21.8%     18.7%     20%         6
RAW stalls                               3.3%      8.4%     14.6%     10.6%       3.5%    22.8%     11%         7
Input data stalls                        6.1%      8.8%      5.1%      2.4%       3.4%      0.6%     4%         8
TeraOp/s (92 Peak)                      12.3       9.7       3.7       2.8      86.0      14.1        21.4      9

Figure 7.45 Factors limiting TPU performance of the NN workload based on hardware performance counters.
Rows 1, 4, 5, and 6 total 100% and are based on measurements of activity of the matrix unit. Rows 2 and 3 further
break down the fraction of 64K weights in the matrix unit that hold useful weights on active cycles. Our counters
cannot exactly explain the time when the matrix unit is idle in row 6; rows 7 and 8 show counters for two possible
reasons, including RAW pipeline hazards and PCIe input stalls. Row 9 (TOPS) is based on measurements of production
code while the other rows are based on performance-counter measurements, so they are not perfectly consistent.
Host server overhead is excluded here. The MLPs and LSTMs are memory-bandwidth limited, but CNNs are not. CNN1
results are explained in the text.

                            explained by the matrix-related counters. Because of overlapped execution on the
                            TPU, we do not have exact accounting for those cycles, but we can see that 23% of
                            cycles have stalls for RAW dependences in the pipeline and that 1% are spent
                            stalled for input over the PCIe bus.
                                 Figures 7.46 and 7.47 show Rooflines for Haswell and the K80. The six NN
                            applications are generally further below their ceilings than the TPU in Figure 7.44.
                            Response-time limits are the reason. Many of these DNN applications are parts of
                            services that are part of end-user-facing services. Researchers have demonstrated
                            that small increases in response time cause customers to use a service less (see
                            Chapter 6). Thus, although training may not have hard response-time deadlines,
                            inference usually does. That is, inference cares about throughput only while it
                            is maintaining the latency bound.
                                 Figure 7.48 illustrates the impact of the 99th percentile response-time limit of 7
                            ms for MLP0 on Haswell and the K80, which was required by the application
                            developer. (The inferences per second and 7-ms latency include the server host
                            time as well as the accelerator time.) They can operate at 42% and 37%, respec-
                            tively, with the highest throughput achievable for MLP0, if the response-time limit
                            is relaxed. Thus, although CPUs and GPUs have potentially much higher through-
                            put, it’s wasted if they don’t meet the response-time limit. These bounds affect the
                            TPU as well, but at 80% in Figure 7.48, it is operating much closer to its highest
                            MLP0 throughput. As compared with CPUs and GPUs, the single-threaded TPU
                            has none of the sophisticated microarchitectural features discussed in Section 7.1
                            that consume transistors and energy to improve the average case but not the 99th-
                            percentile case.

  Haswell log-log
                                                                                                                       Roofline
                                                                                                                       LSTM0
                             2
                                                                                                                       LSTM1
                                                           1.1
  TeraOps/sec (log scale)

                                                                                                                       MLP1
                              1                                                                                        MLP0
                            0.8                                                                0.6
                                                           0.6                                                         CNN0
                            0.6
                                                                                                                       CNN1
                                                           0.5                                                0.3
                            0.4
                                                0.2
                            0.2

                            0.1
                                  1                10                     100                     1000
                                            Operational intensity: MAC Ops/weight byte (log scale)

Figure 7.46 Intel Haswell CPU Roofline with its ridge point at 13 multiply-accumulate operations/byte, which is
much further to the left than in Figure 7.44.

  K80 log-log
                                                                                                                       Roofline
                                                                                                                       LSTM0
                             2
                                                                                                                       LSTM1
                                                                                                                       MLP1
  TeraOps/sec (log scale)

                                                                                                 1.0            0.9
                              1                                                                                        MLP0
                                        0.7                      0.7
                            0.8                                                                                        CNN0
                            0.6                                                                                        CNN1
                                                            0.5

                            0.4

                            0.2                            0.2

                                  1                   10                    100                        1000
                                              Operational intensity: MAC Ops/weight byte (log scale)

Figure 7.47 NVIDIA K80 GPU die Roofline. The much higher memory bandwidth moves the ridge point to 9
multiply-accumulate operations per weight byte, which is even further to the left than in Figure 7.46.

                                                   Figure 7.49 gives the bottom line of relative inference performance per die,
                                               including the host server overhead for the two accelerators. Recall that architects
                                               use the geometric mean when they don’t know the actual mix of programs that will
                                               be run. For this comparison, however, we do know the mix (Figure 7.41). The

                            Type          Batch           99th% response             Inf/s (IPS)          % max IPS
                            CPU              16                7.2 ms                    5482                42%
                            CPU              64               21.3 ms                  13,194               100%
                            GPU              16                6.7 ms                  13,461                37%
                            GPU              64                8.3 ms                  36,465               100%
                            TPU            200                 7.0 ms                 225,000                80%
                            TPU            250                10.0 ms                 280,000               100%

Figure 7.48 99th% response time and per die throughput (IPS) for MLP0 as batch
                            size varies. The longest allowable latency is 7 ms. For the GPU and TPU, the maximum
                            MLP0 throughput is limited by the host server overhead.

Type           MLP0          MLP1            LSTM0           LSTM1           CNN0               CNN1          Mean
GPU             2.5            0.3            0.4              1.2             1.6                  2.7        1.9
TPU            41.0           18.5            3.5              1.2            40.3                 71.0       29.2
Ratio          16.7           60.0            8.0              1.0            25.4                 26.3       15.3

Figure 7.49 K80 GPU and TPU performance relative to CPU for the DNN workload. The mean uses the actual mix of
the six applications in Figure 7.41. Relative performance for the GPU and TPU includes host server overhead.
Figure 7.48 corresponds to the second column of this table (MLP0), showing relative IPS that meet the 7-ms latency
threshold.

                            weighted mean in the last column of Figure 7.49 using the actual mix makes the
                            GPU up to 1.9 times, and the TPU is 29.2 times as fast as the CPU, so the TPU is
                            15.3 times as fast as the GPU.

                            Cost-Performance, TCO, and Performance/Watt
                            When buying computers by the thousands, cost-performance trumps general per-
                            formance. The best cost metric in a data center is total cost of ownership (TCO).
                            The actual price Google pays for thousands of chips depends on negotiations
                            between the companies involved. For business reasons, Google can’t publish such
                            price information or data that might let them be deduced. However, power is cor-
                            related with TCO, and Google can publish watts per server, so we use performance/
                            watt as our proxy for performance/TCO. In this section, we compare servers
                            (Figure 7.43) rather than single dies (Figure 7.42).
                                Figure 7.50 shows the weighted mean performance/watt for the K80 GPU and
                            TPU relative to the Haswell CPU. We present two different calculations of perfor-
                            mance/watt. The first (“total”) includes the power consumed by the host CPU
                            server when calculating performance/watt for the GPU and TPU. The second
                            (“incremental”) subtracts the host CPU server power from the total for the GPU
                            and TPU beforehand.

                                            GPU/CPU             TPU/CPU         TPU/GPU

                                      100

       Performance/Watt relative to
                                                                                      83
                                      75

              CPU or GPU
                                      50

                                                      34
                                       25                                                     29

                                                              16
                                              2.1                              2.9
                                        0
                                             Total performance/Watt       Incremental performance/Watt

Figure 7.50 Relative performance/watt of GPU and TPU servers to CPU or GPU
       servers. Total performance/watt includes host server power, but incremental doesn’t.
       It is a widely quoted metric, but we use it as a proxy for performance/TCO in the
       data center.

           For total-performance/watt, the K80 server is 2.1 ? Haswell. For incremental-
       performance/watt, when Haswell power is omitted, the K80 server is 2.9 ?.
           The TPU server has 34 times better total-performance/watt than Haswell,
       which makes the TPU server 16 times the performance/watt of the K80 server.
       The relative incremental-performance/watt—which was Google’s justification
       for a custom ASIC—is 83 for the TPU, which lifts the TPU to 29 times the per-
       formance/watt of the GPU.

       Evaluating Catapult and Pixel Visual Core
       Catapult V1 runs CNNs 2.3 ? as fast as a 2.1 GHz, 16-core, dual-socket server
       (Ovtcharov et al., 2015a). Using the next generation of FPGAs (14-nm Arria
       10), performance goes up 7 ?, and perhaps even 17? with more careful floorplan-
       ning and scaling up of the Processing Elements (Ovtcharov et al., 2015b). In both
       cases, Catapult increases power by less than 1.2 ?. Although it’s apples versus
       oranges, the TPU runs its CNNs 40 ? to 70? versus a somewhat faster server
       (see Figures 7.42, 7.43, and 7.49).
            Because Pixel Visual Core and the TPU are both made by Google, the good
       news is that we can directly compare performance for CNN1, which is a common
       DNN, although it had to be translated from TensorFlow. It runs with batch size of 1
       instead of 32 as in the TPU. The TPU runs CNN1 about 50 times as fast as Pixel
       Visual Core, which makes Pixel Visual Core about half as fast as the GPU and a
       little faster than Haswell. Incremental performance/watt for CNN1 raises Pixel
       Visual Core to about half the TPU, 25 times the GPU, and 100 times the CPU.

                         Because the Intel Crest is designed for training rather than inference, it wouldn’t be
                         fair to include it in this section, even if it were available to measure.

              7.10       Fallacies and Pitfalls
                         In these early days of both DSAs and DNNs, fallacies abound.
               Fallacy   It costs $100 million to design a custom chip.
                         Figure 7.51 shows a graph from an article that debunks the widely quoted $100-
                         million myth that it was “only” $50 million, with most of the cost being salaries
                         (Olofsson, 2011). Note that the author’s estimate is for sophisticated processors
                         that include features that DSAs by definition omit, so even if there were no
                         improvement to the development process, you would expect the cost of a DSA
                         design to be less.
                              Why are we more optimistic six years later, when, if anything, mask costs are
                         even higher for the smaller process technologies?
                              First, software is the largest category, at almost a third of the cost. The avail-
                         ability of applications written in domain-specific languages allows the compilers to
                         do most of the work of porting the applications to your DSA, as we saw for the TPU
                         and Pixel Visual Core. The open RISC-V instruction set will also help reduce the
                         cost of getting system software as well as cut the large IP costs.
                              Mask and fabrication costs can be saved by having multiple projects share a single
                         reticle. As long as you have a small chip, amazingly enough, for $30,000 anyone can
                         get 100 untested parts in 28-nm TSMC technology (Patterson and Nikoli?c, 2015).

                              SOFTWARE,
                              $15,750,000
                                          HARDWARE,
                                          $13,500,000

                                                       EDA TOOLS,
                                                        $9,000,000

                                                                                             Sales+
                                                                   FABRICATION,     IP,   Management,
                                                                     $5,000,000 $5,000,000 $4,500,000

Figure 7.51 The breakdown of the $50 million cost of a custom ASIC that came from
                         surveying others (Olofsson, 2011). The author wrote that his company spent just $2
                         million for its ASIC.

               Perhaps the biggest change is to hardware engineering, which is more than a
           quarter of the cost. Hardware engineers have begun to follow their software col-
           leagues to use agile development. The traditional hardware process not only has
           separate phases for design requirements, architecture, logical design, layout, ver-
           ification, and so on, but also it uses different job titles for the people who perform
           each of the phases. This process is heavy on planning, documentation, and sched-
           uling in part because of the change in personnel each phase.
               Software used to follow this “waterfall” model as well, but projects were so com-
           monly late, over budget, and even canceled that it led to a radically different
           approach. The Agile Manifesto in 2001 basically said that it was much more likely
           that a small team that iterated on an incomplete but working prototype shown reg-
           ularly to customers would produce useful software on schedule and on budget more
           than the traditional plan-and-document approach of the waterfall process would.
               Small hardware teams now do agile iterations (Lee et al., 2016). To ameliorate
           the long latency of a chip fabrication, engineers do some iterations using FPGAs
           because modern design systems can produce both the EDIF for FPGAs and chip
           layout from a single design. FPGA prototypes run 10–20 times slower than chips,
           but that is still much faster than simulators. They also do “tape-in” iterations, where
           you do all the work of a tape-out for your working but incomplete prototype, but
           you don’t pay the costs of fabricating a chip.
               In addition to an improved development process, more modern hardware design
           languages to support them (Bachrach et al., 2012), and advances in automatic gen-
           eration of hardware from high-level domain-specific languages (Canis et al., 2013;
           Huang et al., 2016; Prabhakar et al., 2016). Open source cores that you can download
           for free and modify should also lower the cost of hardware design.
 Pitfall   Performance counters added as an afterthought for DSA hardware.
           The TPU has 106 performance counters, and the designers wanted even more (see
           Figure 7.45). The raison d’^etre for DSAs is performance, and it is way too early in
           their evolution to have a good idea about what is going on.
Fallacy    Architects are tackling the right DNN tasks.
           The architecture community is paying attention to deep learning: 15% of the papers
           at ISCA 2016 were on hardware accelerators for DNNs! Alas, all nine papers
           looked at CNNs, and only two mentioned other DNNs. CNNs are more complex
           than MLPs and are prominent in DNN competitions (Russakovsky et al., 2015),
           which might explain their allure, but they are only about 5% of the Google data
           center NN workload. It seems wise try to accelerate MLPs and LSTMs with at least
           as much gusto.
Fallacy    For DNN hardware, inferences per second (IPS) is a fair summary performance
           metric.
           IPS is not appropriate as a single, overall performance summary for DNN hardware
           because it’s simply the inverse of the complexity of the typical inference in the
           application (e.g., the number, size, and type of NN layers). For example, the

                          TPU runs the 4-layer MLP1 at 360,000 IPS but the 89-layer CNN1 at only 4700
                          IPS; thus TPU IPS varies by 75X! Therefore using IPS as the single-speed sum-
                          mary is much more misleading for NN accelerators than MIPS or FLOPS is for
                          traditional processors, so IPS should be even more disparaged. To compare
                          DNN machines better, we need a benchmark suite written at a high level to port
                          it to the wide variety of DNN architectures. Fathom is a promising new attempt
                          at such a benchmark suite (Adolf et al., 2016).
                Pitfall   Being ignorant of architecture history when designing a DSA.
                          Ideas that didn’t fly for general-purpose computing may be ideal for DSAs, thus
                          history-aware architects could have a competitive edge. For the TPU, three impor-
                          tant architectural features date back to the early 1980s: systolic arrays (Kung and
                          Leiserson, 1980), decoupled-access/execute (Smith, 1982b), and CISC instruc-
                          tions (Patterson and Ditzel, 1980). The first reduced the area and power of the large
                          Matrix Multiply Unit, the second fetched weights concurrently during operation of
                          the Matrix Multiply Unit, and the third better utilized the limited bandwidth of the
                          PCIe bus for delivering instructions. We advise mining the historical perspectives
                          sections at the end of every chapter of this book to discover jewels that could
                          embellish DSAs that you design.

              7.11        Concluding Remarks
                          In this chapter, we’ve seen several commercial examples of the recent shift from
                          the traditional goal of improving general-purpose computers so that all programs
                          benefit to accelerating a subset of programs with DSAs.
                              Both versions of Catapult preserved data-center homogeneity by designing a
                          small, low-power FPGA board that could fit inside a server. The hope is that
                          the flexibility of FPGAs will allow Catapult to be useful to many current applica-
                          tions and the new ones that appeared after deployment. Catapult runs search rank
                          and CNNs faster than GPUs, offering a 1.5–1.75 gain in performance/TCO for
                          ranking over CPUs.
                              The TPU project actually began with FPGAs but abandoned them when the
                          designers concluded that the FPGAs of that time were not competitive in perfor-
                          mance compared to the GPUs. They also believed the TPU would use much less
                          power than GPUs, while being as fast or faster, potentially making the TPU much
                          better than FPGAs and GPUs. Finally, the TPU was not the device that broke data
                          center homogeneity at Google because some servers in its data centers already had
                          GPUs. The TPU basically followed in the footsteps of the GPU and was just
                          another type of accelerator.
                              The nonrecurring engineering costs were likely much higher for the TPU than
                          for Catapult, but the rewards were also greater: both performance and performance/
                          watt were much higher for an ASIC than for an FPGA. The risk was that the TPU
                          was appropriate only for DNN inference, but as we mentioned, DNNs are an attrac-
                          tive target because they can potentially be used for many applications. In 2013

Google’s management took a leap of faith by trusting that the DNN requirements in
2015 and beyond would justify investment in the TPU.
     The deterministic execution model of both Catapult and the TPU is a better
match to the response-time deadline of user-facing applications than are the
time-varying optimizations of CPUs and GPUs (caches, out-of-order execution,
multithreading, multiprocessing, prefetching, etc.) that help average throughput
more than latency. The lack of such features helps explain why, despite having
myriad ALUs and a big memory, the TPU is relatively small and low powered.
This achievement suggests a “Cornucopia Corollary” to Amdahl’s Law: low uti-
lization of a huge, cheap resource can still deliver high, cost-effective
performance.
     In summary, the TPU succeeded for DNNs because of the large matrix unit; the
substantial software-controlled on-chip memory; the ability to run whole inference
models to reduce dependence on host CPU; a single-threaded, deterministic exe-
cution model that proved to be a good match to 99th-percentile response-time
limits; enough flexibility to match the DNNs of 2017 as well as of 2013; the omis-
sion of general-purpose features that enabled a small and low-power die despite the
larger datapath and memory; the use of 8-bit integers by the quantized applications;
and the fact that applications were written using TensorFlow, which made it easy to
port them to the DSA at high-performance rather than having to rewrite them in
order for them to run well on the very different hardware.
     Pixel Visual Core demonstrated the constraints of designing a DSA for a PMD
in terms of die size and power. Unlike the TPU, it is a separate processor from the
host that fetches its own instructions. Despite being aimed primarily at computer
vision, Pixel Visual Core can run CNNs one to two orders of magnitude better in
performance/watt than the K80 GPU and the Haswell CPU.
     It’s too early to render judgment on the Intel Crest, although its enthusiastic
announcement by the Intel CEO signals a shift in the computing landscape.

An Architecture Renaissance
For at least the past decade, architecture researchers have been publishing innova-
tions based on simulations using limited benchmarks claiming improvements for
general-purpose processors of 10% or less while companies are now reporting
gains for DSA hardware products of 10 times or more.
    We think that is a sign that the field is undergoing a transformation, and we expect
to see a renaissance in architecture innovation in the next decade because of

■   the historic end of both Dennard scaling and Moore’s Law, which means
    improving cost-energy-performance will require innovation in computer
    architecture;
■   the productivity advances in building hardware from both Agile hardware
    development and new hardware design languages that leverage advances in
    modern programming languages;

                         ■   the reduced cost of hardware development because of free and open instruction
                             sets, open-source IP blocks, and commercial IP blocks (which so far is where
                             most DSAs are found);
                         ■   the improvements mentioned above in productivity and cost of development
                             means researchers can afford to demonstrate their ideas by building them in
                             FPGAs or even in custom chips, instead of trying to convince skeptics with
                             simulators; and
                         ■   the potential upside of DSAs and their synergy with domain-specific program-
                             ming languages.

                         We believe that many architecture researchers will build DSAs that will raise the
                         bar still higher than those discussed in this chapter. And we can’t wait to see what
                         the computer architecture world will look like by the next edition of this book!

              7.12       Historical Perspectives and References
                         Section M.9 (available online) covers the development of DSAs.

                         Case Studies and Exercises by Cliff Young
                         Case Study: Google’s Tensor Processing Unit and Acceleration
                         of Deep Neural Networks
                         Concepts illustrated by this case study
                         ■   Structure of matrix multiplication operations
                         ■   Capacities of memories and rates of computations (“speeds and feeds”) for a
                             simple neural network model
                         ■   Construction of a special-purpose ISA
                         ■   Inefficiencies in mapping convolutions to TPU hardware
                         ■   Fixed-point arithmetic
                         ■   Function approximation

                   7.1   [10/20/10/25/25] < 7.3,7.4 > Matrix multiplication is a key operation supported in
                         hardware by the TPU. Before going into details of the TPU hardware, it’s worth
                         analyzing the matrix multiplication calculation itself. One common way to depict
                         matrix multiplication is with the following triply nested loop:

                               float a[M][K], b[K][N], c[M][N];
                               // M, N, and K are constants.
                               for (int i = 0; i < M; ++i)
                                         for (int j = 0; j < N; ++j)
                                                  for (int k = 0; k < K; ++k)
                                                            c[i][j] += a[i][k] * b[k][j];

      a. [10] Suppose that M, N, and K are all equal. What is the asymptotic complexity
         in time of this algorithm? What is the asymptotic complexity in space of the
         arguments? What does this mean for the operational intensity of matrix multi-
         plication as M, N, and K grow large?
      b. [20] Suppose that M = 3, N = 4, and K = 5, so that each of the dimensions are
         relatively prime. Write out the order of accesses to memory locations in each
         of the three matrices A, B, and C (you might start with two-dimensional indices,
         then translate those to memory addresses or offsets from the start of each
         matrix). For which matrices are the elements accessed sequentially? Which
         are not? Assume row-major (C-language) memory ordering.
      c. [10] Suppose that you transpose matrix B, swapping its indices so that they are
         B[N][K] instead. So, now the innermost statement of the loop looks like:
             c[i][j] += a[i][k] * b[j][k];
         Now, for which matrices are the elements accessed sequentially?
      d. [25] The innermost (k-indexed) loop of our original routine performs a
         dot-product operation. Suppose that you are a given a hardware unit that can
         perform an 8-element dot-product more efficiently than the raw C code, behav-
         ing effectively like this C function:
             void hardware_dot(float *accumulator,
                const float *a_slice, const float *b_slice) {
                    float total = 0.;
                    for (int k = 0; k < 8; ++k) {
                           total += a_slice[k] * b_slice[k];
                    }
                    *accumulator += total;
             }
         How would you rewrite the routine with the transposed B matrix from part (c) to
         use this function?
      e. [25] Suppose that instead, you are given a hardware unit that performs an
         8-element “saxpy” operation, which behaves like this C function:
             void hardware_saxpy(float *accumulator,
                float a, const float *input) {
                     for (int k = 0; k < 8; ++k) {
                              accumulator[k] += a * input[k];
                     }
             }
      Write another routine that uses the saxpy primitive to deliver equivalent results to
      the original loop, without the transposed memory ordering for the B matrix.
7.2   [15/10/10/20/15/15/20/20] <7.3,7.4 > Consider the neural network model MLP0
      from Figure 7.5. That model has 20 M weights in five fully connected layers (neural
      network researchers count the input layer as if it were a layer in the stack, but it has no

                         weights associated with it). For simplicity, let’s assume that those layers are each the
                         same size, so each layer holds 4 M weights. Then assume that each layer has identical
                         geometry, so each group of 4 M weights represents a 2 K*2 K matrix. Because the
                         TPU typically uses 8-bit numerical values, 20 M weights take up 20 MB.
                         a. [15] For batch sizes of 128, 256, 512, 1024, and 2048, how big are the input
                            activations for each layer of the model (which, except for the input layer, are
                            also the output activations of the previous layer)? Now considering the whole
                            mode (i.e., there’s just the input to the first layer and the output from the last
                            layer), for each batch size, what is the transfer time for input and output over
                            PCIe Gen3 x16, which has a transfer speed of about 100 Gibit/s?
                         b. [10] Given the memory system speed of 30 GiB/s, give a lower bound for the
                            time the TPU takes to read the weights of MLP0 from memory. How much time
                            does it take for the TPU to read a 256 ? 256 “tile” of weights from memory?
                         c. [10] Show how to calculate the TPU’s 92 T operations/second, given that we
                            know that the systolic array matrix multiplier has 256 ? 256 elements, each of
                            which performs an 8-bit multiply-accumulate operation (MAC) each cycle. In
                            high-performance-computing marketing terms, a MAC counts as two operations.
                         d. [20] Once a weight tile has been loaded into the matrix unit of the TPU, it can be
                            reused to multiply a 256-element input vector by the 256 ? 256 weight matrix
                            represented by the tile to produce a 256-element output vector every cycle.
                            How many cycles pass during the time it takes to load a weight tile? This is
                            the “break-even” batch size, where compute and memory-load times are equal,
                            also known as the “ridge” of the roofline.
                         e. [15] The compute peak for the Intel Haswell x86 server is about 1 T FLOPS,
                            while the compute peak for the NVIDIA K80 GPU is about 3 T FLOPS. Sup-
                            posing that they hit these peak numbers, calculate their best-case compute time
                            for batch size 128. How do these times compare to the time the TPU takes to
                            load all 20 M weights from memory?
                          f. [15] Assuming that the TPU program does not overlap computation with I/O
                             over PCIe, calculate the time elapsed from when the CPU starts to send the first
                             byte of data to the TPU until the time that the last byte of output is returned.
                             What fraction of PCIe bandwidth is used?
                         g. [20] Suppose that we deployed a configuration where one CPU was connected
                            to five TPUs across a single PCIe Gen3 x16 bus (with appropriate PCIe
                            switches). Assume that we parallelize by placing one layer of MLP0 on each
                            TPU, and that the TPUs can communicate directly with each other over PCIe.
                            At batch = 128, what is the best-case latency for calculating a single inference,
                            and what throughput, in terms of inferences per second, would such a config-
                            uration deliver? How does this compare to a single TPU?
                         h. [20] Suppose that each example in a batch of inferences requires 50 core-micro-
                            seconds of processing time on the CPU. How many cores on the host CPU will
                            be required to drive a single-TPU configuration at batch = 128?
                   7.3   [20/25/25/25/Discussion] <7.3,7.4 > Consider a pseudo-assembly language for
                         the TPU, and consider the program that handles a batch of size 2048 for a tiny fully

connected layer with a 256 ? 256 weight matrix. If there were no constraints on the
sizes or alignments of computations in each instruction, the entire program for that
layer might look like the following:
     read_host u#0, 256*2048
     read_weights w#0, 256*256
     // matmul weights are implicitly read from the FIFO.
     activate u#256*2048, a#0, 256*2048
     write_host, u#256*2048, 256*2048
In this pseudo-assembly language, a prefix of “u#” refers to a memory address in
the unified buffer; a prefix of “w#” refers to a memory address in the off-chip
weight DRAM, and a prefix of “a#” refers to an accumulator address. The
last argument of each assembly instruction describes the number of bytes to be
operated upon.
    Let’s walk through the program instruction by instruction:
■   The read_host instruction reads 512 KB of data from host memory, storing it at
    the very beginning of the unified buffer (u#0).
■   The read_weights instruction tells the weight fetching unit to read 64 KB of
    weights, loading them into the on-chip weight FIFO. These 64 KB of weights
    represent a single, 256 ? 256 matrix of weights, which we will call a “weight
    tile.”
■   The matmul instruction reads the 512 KB of input data from address 0 in the
    unified buffer, performs a matrix multiplication with the tile of weights, and
    stores the resulting 256*2048 = 524,288, 32-bit activations at accumulator
    address 0 (a#0). We have intentionally glossed over the details of the ordering
    of weights; the exercise will expand on these details.
■   The activate instruction takes those 524,288 32-bit accumulators at a#0, applies
    an activation function to them, and stores the resulting 524,288, 8-bit output
    values at the next free location in the unified buffer, u#524288.
■   The write_host instruction writes the 512 KB of output activations, starting at
    u#524288, back to the host CPU.
We will progressively add realistic details to the pseudo-assembly language to
explore some aspects of TPU design.
a. [20] While we have written our pseudo-code in terms of bytes and byte
   addresses (or in the case of the accumulators, in terms of addresses to 32-bit
   values), the TPU operates on a natural vector length of 256. This means that
   the unified buffer is typically addressed at 256-byte boundaries, the accumula-
   tors are addressed in groups of 256 32-bit values (or at 1 KB boundaries), and
   weights are loaded in groups of 65,536 8-bit values. Rewrite the program’s
   addresses and transfer sizes to take these vector and weight-tile lengths into
   account. How many 256-element vectors of input activations will be read
   by the program? How many bytes of accumulated values will be used while
   computing the results? How many 256-element vectors of output activations
   will be written back to the host?

                         b. [25] Suppose that the application requirements change, and instead of a
                            multiplication by a 256 ? 256 weight matrix, the shape of the weight matrix
                            now becomes 1024 ? 256. Think of the matmul instruction as putting the
                            weights as the right argument of the matrix multiplication operator, so 1024
                            corresponds to K, the dimension in which the matrix multiplication adds up
                            values. Suppose that there are now two variants of the accumulate instruction,
                            one of which overwrites the accumulators with its results, and the other of
                            which adds the matrix multiplication results to the specified accumulator.
                            How would you change the program to handle this 1024 ? 256 matrix? Do
                            you need more accumulators? The size of the matrix unit remains the same
                            at 256 ? 256; how many 256 ? 256 weight tiles does your program need?
                         c. [25] Now write the program to handle a multiplication by a weight matrix of
                            size 256 ? 512. Does your program need more accumulators? Can you rewrite
                            your program so that it uses only 2048, 256-entry accumulators? How many
                            weight tiles does your program need? In what order should they be stored in
                            the weight DRAM?
                         d. [25] Next, write the program to handle a multiplication by a weight matrix of
                            size 1024 ? 768. How many weight tiles does your program need? Write your
                            program so that it uses only 2048, 256-entry accumulators. In what order
                            should the weight tiles be stored in the weight DRAM? For this calculation,
                            how many times did each input activation get read?
                         e. [Discussion] What would it take to build an architecture that reads each
                            256-element set of input activations just once? How many accumulators would
                            that require? If you did it that way, how big would the accumulator memory
                            have to be? Contrast this approach with the TPU, which uses 4096 accumula-
                            tors, so that one set of 2048 accumulators can be written by the matrix unit
                            while another is being used for activations.
                   7.4   [15/15/15] <7.3,7.4 > Consider the first convolutional layer of AlexNet, which
                         uses a 7 ? 7 convolutional kernel, with an input feature depth of 3 and an output
                         feature depth of 48. The original image width is 220 ? 220.
                         a. [15] Ignore the 7 ? 7 convolutional kernel for the moment, and consider just
                            the center element of that kernel. A 1 ? 1 convolutional kernel is mathemati-
                            cally equivalent to a matrix multiplication, using a weight matrix that is
                            input_depth ? output_depth in dimensions. With these depths, and using a stan-
                            dard matrix multiplication, what fraction of the TPU’s 65,536 ALUs can be
                            used?
                         b. [15] For convolutional neural networks, the spatial dimensions are also sources
                            of weight reuse, since the convolutional kernel gets applied to many different
                            (x,y) coordinate positions. Suppose that the TPU reaches balanced compute and
                            memory at a batch size of 1400 (as you might have computed in exercise 1d).
                            What is the smallest square image size that the TPU can process efficiently at a
                            batch size of 1?
                         c. [15] The first convolutional layer of AlexNet implements a kernel stride of 4,
                            which means that rather than moving by one X or Y pixel at each application,

         the 7 ? 7 kernel moves by 4 pixels at a time. This striding means that we can
         permute the input data from 220 ? 220 ? 3 to be 55 ? 55 ? 48 (dividing the X
         and Y dimensions by 4 and multiplying the input depth by 16), and simulta-
         neously we can restack the 7 ? 7 ? 3 ? 48 convolutional weights to be
         2 ? 2 ? 48 ? 48 (just as the input data gets restacked by 4 in X and Y, we do
         the same to the 7 ? 7 elements of the convolutional kernel, ending up with
         ceiling(7/4) = 2 elements in each of the X and Y dimensions). Because the
         kernel is now 2 ? 2, we need to perform only four matrix multiplication oper-
         ations, using weight matrices of size 48 ? 48. What is the fraction of the 65,536
         ALUs that can be used now?
7.5   [15/10/20/20/20/25] < 7.3 > The TPU uses fixed-point arithmetic (sometimes also
      called quantized arithmetic, with overlapping and conflicting definitions), where
      integers are used to represent values on the real number line. There are a number of
      different schemes for fixed-point arithmetic, but they share the common theme that
      there is an affine projection from the integer used by hardware to the real number
      that the integer represents. An affine projection has the form r = i*s + b, where i is
      the integer, r is the represented real value, and s and b are a scale and bias. You can
      of course write the projection in either direction, from integers to reals or vice versa
      (although you need to round when converting from reals to integers).
      a. [15] The simplest activation function supported by the TPU is “ReLUX,” which
         is a rectified linear unit with a maximum of X. For example, ReLU6 is defined by
         Relu6(x)= { 0, when x < 0; x, when 0 < =x < =6; and 6, when x > 6 }. So 0.0 and
         6.0 on the real number line are the minimum and maximum values that Relu6
         might produce. Assume that you use an 8-bit unsigned integer in hardware,
         and that you want to make 0 map to 0.0 and 255 map to 6.0. Solve for s and b.
      b. [10] How many values on the real number line are exactly representable by
         an 8-bit quantized representation of ReLU6 output? What is the real-number
         spacing between them?
      c. [20] The difference between representable values is sometimes called a “unit in
         the least place,” or ulp, when performing numerical analysis. If you map a real
         number to its fixed-point representation, then map back, you only rarely get
         back the original real number. The difference between the original number
         and its representation is called the quantization error. When mapping a
         real number in the range [0.0,6.0] to an 8-bit integer, show that the worst-case
         quantization error is one-half of an ulp (make sure you round to the nearest rep-
         resentable value). You might consider graphing the errors as a function of the
         original real number.
      d. [20] Keep the real-number range [0.0,6.0] for an 8-bit integer from the last step.
         What 8-bit unsigned integer represents 1.0? What is the quantization error for
         1.0? Suppose that you ask the TPU to add 1.0 to 1.0. What answer do you get
         back, and what is the error in that result?
      e. [20] If you pick a random number uniformly in the range [0.0, 6.0], then
         quantize it to an 8-bit unsigned integer, what distribution would you expect
         to see for the 256 integer values?

                          f. [25] The hyperbolic tangent function, tanh, is another commonly used
                                                                                       2x
                             activation function in deep learning: tanh ðxÞ ¼ 11 ?+ ee?2x
                         Tanh also has a bounded range, mapping the entire real number line to the interval
                         ð?1:0,1:0Þ. Solve for s and b for this range, using an 8-bit unsigned representation.
                         Then solve for s and b using an 8-bit two’s complement representation. For both
                         cases, what real number does the integer 0 represent? Which integer represents the
                         real number 0.0? Can you imagine any issues that might result from the quantiza-
                         tion error incurred when representing 0.0?
                   7.6   [20/25/15/15/30/30/30/40/40/25/20/Discussion] <7.3 > In addition to tanh,
                         another s-shaped smooth function, the logistic sigmoid function y = 1 / (1 + exp(?x)),
                                                                                  1
                                                      logistic_sigmoid ðxÞ ¼
                                                                               1 + e?x
                         is commonly used as an activation function in neural networks. A common way to
                         implement them in fixed-point arithmetic uses a piecewise quadratic approxima-
                         tion, where the most significant bits of the input value select which table entry to
                         use. Then the least significant bits of the input value are sent to a degree-2 polyno-
                         mial that describes a parabola that is fit to the subrange of the approximated function.
                         a. [20] Using a graphing tool (we like www.desmos.com/calculator), draw the
                            graphs for the logistic sigmoid and tanh functions.
                         b. [25] Now draw the graph of y = tanh(x/2)/2. Compare that graph with the logis-
                            tic sigmoid function. How much do they differ by? Build an equation that
                            shows how to transform one into the other. Prove that your equation is correct.
                         c. [15] Given this algebraic identity, do you need to use two different sets of coef-
                            ficients to approximate logistic sigmoid and tanh?
                         d. [15] Tanh is an odd function, meaning that f(?x) = ? f(x). Can you exploit this
                            fact to save table space?
                         e. [30] Let’s focus our attention on approximating tanh over the interval
                            x 2 ½0:0, 6:4? on the number line. Using floating-point arithmetic, write a pro-
                            gram that divides the interval into 64 subintervals (each of length 0.1), and then
                            approximates the value of tanh over each subinterval using a single constant
                            floating-point value (so you’ll need to pick 64 different floating-point values,
                            one for each subinterval). If you spot-check 100 different values (randomly
                            chosen is fine) within each subinterval, what is the worst-case approximation
                            error you see over all subintervals? Can you choose your constant to minimize
                            the approximation error for each subinterval?
                          f. [30] Now consider building a floating-point linear approximation for each sub-
                             interval. In this case, you want to pick a pair of floating-point values m and b,
                             for the traditional line equation y ¼ mx + b, to approximate each of the 64 sub-
                             intervals. Come up with a strategy that you think is reasonable to build this lin-
                             ear interpolation over 64 subintervals for tanh. Measure the worst-case
                             approximation error over the 64 intervals. Is your approximation monotonic
                             when it reaches a boundary between subintervals?

      g. [40] Next, build a quadratic approximation, using the standard formula
         y ¼ ax2 + bx + c: Experiment with a number of different ways to fit the formula.
         Try fitting the parabola to the endpoints and midpoint of the bucket, or using a
         Taylor approximation around a single point in the bucket. What worst-case
         error do you get?
      h. [40] (extra credit) Let’s combine the numerical approximations of this exercise
         with the fixed-point arithmetic of the previous exercise. Suppose that the input
         x 2 ½0:0, 6:4? is represented by a 15-bit unsigned value, with 0x0000 represent-
         ing 0.0 and 0x7FFF representing 6.4. For the output, similarly use a 15-bit
         unsigned value, with 0x0000 representing 0.0 and 0x7FFF representing 1.0.
         For each of your constant, linear, and quadratic approximations, calculate the
         combined effect of approximation and quantization errors. Since there are so
         few input values, you can write a program to check them exhaustively.
       i. [25] For the quadratic, quantized approximation, is your approximation mono-
          tonic within each subinterval?
       j. [20] A difference of one ulp in the output scale should correspond to an error of
          1.0 / 32767. How many ulps of error are you seeing in each case?
      k. [Discussion] By choosing to approximate the interval [0.0, 6.4], we effectively
         clipped the “tail” of the hyperbolic tangent function, for values of x > 6:4. It’s
         not an unreasonable approximation to set the output value for all of the tail to
         1.0. What’s the worst-case error, in terms of both real numbers and ulps, of
         treating the tail this way? Is there a better place we might have clipped the tail
         to improve our accuracy?

      Exercises
7.7   [10/20/10/15] <7.2,7.5 > One popular family of FPGAs, the Virtex-7 series, is
      built by Xilinx. A Virtex-7 XC7VX690T FPGA contains 3,600 25x18-bit
      integer multiply-add “DSP slices.” Consider building a TPU-style design on such
      an FPGA.
      a. [10] Using one 25 ? 18 integer multiplier per systolic array cell, what’s the larg-
         est matrix multiplication unit one could construct? Assume that the matrix mul-
         tiplication unit must be square.
      b. [20] Suppose that you could build a rectangular, nonsquare matrix multiplica-
         tion unit. What implications would such a design have for hardware and soft-
         ware? (Hint: think about the vector length that software must handle.)
      c. [10] Many FPGA designs are lucky to reach 500 MHz operation. At that speed,
         calculate the peak 8-bit operations per second that such a device might achieve.
         How does that compare to the 3 T FLOPS of a K80 GPU?
      d. [15] Assume that you can make up the difference between 3600 and 4096 DSP
         slices using LUTs, but that doing so will reduce your clock rate to 350 MHz. Is
         this a worthwhile trade-off to make?

                       7.8    [15/15/15] <7.9 > Amazon Web Services (AWS) offers a wide variety of “com-
                              puting instances,” which are machines configured to target different applications
                              and scales. AWS prices tell us useful data about the Total Cost of Ownership
                              (TCO) of various computing devices, particularly as computer equipment is often
                              depreciated1 on a 3-year schedule. As of July 2017, a dedicated, compute-oriented
                              “c4” computing instance includes two x86 chips with 20 physical cores in total. It
                              rents on-demand for $1.75/hour, or $17,962 for 3 years. In contrast, a dedicated
                              “p2” computing instance also has two x86 chips but with 36 cores in total, and adds
                              16 NVIDIA K80 GPUs. A p2 rents on-demand for $15.84/hour, or $184,780 for
                              3 years.
                              a. [15] The c4 instance uses Intel Xeon E5-2666 v3 (Haswell) processors. The p2
                                 instance uses Intel Xeon E5-2686 v4 (Broadwell) processors. Neither part num-
                                 ber is listed officially on Intel’s product website, which suggests that these parts
                                 are specially built for Amazon by Intel. The E5-2660 v3 part has a similar core
                                 count to the E5-2666 v3 and has a street price of around $1500. The E5-2697 v4
                                 part has a similar core count to the E5-2686 v4 and has a street price of around
                                 $3000. Assume that the non-GPU portion of the p2 instance would have a price
                                 proportional to the ratio of street prices. What is the TCO, over 3 years, for a
                                 single K80 GPU?
                              b. [15] Suppose that you have a compute- and throughput-dominated workload
                                 that runs at rate 1 on the c4 instance and at rate T on the GPU-accelerated
                                 p2 instance. How large must T be for the GPU-based solution to be more
                                 cost-effective? Suppose that each general-purpose CPU core can compute at
                                 a rate of about 30G single-precision FLOPS. Ignoring the CPUs of the p2
                                 instance, what fraction of peak K80 FLOPs would be required to reach the same
                                 rate of computation as the c4 instance?
                              c. [15] AWS also offers “f1” instances that include 8 Xilinx Ultrascale + VU9P
                                 FPGAs. They rent at $13.20/hour, or $165,758 for 3 years. Each VU9P device
                                 includes 6840 DSP slices, which can perform 27 ? 18-bit integer multiply-
                                 accumulate operations (recall that one multiply-accumulate counts as two
                                 “operations”). At 500 MHz, what is the peak multiply-accumulate opera-
                                 tions/cycle that an f1-based system might achieve, counting all 8 FPGAs
                                 toward the computation total? Assuming that the integer operations on the
                                 FPGAs can substitute for floating-point operations, how does this compare
                                 to the peak single-precision multiply-accumulate operations/cycle of the GPUs
                                 of the p2 instance? How do they compare in terms of cost-effectiveness?
                       7.9    [20/20/25] <7.7 > As shown in Figure 7.34 (but simplified to fewer PEs), each
                              Pixel Visual Core includes a 16 ? 16 set of full processing elements, surrounded

1
 Capital expenses are accounted for over the lifetime of an asset, using a “depreciation schedule.” Rather than taking a
one-time charge at the point where an asset is acquired, standard accounting practice spreads out the capital cost over
the lifetime of the asset. So one might account for a $30,000 device that has a useful life of 3 years by assigning
$10,000 in depreciation to each year.

       by an additional two layers of “simplified” processing elements. Simplified
       PEs can store and communicate data but omit the computation hardware of
       full PEs. Simplified PEs store copies of data that might be the “home data” of a
       neighboring core, so there are (16 + 2 + 2)2 = 400 PEs in total, 256 full and 144
       simplified.
       a. [20] Suppose that you wanted to process a 64 ? 32 grayscale image with a 5 ? 5
          stencil using 8 Pixel Visual Cores. For now, assume that the image is laid out in
          raster-scan order (pixels that are adjacent in X are adjacent in memory, while
          pixels that are adjacent in Y are 64 memory locations apart). For each of the
          8 cores, describe the memory region that the core should import to handle
          its part of the image. Make sure to include the halo region. Which parts of
          the halo region should be zeroed by software to ensure correct operation?
          You may find it convenient to refer to subregions of the image using a 2D slice
          notation, where for example image[2:5][6:13] refers to the set of pixels whose x
          component is 2 < =x < 5 and whose y component is 6 < = y < 13 (the slices are
          half-open following Python slicing practice).
       b. [20] If we change to a 3 ? 3 stencil, how do the regions imported from memory
          change? How many halo-simplified PEs go unused?
       c. [25] Now consider how to support a 7 ? 7 stencil. In this case, we don’t have as
          many hardware-supported simplified PEs as we need to cover the three pixels
          worth of halo data that “belong to” neighboring cores. To handle this, we use
          the outermost ring of full PEs as if they were simplified PEs. How many pixels
          can we handle in a single core using this strategy? How many “tiles” are now
          required to handle our 64 ? 32 input image? What is the utilization of our full
          PEs over the complete processing time for the 7 ? 7 stencil over the 64 ? 32
          image?
7.10   [20/20/20/25/25] <7.7 > Consider a case in which each of the eight cores on a
       Pixel Visual Core device is connected through a four-port switch to a 2D SRAM,
       forming a core + memory unit. The remaining two ports on the switch link these
       units in a ring, so that each core is able to access any of the eight SRAMs. However,
       this ring-based network-on-chip topology makes some data access patterns more
       efficient than others.
                       Core         Core         Core                 Core

                      Switch       Switch       Switch       ···      Switch

                      SRAM         SRAM         SRAM                  SRAM

                         a. [20] Suppose that each link in the NOC has the same bandwidth B, and that
                            each link is full-duplex, so it can simultaneously transfer bandwidth B in each
                            direction. Links connect the core to the switch, the switch to SRAM, and pairs
                            of switches in the ring. Assume that each local memory has at least B band-
                            width, so it can saturate its link. Consider a memory access pattern where each
                            of the eight PEs access only the closest memory (the one connected via the
                            switch of the core + memory unit). What is the maximum memory bandwidth
                            that the core will be able to achieve?
                         b. [20] Now consider an off-by-one access pattern, where core i accesses memory
                            i + 1, going through three links to reach that memory (core 7 will access mem-
                            ory 0, because of the ring topology). What is the maximum memory bandwidth
                            that the core will be able to achieve in this case? To achieve that bandwidth, do
                            you need to make any assumptions about the capabilities of the 4-port switch?
                            What if the switch can only move data at rate B?
                         c. [20] Consider an off-by-two access pattern, where core i access memory i + 2.
                            Once again, what is the maximum memory bandwidth that the core will be able
                            to achieve in this case? Where are the bottleneck links in the network-on-chip?
                         d. [25] Consider a uniform random memory access pattern, where each core uses
                            each of the SRAMs for ⅛ of its memory requests. Assuming this traffic pattern,
                            how much traffic traverses a switch-to-switch link, compared to the amount of
                            traffic between a core and its associated switch or between an SRAM and its
                            associated switch?
                         e. [25] (advanced) Can you conceive of a case (workload) where this network can
                            deadlock? From the standpoint of software-only solutions, what should the
                            compiler do to avoid such a scenario? If you can make changes to hardware,
                            what changes in routing topology (and routing scheme) would guarantee no
                            deadlocks?
                  7.11   <7.2 > The first Anton molecular dynamics supercomputer typically simulated a
                         box of water that was 64 Å on a side. The computer itself might be approximated as
                         a box with 1 m side length. A single simulation step represented 2.5 fs of simula-
                         tion time, and took about 10 μs of wall-clock time. The physics models used in
                         molecular dynamics act as if every particle in the system exerts a force on every
                         other particle in the system on each (“outer”) time step, requiring what amounts to a
                         global synchronization across the entire computer.
                         a. Calculate the spatial expansion factor from simulation space to hardware in real
                            space.
                         b. Calculate the temporal slowdown factor from simulated time to wall-clock
                            time.
                         c. These two numbers come out surprisingly close. Is this just a coincidence, or is
                            there some other limit that constrains them in some way? (Hint: the speed of
                            light applies to both the simulated chemical system and the hardware that does
                            the simulation.)

       d. Given these limits, what would it take to use a warehouse-scale supercomputer
          to perform molecular dynamics simulations at Anton rates? That is, what’s the
          fastest simulation step time that might be achieved with a machine 102 or 103 m
          on a side? What about simulating on a world-spanning Cloud service?
7.12   <7.2 > The Anton communication network is a 3D, 8 ? 8 ? 8 torus, where each
       node in the system has six links to neighboring nodes. Latency for a packet to tran-
       sit single link is about 50 ns. Ignore on-chip switching time between links for this
       exercise.
       a. What is the diameter (maximum number of hops between a pair of nodes) of the
          communication network? Given that diameter, what is the shortest latency
          required to broadcast a single value from one node of the machine to all 512
          nodes of the machine?
       b. Assuming that adding up two values takes zero time, what is the shortest
          latency to add up a sum over 512 values to a single node, where each value
          starts on a different node of the machine?
       c. Once again assume that you want to perform the sum over 512 values, but you
          want each of the 512 nodes of the system to end up with a copy of the sum. Of
          course you could perform a global reduction followed by a broadcast. Can you
          do the combined operation in less time? This pattern is called an all-reduce.
          Compare the times of your all-reduce pattern to the time of a broadcast from
          a single node or a global sum to a single node. Compare the bandwidth used
          by the all-reduce pattern with the other patterns.
