A.1    Introduction                                        A-2
A.2    Classifying Instruction Set Architectures           A-3
A.3    Memory Addressing                                   A-7
A.4    Type and Size of Operands                          A-13
A.5    Operations in the Instruction Set                  A-15
A.6    Instructions for Control Flow                      A-16
A.7    Encoding an Instruction Set                        A-21
A.8    Cross-Cutting Issues: The Role of Compilers        A-24
A.9    Putting It All Together: The RISC-V Architecture   A-33
A.10   Fallacies and Pitfalls                             A-42
A.11   Concluding Remarks                                 A-46
A.12   Historical Perspective and References              A-47
       Exercises by Gregory D. Peterson                   A-47
A
    Instruction Set Principles

    An   Add the number in storage location n into the
         accumulator.
    En   If the number in the accumulator is greater than or equal
         to zero execute next the order which stands in storage
         location n; otherwise proceed serially.
    Z    Stop the machine and ring the warning bell.
                                          Wilkes and Renwick,
                         Selection from the List of 18 Machine
                              Instructions for the EDSAC (1949)

               A.1       Introduction
                         In this appendix we concentrate on instruction set architecture—the portion of the
                         computer visible to the programmer or compiler writer. Most of this material should
                         be review for readers of this book; we include it here for background. This appendix
                         introduces the wide variety of design alternatives available to the instruction set
                         architect. In particular, we focus on four topics. First, we present a taxonomy of
                         instruction set alternatives and give some qualitative assessment of the advantages
                         and disadvantages of various approaches. Second, we present and analyze some
                         instruction set measurements that are largely independent of a specific instruction
                         set. Third, we address the issue of languages and compilers and their bearing on
                         instruction set architecture. Finally, the “Putting It All Together” section shows
                         how these ideas are reflected in the RISC-V instruction set, which is typical of RISC
                         architectures. We conclude with fallacies and pitfalls of instruction set design.
                              To illustrate the principles further and to provide a comparison with RISC-V,
                         Appendix K also gives four examples of other general-purpose RISC architectures
                         (MIPS, Power ISA, SPARC, and Armv8), four embedded RISC processors (ARM
                         Thumb2, RISC-V Compressed, microMIPS), and three older architectures (80x86,
                         IBM 360/370, and VAX). Before we discuss how to classify architectures, we need
                         to say something about instruction set measurement.
                              Throughout this appendix, we examine a wide variety of architectural measure-
                         ments. Clearly, these measurements depend on the programs measured and on the
                         compilers used in making the measurements. The results should not be interpreted
                         as absolute, and you might see different data if you did the measurement with a
                         different compiler or a different set of programs. We believe that the measurements
                         in this appendix are reasonably indicative of a class of typical applications. Many
                         of the measurements are presented using a small set of benchmarks, so that the data
                         can be reasonably displayed and the differences among programs can be seen. An
                         architect for a new computer would want to analyze a much larger collection of
                         programs before making architectural decisions. The measurements shown are
                         usually dynamic—that is, the frequency of a measured event is weighed by the
                         number of times that event occurs during execution of the measured program.
                              Before starting with the general principles, let’s review the three application
                         areas from Chapter 1. Desktop computing emphasizes the performance of pro-
                         grams with integer and floating-point data types, with little regard for program
                         size. For example, code size has never been reported in the five generations of
                         SPEC benchmarks. Servers today are used primarily for database, file server,
                         and Web applications, plus some time-sharing applications for many users. Hence,
                         floating-point performance is much less important for performance than integers
                         and character strings, yet virtually every server processor still includes floating-
                         point instructions. Personal mobile devices and embedded applications value cost
                         and energy, so code size is important because less memory is both cheaper and
                         lower energy, and some classes of instructions (such as floating point) may be
                         optional to reduce chip costs, and a compressed version of the instructions set
                         designed to save memory space may be used.

           Thus, instruction sets for all three applications are very similar. In fact, archi-
      tectures similar to RISC-V, which we focus on here, have been used successfully in
      desktops, servers, and embedded applications.
           One successful architecture very different from RISC is the 80x86 (see Appen-
      dix K). Surprisingly, its success does not necessarily belie the advantages of a RISC
      instruction set. The commercial importance of binary compatibility with PC soft-
      ware combined with the abundance of transistors provided by Moore’s Law led
      Intel to use a RISC instruction set internally while supporting an 80x86 instruction
      set externally. Recent 80x86 microprocessors, including all the Intel Core micropro-
      cessors built in the past decade, use hardware to translate from 80x86 instructions to
      RISC-like instructions and then execute the translated operations inside the chip.
      They maintain the illusion of 80x86 architecture to the programmer while allowing
      the computer designer to implement a RISC-style processor for performance. There
      remain, however, serious disadvantages for a complex instruction set like the
      80x86, and we discuss these further in the conclusions.
           Now that the background is set, we begin by exploring how instruction set
      architectures can be classified.

A.2   Classifying Instruction Set Architectures
      The type of internal storage in a processor is the most basic differentiation, so in this
      section we will focus on the alternatives for this portion of the architecture. The
      major choices are a stack, an accumulator, or a set of registers. Operands may be
      named explicitly or implicitly: The operands in a stack architecture are implicitly
      on the top of the stack, and in an accumulator architecture one operand is implicitly
      the accumulator. The general-purpose register architectures have only explicit
      operands—either registers or memory locations. Figure A.1 shows a block diagram
      of such architectures, and Figure A.2 shows how the code sequence C ¼ A + B would
      typically appear in these three classes of instruction sets. The explicit operands may
      be accessed directly from memory or may need to be first loaded into temporary
      storage, depending on the class of architecture and choice of specific instruction.
          As the figures show, there are really two classes of register computers. One
      class can access memory as part of any instruction, called register-memory archi-
      tecture, and the other can access memory only with load and store instructions,
      called load-store architecture. A third class, not found in computers shipping
      today, keeps all operands in memory and is called a memory-memory architecture.
      Some instruction set architectures have more registers than a single accumulator
      but place restrictions on uses of these special registers. Such an architecture is
      sometimes called an extended accumulator or special-purpose register computer.
          Although most early computers used stack or accumulator-style architectures,
      virtually every new architecture designed after 1980 uses a load-store register archi-
      tecture. The major reasons for the emergence of general-purpose register (GPR)
      computers are twofold. First, registers—like other forms of storage internal to the
      processor—are faster than memory. Second, registers are more efficient for a

                                                                             ...                     ...
           Processor

                 TOS
                                                                             ...                     ...
                          ...

                         ALU                       ALU                      ALU                      ALU

                        ...                       ...                      ...                      ...
           Memory

                        ...                       ...                      ...                      ...

                (A)    Stack             (B) Accumulator        (C) Register-memory (D) Register-register/
                                                                                                 load-store

Figure A.1 Operand locations for four instruction set architecture classes. The arrows indicate whether the oper-
and is an input or the result of the arithmetic-logical unit (ALU) operation, or both an input and result. Lighter shades
indicate inputs, and the dark shade indicates the result. In (A), a top of stack (TOS) register points to the top input
operand, which is combined with the operand below. The first operand is removed from the stack, the result takes the
place of the second operand, and TOS is updated to point to the result. All operands are implicit. In (B), the accu-
mulator is both an implicit input operand and a result. In (C), one input operand is a register, one is in memory,
and the result goes to a register. All operands are registers in (D) and, like the stack architecture, can be transferred
to memory only via separate instructions: push or pop for (A) and load or store for (D).

                                                                         Register                     Register
                                Stack            Accumulator             (register-memory)            (load-store)
                                Push A           Load A                  Load R1,A                    Load R1,A
                                Push B           Add B                   Add       R3,R1,B            Load R2,B
                                Add              Store C                 Store R3,C                   Add      R3,R1,R2
                                Pop C                                                                 Store R3,C

                                Figure A.2 The code sequence for C 5 A + B for four classes of instruction sets. Note
                                that the Add instruction has implicit operands for stack and accumulator architectures
                                and explicit operands for register architectures. It is assumed that A, B, and C all belong
                                in memory and that the values of A and B cannot be destroyed. Figure A.1 shows the
                                Add operation for each class of architecture.

                           compiler to use than other forms of internal storage. For example, on a register com-
                           puter the expression (A * B) + (B * C) – (A * D) may be evaluated by doing the
                           multiplications in any order, which may be more efficient because of the location of
                           the operands or because of pipelining concerns (see Chapter 3). Nevertheless, on a
                           stack computer the hardware must evaluate the expression in only one order, because
                           operands are hidden on the stack, and it may have to load an operand multiple times.
                                More importantly, registers can be used to hold variables. When variables are
                           allocated to registers, the memory traffic reduces, the program speeds up (because
                           registers are faster than memory), and the code density improves (because a reg-
                           ister can be named with fewer bits than can a memory location).
                                As explained in Section A.8, compiler writers would prefer that all registers be
                           equivalent and unreserved. Older computers compromise this desire by dedicating
                           registers to special uses, effectively decreasing the number of general-purpose reg-
                           isters. If the number of truly general-purpose registers is too small, trying to allo-
                           cate variables to registers will not be profitable. Instead, the compiler will reserve
                           all the uncommitted registers for use in expression evaluation.
                                How many registers are sufficient? The answer, of course, depends on the effec-
                           tiveness of the compiler. Most compilers reserve some registers for expression eval-
                           uation, use some for parameter passing, and allow the remainder to be allocated to hold
                           variables. Modern compiler technology and its ability to effectively use larger num-
                           bers of registers has led to an increase in register counts in more recent architectures.
                                Two major instruction set characteristics divide GPR architectures. Both char-
                           acteristics concern the nature of operands for a typical arithmetic or logical instruc-
                           tion (ALU instruction). The first concerns whether an ALU instruction has two or
                           three operands. In the three-operand format, the instruction contains one result
                           operand and two source operands. In the two-operand format, one of the operands
                           is both a source and a result for the operation. The second distinction among GPR
                           architectures concerns how many of the operands may be memory addresses in
                           ALU instructions. The number of memory operands supported by a typical
                           ALU instruction may vary from none to three. Figure A.3 shows combinations
                           of these two attributes with examples of computers. Although there are seven

                      Maximum number
Number of memory        of operands
   addresses              allowed            Type of architecture        Examples
         0                     3             Load-store                  ARM, MIPS, PowerPC, SPARC, RISC-V
         1                     2             Register-memory             IBM 360/370, Intel 80x86, Motorola
                                                                         68000, TI TMS320C54x
         2                     2             Memory-memory               VAX (also has three-operand formats)
         3                     3             Memory-memory               VAX (also has two-operand formats)

Figure A.3 Typical combinations of memory operands and total operands per typical ALU instruction with
examples of computers. Computers with no memory reference per ALU instruction are called load-store or
register-register computers. Instructions with multiple memory operands per typical ALU instruction are called
register-memory or memory-memory, according to whether they have one or more than one memory operand.

Type                 Advantages                                       Disadvantages
Register-register    Simple, fixed-length instruction encoding.       Higher instruction count than architectures with
(0, 3)               Simple code generation model. Instructions       memory references in instructions. More instructions
                     take similar numbers of clocks to execute        and lower instruction density lead to larger programs,
                     (see Appendix C)                                 which may have some instruction cache effects
Register-memory      Data can be accessed without a separate load     Operands are not equivalent because a source
(1, 2)               instruction first. Instruction format tends to   operand in a binary operation is destroyed. Encoding
                     be easy to encode and yields good density        a register number and a memory address in each
                                                                      instruction may restrict the number of registers.
                                                                      Clocks per instruction vary by operand location
Memory-              Most compact. Doesn’t waste registers for        Large variation in instruction size, especially for
memory (2, 2)        temporaries                                      three-operand instructions. In addition, large
or (3, 3)                                                             variation in work per instruction. Memory accesses
                                                                      create memory bottleneck. (Not used today.)

Figure A.4 Advantages and disadvantages of the three most common types of general-purpose register com-
puters. The notation (m, n) means m memory operands and n total operands. In general, computers with fewer alter-
natives simplify the compiler’s task because there are fewer decisions for the compiler to make (see Section A.8).
Computers with a wide variety of flexible instruction formats reduce the number of bits required to encode the pro-
gram. The number of registers also affects the instruction size because you need log2 (number of registers) for each
register specifier in an instruction. Thus, doubling the number of registers takes three extra bits for a register-register
architecture, or about 10% of a 32-bit instruction.

                              possible combinations, three serve to classify nearly all existing computers. As we
                              mentioned earlier, these three are load-store (also called register-register), register-
                              memory, and memory-memory.
                                  Figure A.4 shows the advantages and disadvantages of each of these alter-
                              natives. Of course, these advantages and disadvantages are not absolutes: they
                              are qualitative and their actual impact depends on the compiler and implemen-
                              tation strategy. A GPR computer with memory-memory operations could eas-
                              ily be ignored by the compiler and used as a load-store computer. One of the
                              most pervasive architectural impacts is on instruction encoding and the num-
                              ber of instructions needed to perform a task. We see the impact of these archi-
                              tectural alternatives on implementation approaches in Appendix C and
                              Chapter 3.

                              Summary: Classifying Instruction Set Architectures
                              Here and at the end of Sections A.3–A.8 we summarize those characteristics we
                              would expect to find in a new instruction set architecture, building the foundation
                              for the RISC-V architecture introduced in Section A.9. From this section we should
                              clearly expect the use of general-purpose registers. Figure A.4, combined with
                              Appendix C on pipelining, leads to the expectation of a load-store version of a
                              general-purpose register architecture.
                                   With the class of architecture covered, the next topic is addressing operands.

A.3   Memory Addressing
      Independent of whether the architecture is load-store or allows any operand to
      be a memory reference, it must define how memory addresses are interpreted
      and how they are specified. The measurements presented here are largely,
      but not completely, computer independent. In some cases the measurements
      are significantly affected by the compiler technology. These measurements
      have been made using an optimizing compiler, because compiler technology
      plays a critical role.

      Interpreting Memory Addresses
      How is a memory address interpreted? That is, what object is accessed as a func-
      tion of the address and the length? All the instruction sets discussed in this book
      are byte addressed and provide access for bytes (8 bits), half words (16 bits), and
      words (32 bits). Most of the computers also provide access for double words
      (64 bits).
          There are two different conventions for ordering the bytes within a larger
      object. Little Endian byte order puts the byte whose address is “x … x000” at
      the least-significant position in the double word (the little end). The bytes are
      numbered:

               7        6         5        4        3        2         1        0

          Big Endian byte order puts the byte whose address is “x … x000” at the most-
      significant position in the double word (the big end). The bytes are numbered:

               0        1         2        3        4        5         6        7

          When operating within one computer, the byte order is often unnoticeable—
      only programs that access the same locations as both, say, words and bytes, can
      notice the difference. Byte order is a problem when exchanging data among com-
      puters with different orderings, however. Little Endian ordering also fails to match
      the normal ordering of words when strings are compared. Strings appear
      “SDRAWKCAB” (backwards) in the registers.
          A second memory issue is that in many computers, accesses to objects larger
      than a byte must be aligned. An access to an object of size s bytes at byte address A
      is aligned if A mod s ¼ 0. Figure A.5 shows the addresses at which an access is
      aligned or misaligned.
          Why would someone design a computer with alignment restrictions? Misalign-
      ment causes hardware complications, because the memory is typically aligned on a
      multiple of a word or double-word boundary. A misaligned memory access may,
      therefore, take multiple aligned memory references. Thus, even in computers that
      allow misaligned access, programs with aligned accesses run faster.

                                                Value of three low-order bits of byte address
Width of object           0             1             2             3            4              5            6        7
1 byte (byte)           Aligned     Aligned      Aligned       Aligned        Aligned       Aligned       Aligned       Aligned
2 bytes (half word)           Aligned                     Aligned                     Aligned                       Aligned
2 bytes (half word)                     Misaligned                      Misaligned                  Misaligned          Misaligned
4 bytes (word)                              Aligned                                                    Aligned
4 bytes (word)                                        Misaligned                                           Misaligned
4 bytes (word)                                                      Misaligned                                    Misaligned
4 bytes (word)                                                                       Misaligned                         Misaligned
8 bytes (double word)                                         Aligned
8 bytes (double word)                                                         Misaligned
8 bytes (double word)                                                                  Misaligned
8 bytes (double word)                                                                       Misaligned
8 bytes (double word)                                                                                Misaligned
8 bytes (double word)                                                                                     Misaligned
8 bytes (double word)                                                                                             Misaligned
8 bytes (double word)                                                                                                   Misaligned

Figure A.5 Aligned and misaligned addresses of byte, half-word, word, and double-word objects for byte-
addressed computers. For each misaligned example some objects require two memory accesses to complete. Every
aligned object can always complete in one memory access, as long as the memory is as wide as the object. The figure
shows the memory organized as 8 bytes wide. The byte offsets that label the columns specify the low-order three bits
of the address.

                                   Even if data are aligned, supporting byte, half-word, and word accesses requires
                              an alignment network to align bytes, half words, and words in 64-bit registers. For
                              example, in Figure A.5, suppose we read a byte from an address with its 3 low-order
                              bits having the value 4. We will need to shift right 3 bytes to align the byte to the proper
                              place in a 64-bit register. Depending on the instruction, the computer may also need to
                              sign-extend the quantity. Stores are easy: only the addressed bytes in memory may be
                              altered. On some computers a byte, half-word, and word operation does not affect the
                              upper portion of a register. Although all the computers discussed in this book permit
                              byte, half-word, and word accesses to memory, only the IBM 360/370, Intel 80x86,
                              and VAX support ALU operations on register operands narrower than the full width.
                                   Now that we have discussed alternative interpretations of memory addresses,
                              we can discuss the ways addresses are specified by instructions, called addressing
                              modes.

                              Addressing Modes
                              Given an address, we now know what bytes to access in memory. In this sub-
                              section we will look at addressing modes—how architectures specify the address

                             of an object they will access. Addressing modes specify constants and registers
                             in addition to locations in memory. When a memory location is used, the actual
                             memory address specified by the addressing mode is called the effective address.
                                 Figure A.6 shows all the data addressing modes that have been used in recent
                             computers. Immediates or literals are usually considered memory addressing
                             modes (even though the value they access is in the instruction stream), although
                             registers are often separated because they don’t usually have memory addresses.
                             We have kept addressing modes that depend on the program counter, called
                             PC-relative addressing, separate. PC-relative addressing is used primarily for
                             specifying code addresses in control transfer instructions, discussed in Section A.6.

Addressing
mode              Example instruction            Meaning                            When used
Register          Add R4,R3                      Regs[R4]        Regs[R4]           When a value is in a register
                                                              + Regs[R3]
Immediate         Add R4,3                       Regs[R4]       Regs[R4] + 3        For constants
Displacement      Add R4,100(R1)                 Regs[R4] Regs[R4]                  Accessing local variables
                                                   + Mem[100 + Regs[R1]]            (+ simulates register indirect, direct
                                                                                    addressing modes)
Register          Add R4,(R1)                    Regs[R4] Regs[R4]                  Accessing using a pointer or a
indirect                                                + Mem[Regs[R1]]             computed address
Indexed           Add R3,(R1 + R2)               Regs[R3] Regs[R3]                  Sometimes useful in array
                                                 + Mem[Regs[R1] + Regs              addressing: R1 ¼ base of array;
                                                 [R2]]                              R2 ¼ index amount
Direct or         Add R1,(1001)                  Regs[R1] Regs[R1]                  Sometimes useful for accessing
absolute                                                 + Mem[1001]                static data; address constant may
                                                                                    need to be large
Memory            Add R1,@(R3)                   Regs[R1] Regs[R1]                  If R3 is the address of a pointer p,
indirect                                           + Mem[Mem[Regs[R3]]]             then mode yields *p
Autoincrement     Add R1,(R2)+                   Regs[R1] Regs[R1]                  Useful for stepping through arrays
                                                     + Mem[Regs[R2]]                within a loop. R2 points to start of
                                                 Regs[R2] Regs[R2] + d              array; each reference increments R2
                                                                                    by size of an element, d
Autodecrement     Add R1, –(R2)                  Regs[R2] Regs[R2] – d              Same use as autoincrement.
                                                 Regs[R1] Regs[R1]                  Autodecrement/-increment can also
                                                      + Mem[Regs[R2]]               act as push/pop to implement a
                                                                                    stack.
Scaled            Add R1,100(R2)[R3]             Regs[R1] Regs[R1]                  Used to index arrays. May be
                                                  + Mem[100 + Regs[R2]              applied to any indexed addressing
                                                      + Regs[R3] * d]               mode in some computers

Figure A.6 Selection of addressing modes with examples, meaning, and usage. In autoincrement/-decrement and
scaled addressing modes, the variable d designates the size of the data item being accessed (i.e., whether the instruc-
tion is accessing 1, 2, 4, or 8 bytes). These addressing modes are only useful when the elements being accessed are
adjacent in memory. RISC computers use displacement addressing to simulate register indirect with 0 for the address
and to simulate direct addressing using 0 in the base register. In our measurements, we use the first name shown for
each mode. The extensions to C used as hardware descriptions are defined on page A.38.

                              Figure A.6 shows the most common names for the addressing modes, though the
                         names differ among architectures. In this figure and throughout the book, we will use
                         an extension of the C programming language as a hardware description notation. In
                         this figure, only one non-C feature is used: the left arrow ( ) is used for assignment.
                         We also use the array Mem as the name for main memory and the array Regs for
                         registers. Thus, Mem[Regs[R1]] refers to the contents of the memory location
                         whose address is given by the contents of register 1 (R1). Later, we will introduce
                         extensions for accessing and transferring data smaller than a word.
                              Addressing modes have the ability to significantly reduce instruction counts;
                         they also add to the complexity of building a computer and may increase the aver-
                         age clock cycles per instruction (CPI) of computers that implement those modes.
                         Thus, the usage of various addressing modes is quite important in helping the
                         architect choose what to include.
                              Figure A.7 shows the results of measuring addressing mode usage patterns
                         in three programs on the VAX architecture. We use the old VAX architecture
                         for a few measurements in this appendix because it has the richest set of addressing

                                           TeX     1%
                          Memory indirect spice          6%
                                            gcc    1%
                                          TeX 0%
                                  Scaled spice                       16%
                                           gcc   6%

                                            TeX                               24%
                         Register indirect spice        3%
                                                               11%
                                             gcc
                                          TeX                                                 43%
                               Immediate spice                         17%
                                                                                           39%
                                           gcc
                                          TeX                                       32%
                            Displacement spice                                                            55%
                                                                                            40%
                                           gcc
                                                   0%        10%       20%        30%       40%     50%    60%
                                                                   Frequency of the addressing mode

                         Figure A.7 Summary of use of memory addressing modes (including immediates).
                         These major addressing modes account for all but a few percent (0%–3%) of the mem-
                         ory accesses. Register modes, which are not counted, account for one-half of the oper-
                         and references, while memory addressing modes (including immediate) account for the
                         other half. Of course, the compiler affects what addressing modes are used; see
                         Section A.8. The memory indirect mode on the VAX can use displacement, autoincre-
                         ment, or autodecrement to form the initial memory address; in these programs, almost
                         all the memory indirect references use displacement mode as the base. Displacement
                         mode includes all displacement lengths (8, 16, and 32 bits). The PC-relative addressing
                         modes, used almost exclusively for branches, are not included. Only the addressing
                         modes with an average frequency of over 1% are shown.

modes and the fewest restrictions on memory addressing. For example, Figure A.6
on page A.9 shows all the modes the VAX supports. Most measurements in this
appendix, however, will use the more recent register-register architectures to show
how programs use instruction sets of current computers.
   As Figure A.7 shows, displacement and immediate addressing dominate
addressing mode usage. Let’s look at some properties of these two heavily
used modes.

Displacement Addressing Mode
The major question that arises for a displacement-style addressing mode is that of
the range of displacements used. Based on the use of various displacement sizes, a
decision of what sizes to support can be made. Choosing the displacement field
sizes is important because they directly affect the instruction length. Figure A.8

                              40%

                              35%
                                        Integer average
 Percentage of displacement

                              30%

                              25%

                              20%
                                                                               Floating-point average
                              15%

                              10%

                              5%

                              0%
                                    0     1    2    3     4    5   6     7      8    9 10 11    12      13       14   15
                                                              Number of bits of displacement

Figure A.8 Displacement values are widely distributed. There are both a large num-
ber of small values and a fair number of large values. The wide distribution of displace-
ment values is due to multiple storage areas for variables and different displacements to
access them (see Section A.8) as well as the overall addressing scheme the compiler
uses. The x-axis is log2 of the displacement, that is, the size of a field needed to represent
the magnitude of the displacement. Zero on the x-axis shows the percentage of dis-
placements of value 0. The graph does not include the sign bit, which is heavily affected
by the storage layout. Most displacements are positive, but a majority of the largest dis-
placements (14 + bits) are negative. Because these data were collected on a computer
with 16-bit displacements, they cannot tell us about longer displacements. These data
were taken on the Alpha architecture with full optimization (see Section A.8) for SPEC
CPU2000, showing the average of integer programs (CINT2000) and the average of
floating-point programs (CFP2000).

                         shows the measurements taken on the data access on a load-store architecture using
                         our benchmark programs. We look at branch offsets in Section A.6—data acces-
                         sing patterns and branches are different; little is gained by combining them,
                         although in practice the immediate sizes are made the same for simplicity.

                         Immediate or Literal Addressing Mode
                         Immediates can be used in arithmetic operations, in comparisons (primarily for
                         branches), and in moves where a constant is wanted in a register. The last case
                         occurs for constants written in the code—which tend to be small—and for address
                         constants, which tend to be large. For the use of immediates it is important to know
                         whether they need to be supported for all operations or for only a subset. Figure A.9
                         shows the frequency of immediates for the general classes of integer and floating-
                         point operations in an instruction set.
                             Another important instruction set measurement is the range of values for imme-
                         diates. Like displacement values, the size of immediate values affects instruction
                         length. As Figure A.10 shows, small immediate values are most heavily used. Large
                         immediates are sometimes used, however, most likely in addressing calculations.

                         Summary: Memory Addressing
                         First, because of their popularity, we would expect a new architecture to support at
                         least the following addressing modes: displacement, immediate, and register indi-
                         rect. Figure A.7 shows that they represent 75%–99% of the addressing modes used

                                                                                              Floating-point average
                                                                                              Integer average
                                                                                     22%
                                      Loads
                                                                                      23%

                                                                               19%
                            ALU operations
                                                                                        25%

                                                                         16%
                             All instructions
                                                                                 21%

                                                0%   5%    10%     15%     20%        25%     30%

                         Figure A.9 About one-quarter of data transfers and ALU operations have an imme-
                         diate operand. The bottom bars show that integer programs use immediates in about
                         one-fifth of the instructions, while floating-point programs use immediates in about
                         one-sixth of the instructions. For loads, the load immediate instruction loads 16 bits into
                         either half of a 32-bit register. Load immediates are not loads in a strict sense because
                         they do not access memory. Occasionally a pair of load immediates is used to load a 32-
                         bit constant, but this is rare. (For ALU operations, shifts by a constant amount are
                         included as operations with immediate operands.) The programs and computer used
                         to collect these statistics are the same as in Figure A.8.

                                  45%

                                  40%

                                  35%

       Percentage of immediates
                                                          Floating-point average
                                  30%

                                  25%

                                  20%

                                  15%
                                                                                              Integer average
                                  10%

                                  5%

                                  0%
                                        0   1   2   3   4  5    6      7   8    9 10 11        12   13       14   15
                                                        Number of bits needed for immediate

      Figure A.10 The distribution of immediate values. The x-axis shows the number of
      bits needed to represent the magnitude of an immediate value—0 means the imme-
      diate field value was 0. The majority of the immediate values are positive. About 20%
      were negative for CINT2000, and about 30% were negative for CFP2000. These measure-
      ments were taken on an Alpha, where the maximum immediate is 16 bits, for the same
      programs as in Figure A.8. A similar measurement on the VAX, which supported 32-bit
      immediates, showed that about 20%–25% of immediates were longer than 16 bits.
      Thus, 16 bits would capture about 80% and 8 bits about 50%.

      in our measurements. Second, we would expect the size of the address for displace-
      ment mode to be at least 12–16 bits, because the caption in Figure A.8 suggests
      these sizes would capture 75%–99% of the displacements. Third, we would expect
      the size of the immediate field to be at least 8–16 bits. This claim is not substan-
      tiated by the caption of the figure to which it refers.
           Having covered instruction set classes and decided on register-register archi-
      tectures, plus the previous recommendations on data addressing modes, we next
      cover the sizes and meanings of data.

A.4   Type and Size of Operands
      How is the type of an operand designated? Usually, encoding in the opcode
      designates the type of an operand—this is the method used most often. Alterna-
      tively, the data can be annotated with tags that are interpreted by the hardware.
      These tags specify the type of the operand, and the operation is chosen accordingly.
      Computers with tagged data, however, can only be found in computer museums.
          Let’s start with desktop and server architectures. Usually the type of an oper-
      and—integer, single-precision floating point, character, and so on—effectively

                         gives its size. Common operand types include character (8 bits), half word (16
                         bits), word (32 bits), single-precision floating point (also 1 word), and double-
                         precision floating point (2 words). Integers are almost universally represented
                         as two’s complement binary numbers. Characters are usually in ASCII, but the
                         16-bit Unicode (used in Java) is gaining popularity with the internationalization
                         of computers. Until the early 1980s, most computer manufacturers chose their
                         own floating-point representation. Almost all computers since that time follow
                         the same standard for floating point, the IEEE standard 754, although this level
                         of accuracy has recently been abandoned in application-specific processors. The
                         IEEE floating-point standard is discussed in detail in Appendix J.
                              Some architectures provide operations on character strings, although such oper-
                         ations are usually quite limited and treat each byte in the string as a single character.
                         Typical operations supported on character strings are comparisons and moves.
                              For business applications, some architectures support a decimal format, usually
                         called packed decimal or binary-coded decimal—4 bits are used to encode the
                         values 0–9, and 2 decimal digits are packed into each byte. Numeric character
                         strings are sometimes called unpacked decimal, and operations—called packing
                         and unpacking—are usually provided for converting back and forth between them.
                              One reason to use decimal operands is to get results that exactly match decimal
                         numbers, as some decimal fractions do not have an exact representation in binary.
                         For example, 0.1010 is a simple fraction in decimal, but in binary it requires an
                         infinite set of repeating digits: 0:0001100110011 …2 . Thus, calculations that are
                         exact in decimal can be close but inexact in binary, which can be a problem for
                         financial transactions. (See Appendix J to learn more about precise arithmetic.)
                              The SPEC benchmarks use byte or character, half-word (short integer), word
                         (integer and single precision floating point), double-word (long integer), and
                         floating-point data types. Figure A.11 shows the dynamic distribution of the sizes
                         of objects referenced from memory for these programs. The frequency of access to

                                 Double word                                                         70%
                                    (64 bits)                                             59%

                                         Word                          29%
                                      (32 bits)                      26%

                                    Half word      0%
                                     (16 bits)          5%
                                                                                   Floating-point average
                                          Byte     1%                              Integer average
                                       (8 bits)              10%

                                                  0%           20%           40%       60%             80%

                         Figure A.11 Distribution of data accesses by size for the benchmark programs. The
                         double-word data type is used for double-precision floating point in floating-point pro-
                         grams and for addresses, because the computer uses 64-bit addresses. On a 32-bit address
                         computer the 64-bit addresses would be replaced by 32-bit addresses, and so almost all
                         double-word accesses in integer programs would become single-word accesses.

      different data types helps in deciding what types are most important to support effi-
      ciently. Should the computer have a 64-bit access path, or would taking two cycles
      to access a double word be satisfactory? As we saw earlier, byte accesses require an
      alignment network: how important is it to support bytes as primitives? Figure A.11
      uses memory references to examine the types of data being accessed.
          In some architectures, objects in registers may be accessed as bytes or half
      words. However, such access is very infrequent—on the VAX, it accounts for
      no more than 12% of register references, or roughly 6% of all operand accesses
      in these programs.

A.5   Operations in the Instruction Set
      The operators supported by most instruction set architectures can be categorized as
      in Figure A.12. One rule of thumb across all architectures is that the most widely
      executed instructions are the simple operations of an instruction set. For example,
      Figure A.13 shows 10 simple instructions that account for 96% of instructions exe-
      cuted for a collection of integer programs running on the popular Intel 80x86.
      Hence, the implementor of these instructions should be sure to make these fast,
      as they are the common case.

      Operator type         Examples
      Arithmetic and        Integer arithmetic and logical operations: add, subtract, and, or,
      logical               multiply, divide
      Data transfer         Loads-stores (move instructions on computers with memory
                            addressing)
      Control               Branch, jump, procedure call and return, traps
      System                Operating system call, virtual memory management instructions
      Floating point        Floating-point operations: add, multiply, divide, compare
      Decimal               Decimal add, decimal multiply, decimal-to-character conversions
      String                String move, string compare, string search
      Graphics              Pixel and vertex operations, compression/decompression operations

      Figure A.12 Categories of instruction operators and examples of each. All computers
      generally provide a full set of operations for the first three categories. The support for
      system functions in the instruction set varies widely among architectures, but all com-
      puters must have some instruction support for basic system functions. The amount of
      support in the instruction set for the last four categories may vary from none to an
      extensive set of special instructions. Floating-point instructions will be provided in
      any computer that is intended for use in an application that makes much use of floating
      point. These instructions are sometimes part of an optional instruction set. Decimal and
      string instructions are sometimes primitives, as in the VAX or the IBM 360, or may be
      synthesized by the compiler from simpler instructions. Graphics instructions typically
      operate on many smaller data items in parallel—for example, performing eight 8-bit
      additions on two 64-bit operands.

                                                                                              Integer average
                         Rank                      80x86 instruction                          % total executed)
                         1                         Load                                              22%
                         2                         Conditional branch                                20%
                         3                         Compare                                           16%
                         4                         Store                                             12%
                         5                         Add                                                8%
                         6                         And                                                6%
                         7                         Sub                                                5%
                         8                         Move register-register                             4%
                         9                         Call                                               1%
                         10                        Return                                             1%
                                Total                                                                96%

                         Figure A.13 The top 10 instructions for the 80x86. Simple instructions dominate this
                         list and are responsible for 96% of the instructions executed. These percentages are the
                         average of the five SPECint92 programs.

                             As mentioned before, the instructions in Figure A.13 are found in every computer
                         for every application––desktop, server, embedded––with the variations of operations
                         in Figure A.12 largely depending on which data types the instruction set includes.

               A.6       Instructions for Control Flow
                         Because the measurements of branch and jump behavior are fairly independent of
                         other measurements and applications, we now examine the use of control flow instruc-
                         tions, which have little in common with the operations of the previous sections.
                              There is no consistent terminology for instructions that change the flow of con-
                         trol. In the 1950s they were typically called transfers. Beginning in 1960 the name
                         branch began to be used. Later, computers introduced additional names. Through-
                         out this book we will use jump when the change in control is unconditional and
                         branch when the change is conditional.
                              We can distinguish four different types of control flow change:

                         ■    Conditional branches
                         ■    Jumps
                         ■    Procedure calls
                         ■    Procedure returns

                         We want to know the relative frequency of these events, as each event is different,
                         may use different instructions, and may have different behavior. Figure A.14
                         shows the frequencies of these control flow instructions for a load-store computer
                         running our benchmarks.

                                                                Floating-point average
                               8%                               Integer average
            Call/return
                                       19%

                                 10%
                 Jump
                               6%

                                                                           82%
    Conditional branch
                                                                      75%

                          0%           25%           50%             75%           100%
                                        Frequency of branch instructions

Figure A.14 Breakdown of control flow instructions into three classes: calls or
returns, jumps, and conditional branches. Conditional branches clearly dominate. Each
type is counted in one of three bars. The programs and computer used to collect these
statistics are the same as those in Figure A.8.

Addressing Modes for Control Flow Instructions
The destination address of a control flow instruction must always be specified. This
destination is specified explicitly in the instruction in the vast majority of cases—
procedure return being the major exception, because for return the target is not
known at compile time. The most common way to specify the destination is to supply
a displacement that is added to the program counter (PC). Control flow instructions
of this sort are called PC-relative. PC-relative branches or jumps are advantageous
because the target is often near the current instruction, and specifying the position
relative to the current PC requires fewer bits. Using PC-relative addressing also per-
mits the code to run independently of where it is loaded. This property, called posi-
tion independence, can eliminate some work when the program is linked and is also
useful in programs linked dynamically during execution.
    To implement returns and indirect jumps when the target is not known at com-
pile time, a method other than PC-relative addressing is required. Here, there must
be a way to specify the target dynamically, so that it can change at runtime. This
dynamic address may be as simple as naming a register that contains the target
address; alternatively, the jump may permit any addressing mode to be used to sup-
ply the target address.
    These register indirect jumps are also useful for four other important
features:

■   Case or switch statements, found in most programming languages (which
    select among one of several alternatives).
■   Virtual functions or methods in object-oriented languages like C++ or Java
    (which allow different routines to be called depending on the type of the
    argument).

                                                       ■   High-order functions or function pointers in languages like C or C++ (which
                                                           allow functions to be passed as arguments, giving some of the flavor of object-
                                                           oriented programming).
                                                       ■   Dynamically shared libraries (which allow a library to be loaded and linked at
                                                           runtime only when it is actually invoked by the program rather than loaded and
                                                           linked statically before the program is run).

                                                       In all four cases the target address is not known at compile time, and hence is usu-
                                                       ally loaded from memory into a register before the register indirect jump.
                                                           As branches generally use PC-relative addressing to specify their targets, an
                                                       important question concerns how far branch targets are from branches. Knowing
                                                       the distribution of these displacements will help in choosing what branch offsets to
                                                       support, and thus will affect the instruction length and encoding. Figure A.15
                                                       shows the distribution of displacements for PC-relative branches in instructions.
                                                       About 75% of the branches are in the forward direction.

                                                       Conditional Branch Options
                                                       Because most changes in control flow are branches, deciding how to specify the
                                                       branch condition is important. Figure A.16 shows the three primary techniques in
                                                       use today and their advantages and disadvantages.

                                30%

                                25%
       Percentage of distance

                                20%
                                             Integer
                                             average
                                15%
                                                                              Floating-point average
                                10%

                                    5%

                                    0%
                                         0   1   2     3   4   5    6   7       8    9 10 11 12 13        14   15   16   17   18   19   20
                                                                            Bits of branch displacement

Figure A.15 Branch distances in terms of number of instructions between the target and the branch instruction.
The most frequent branches in the integer programs are to targets that can be encoded in 4–8 bits. This result tells us
that short displacement fields often suffice for branches and that the designer can gain some encoding density by
having a shorter instruction with a smaller branch displacement. These measurements were taken on a load-store
computer (Alpha architecture) with all instructions aligned on word boundaries. An architecture that requires fewer
instructions for the same program, such as a VAX, would have shorter branch distances. However, the number of bits
needed for the displacement may increase if the computer has variable-length instructions to be aligned on any byte
boundary. The programs and computer used to collect these statistics are the same as those in Figure A.8.

Name           Examples             How condition is tested       Advantages               Disadvantages
Condition      80x86, ARM,          Tests special bits set by     Sometimes condition      CC is extra state. Condition
code (CC)      PowerPC,             ALU operations,               is set for free.         codes constrain the ordering of
               SPARC, SuperH        possibly under program                                 instructionsbecause they pass
                                    control                                                information from one
                                                                                           instruction to a branch
Condition      Alpha, MIPS          Tests arbitrary register      Simple                   Limited compare may affect
register/                           with the result of a simple                            critical path or require extra
limited                             comparison (equality or                                comparison for general
comparison                          zero tests)                                            condition
Compare        PA-RISC, VAX,        Compare is part of the        One instruction          May set critical path for branch
and branch     RISC-V               branch. Fairly general        rather than two for a    instructions
                                    compares are allowed          branch
                                    (greater then, less then)

Figure A.16 The major methods for evaluating branch conditions, their advantages, and their disadvantages.
Although condition codes can be set by ALU operations that are needed for other purposes, measurements on pro-
grams show that this rarely happens. The major implementation problems with condition codes arise when the con-
dition code is set by a large or haphazardly chosen subset of the instructions, rather than being controlled by a bit in the
instruction. Computers with compare and branch often limit the set of compares and use a separate operation and
register for more complex compares. Often, different techniques are used for branches based on floating-point com-
parison versus those based on integer comparison. This dichotomy is reasonable because the number of branches that
depend on floating-point comparisons is much smaller than the number depending on integer comparisons.

                                  One of the most noticeable properties of branches is that a large number of the
                              comparisons are simple tests, and a large number are comparisons with zero. Thus,
                              some architectures choose to treat these comparisons as special cases, especially if
                              a compare and branch instruction is being used. Figure A.17 shows the frequency
                              of different comparisons used for conditional branching.

                              Procedure Invocation Options
                              Procedure calls and returns include control transfer and possibly some state saving;
                              at a minimum the return address must be saved somewhere, sometimes in a special
                              link register or just a GPR. Some older architectures provide a mechanism to save
                              many registers, while newer architectures require the compiler to generate stores
                              and loads for each register saved and restored.
                                   There are two basic conventions in use to save registers: either at the call site or
                              inside the procedure being called. Caller saving means that the calling procedure
                              must save the registers that it wants preserved for access after the call, and thus the
                              called procedure need not worry about registers. Callee saving is the opposite: the
                              called procedure must save the registers it wants to use, leaving the caller unre-
                              strained. There are times when caller save must be used because of access patterns
                              to globally visible variables in two different procedures. For example, suppose we
                              have a procedure P1 that calls procedure P2, and both procedures manipulate the

                                                                               Floating-point average
                                                           5%
                                           Not equal                           Integer average
                                                         2%

                                                                       16%
                                              Equal
                                                                         18%

                                                       0%
                               Greater than or equal             11%

                                                       0%
                                        Greater than
                                                       0%

                                                                                                  44%
                                  Less than or equal
                                                                                       33%

                                                                                        34%
                                           Less than
                                                                                         35%

                                                    0%      10%        20%     30%         40%     50%
                                                         Frequency of comparison types in branches

                         Figure A.17 Frequency of different types of compares in conditional branches. Less
                         than (or equal) branches dominate this combination of compiler and architecture. These
                         measurements include both the integer and floating-point compares in branches. The
                         programs and computer used to collect these statistics are the same as those in
                         Figure A.8.

                         global variable x. If P1 had allocated x to a register, it must be sure to save x to a
                         location known by P2 before the call to P2. A compiler’s ability to discover when a
                         called procedure may access register-allocated quantities is complicated by the
                         possibility of separate compilation. Suppose P2 may not touch x but can call
                         another procedure, P3, that may access x, yet P2 and P3 are compiled separately.
                         Because of these complications, most compilers will conservatively caller save any
                         variable that may be accessed during a call.
                              In the cases where either convention could be used, some programs will be more
                         optimal with callee save and some will be more optimal with caller save. As a result,
                         most real systems today use a combination of the two mechanisms. This convention
                         is specified in an application binary interface (ABI) that sets down the basic rules as
                         to which registers should be caller saved and which should be callee saved. Later in
                         this appendix we will examine the mismatch between sophisticated instructions for
                         automatically saving registers and the needs of the compiler.

                         Summary: Instructions for Control Flow
                         Control flow instructions are some of the most frequently executed instructions.
                         Although there are many options for conditional branches, we would expect

      branch addressing in a new architecture to be able to jump to hundreds of instruc-
      tions either above or below the branch. This requirement suggests a PC-relative
      branch displacement of at least 8 bits. We would also expect to see register indirect
      and PC-relative addressing for jump instructions to support returns as well as many
      other features of current systems.
          We have now completed our instruction architecture tour at the level seen by
      an assembly language programmer or compiler writer. We are leaning toward a
      load-store architecture with displacement, immediate, and register indirect addres-
      sing modes. These data are 8-, 16-, 32-, and 64-bit integers and 32- and 64-bit
      floating-point data. The instructions include simple operations, PC-relative condi-
      tional branches, jump and link instructions for procedure call, and register indirect
      jumps for procedure return (plus a few other uses).
          Now we need to select how to represent this architecture in a form that makes it
      easy for the hardware to execute.

A.7   Encoding an Instruction Set
      Clearly, the choices mentioned herein will affect how the instructions are encoded
      into a binary representation for execution by the processor. This representation
      affects not only the size of the compiled program but also the implementation
      of the processor, which must decode this representation to quickly find the oper-
      ation and its operands. The operation is typically specified in one field, called the
      opcode. As we shall see, the important decision is how to encode the addressing
      modes with the operations.
          This decision depends on the range of addressing modes and the degree of
      independence between opcodes and modes. Some older computers have one
      to five operands with 10 addressing modes for each operand (see Figure A.6).
      For such a large number of combinations, typically a separate address
      specifier is needed for each operand: the address specifier tells what addres-
      sing mode is used to access the operand. At the other extreme are load-store
      computers with only one memory operand and only one or two addressing
      modes; obviously, in this case, the addressing mode can be encoded as part
      of the opcode.
          When encoding the instructions, the number of registers and the number of
      addressing modes both have a significant impact on the size of instructions, as
      the register field and addressing mode field may appear many times in a single
      instruction. In fact, for most instructions many more bits are consumed in
      encoding addressing modes and register fields than in specifying the opcode.
      The architect must balance several competing forces when encoding the
      instruction set:

      1. The desire to have as many registers and addressing modes as possible.
      2. The impact of the size of the register and addressing mode fields on the average
         instruction size and hence on the average program size.

                         3. A desire to have instructions encoded into lengths that will be easy to han-
                            dle in a pipelined implementation. (The value of easily decoded instructions
                            is discussed in Appendix C and Chapter 3.) As a minimum, the architect
                            wants instructions to be in multiples of bytes, rather than an arbitrary bit
                            length. Many desktop and server architects have chosen to use a fixed-
                            length instruction to gain implementation benefits while sacrificing average
                            code size.

                         Figure A.18 shows three popular choices for encoding the instruction set. The first
                         we call variable, because it allows virtually all addressing modes to be with all
                         operations. This style is best when there are many addressing modes and opera-
                         tions. The second choice we call fixed, because it combines the operation and
                         the addressing mode into the opcode. Often fixed encoding will have only a single

                          Operation and   Address        Address            Address        Address
                          no. of operands specifier 1    field 1            specifier n    field n
                          (A) Variable (e.g., Intel 80x86, VAX)

                           Operation      Address        Address       Address
                                          field 1        field 2       field 3
                          (B) Fixed (e.g., RISC V, ARM, MIPS, PowerPC, SPARC)

                           Operation      Address        Address
                                          specifier      field

                           Operation      Address        Address       Address
                                          specifier 1    specifier 2   field

                           Operation      Address        Address       Address
                                          specifier      field 1       field 2
                         (C) Hybrid (e.g., RISC V Compressed (RV32IC), IBM 360/370, microMIPS, Arm Thumb2)

                         Figure A.18 Three basic variations in instruction encoding: variable length, fixed
                         length, and hybrid. The variable format can support any number of operands, with
                         each address specifier determining the addressing mode and the length of the spec-
                         ifier for that operand. It generally enables the smallest code representation, because
                         unused fields need not be included. The fixed format always has the same number of
                         operands, with the addressing modes (if options exist) specified as part of the
                         opcode. It generally results in the largest code size. Although the fields tend not
                         to vary in their location, they will be used for different purposes by different instruc-
                         tions. The hybrid approach has multiple formats specified by the opcode, adding one
                         or two fields to specify the addressing mode and one or two fields to specify the
                         operand address.

size for all instructions; it works best when there are few addressing modes and
operations. The trade-off between variable encoding and fixed encoding is size
of programs versus ease of decoding in the processor. Variable tries to use as
few bits as possible to represent the program, but individual instructions can vary
widely in both size and the amount of work to be performed.
    Let’s look at an 80x86 instruction to see an example of the variable encoding:
    add EAX,1000(EBX)
    The name add means a 32-bit integer add instruction with two operands, and
this opcode takes 1 byte. An 80x86 address specifier is 1 or 2 bytes, specifying the
source/destination register (EAX) and the addressing mode (displacement in
this case) and base register (EBX) for the second operand. This combination takes
1 byte to specify the operands. When in 32-bit mode (see Appendix K), the size of
the address field is either 1 byte or 4 bytes. Because1000 is bigger than 28, the total
length of the instruction is
                                  1 + 1 + 4 ¼ 6 bytes
The length of 80x86 instructions varies between 1 and 17 bytes. 80x86 programs
are generally smaller than the RISC architectures, which use fixed formats (see
Appendix K).
    Given these two poles of instruction set design of variable and fixed, the third
alternative immediately springs to mind: reduce the variability in size and work of
the variable architecture but provide multiple instruction lengths to reduce code
size. This hybrid approach is the third encoding alternative, and we’ll see examples
shortly.

Reduced Code Size in RISCs
As RISC computers started being used in embedded applications, the 32-bit fixed
format became a liability because cost, and hence smaller code, are important. In
response, several manufacturers offered a new hybrid version of their RISC instruc-
tion sets, with both 16-bit and 32-bit instructions. The narrow instructions support
fewer operations, smaller address and immediate fields, fewer registers, and the
two-address format rather than the classic three-address format of RISC computers.
RISC-V offers such an extension, called RV32IC, the C standing for compressed.
Common instruction occurrences, such as intermediates with small values and com-
mon ALU operations with the source and destination register being identical, are
encoded in 16-bit formats. Appendix K gives two other examples, the ARM Thumb
and microMIPS, which both claim a code size reduction of up to 40%.
    In contrast to these instruction set extensions, IBM simply compresses its stan-
dard instruction set and then adds hardware to decompress instructions as they are
fetched from memory on an instruction cache miss. Thus, the instruction cache
contains full 32-bit instructions, but compressed code is kept in main memory,
ROMs, and the disk. The advantage of a compressed format, such as RV32IC,

                         microMIPS and Thumb2 is that instruction caches act as if they are about 25%
                         larger, while IBM’s CodePack means that compilers need not be changed to handle
                         different instruction sets and instruction decoding can remain simple.
                             CodePack starts with run-length encoding compression on any PowerPC pro-
                         gram and then loads the resulting compression tables in a 2 KB table on chip.
                         Hence, every program has its own unique encoding. To handle branches, which
                         are no longer to an aligned word boundary, the PowerPC creates a hash table in
                         memory that maps between compressed and uncompressed addresses. Like a
                         TLB (see Chapter 2), it caches the most recently used address maps to reduce
                         the number of memory accesses. IBM claims an overall performance cost of
                         10%, resulting in a code size reduction of 35%–40%.

                         Summary: Encoding an Instruction Set
                         Decisions made in the components of instruction set design discussed in previous
                         sections determine whether the architect has the choice between variable and fixed
                         instruction encodings. Given the choice, the architect more interested in code size
                         than performance will pick variable encoding, and the one more interested in per-
                         formance than code size will pick fixed encoding. RISC-V, MIPS, and ARM all
                         have an instruction set extension that uses 16-bit instruction, as well as 32-bit;
                         applications with serious code size constraints can opt to use the 16-bit variant
                         to decrease code size. Appendix E gives 13 examples of the results of architects’
                         choices. In Appendix C and Chapter 3, the impact of variability on performance of
                         the processor will be discussed further.
                             We have almost finished laying the groundwork for the RISC-V instruction set
                         architecture that will be introduced in Section A.9. Before we do that, however, it
                         will be helpful to take a brief look at compiler technology and its effect on program
                         properties.

               A.8       Cross-Cutting Issues: The Role of Compilers
                         Today almost all programming is done in high-level languages for desktop and
                         server applications. This development means that because most instructions exe-
                         cuted are the output of a compiler, an instruction set architecture is essentially
                         a compiler target. In earlier times for these applications, architectural decisions
                         were often made to ease assembly language programming or for a specific kernel.
                         Because the compiler will significantly affect the performance of a computer,
                         understanding compiler technology today is critical to designing and efficiently
                         implementing an instruction set.
                             Once it was popular to try to isolate the compiler technology and its effect on
                         hardware performance from the architecture and its performance, just as it was
                         popular to try to separate architecture from its implementation. This separation
                         is essentially impossible with today’s desktop compilers and computers. Architec-
                         tural choices affect the quality of the code that can be generated for a computer and
                         the complexity of building a good compiler for it, for better or for worse.

    In this section, we discuss the critical goals in the instruction set primarily from
the compiler viewpoint. It starts with a review of the anatomy of current compilers.
Next we discuss how compiler technology affects the decisions of the architect,
and how the architect can make it hard or easy for the compiler to produce good
code. We conclude with a review of compilers and multimedia operations, which
unfortunately is a bad example of cooperation between compiler writers and
architects.

The Structure of Recent Compilers
To begin, let’s look at what optimizing compilers are like today. Figure A.19 shows
the structure of recent compilers.
    A compiler writer’s first goal is correctness—all valid programs must be
compiled correctly. The second goal is usually speed of the compiled code. Typ-
ically, a whole set of other goals follows these two, including fast compilation,
debugging support, and interoperability among languages. Normally, the passes

Dependencies                                                   Function
Language dependent;                   Front end per            Transform language to
machine independent                     language               common intermediate form

                                              Intermediate
                                              representation
Somewhat language                                              For example, loop
                                       High-level
dependent; largely machine                                     transformations and
                                      optimizations
independent                                                    procedure inlining
                                                               (also called
                                                               procedure integration)
Small language dependencies;                                   Including global and local
machine dependencies slight              Global                optimizations + register
(e.g., register counts/types)           optimizer              allocation

Highly machine dependent;                                      Detailed instruction selection
language independent                 Code generator            and machine-dependent
                                                               optimizations; may include
                                                               or be followed by assembler

Figure A.19 Compilers typically consist of two to four passes, with more highly opti-
mizing compilers having more passes. This structure maximizes the probability that a
program compiled at various levels of optimization will produce the same output when
given the same input. The optimizing passes are designed to be optional and may be
skipped when faster compilation is the goal and lower-quality code is acceptable. A pass
is simply one phase in which the compiler reads and transforms the entire program.
(The term phase is often used interchangeably with pass.) Because the optimizing passes
are separated, multiple languages can use the same optimizing and code generation
passes. Only a new front end is required for a new language.

                         in the compiler transform higher-level, more abstract representations into progres-
                         sively lower-level representations. Eventually it reaches the instruction set. This
                         structure helps manage the complexity of the transformations and makes writing
                         a bug-free compiler easier.
                             The complexity of writing a correct compiler is a major limitation on the
                         amount of optimization that can be done. Although the multiple-pass structure
                         helps reduce compiler complexity, it also means that the compiler must order
                         and perform some transformations before others. In the diagram of the optimizing
                         compiler in Figure A.19, we can see that certain high-level optimizations are per-
                         formed long before it is known what the resulting code will look like. Once such a
                         transformation is made, the compiler can’t afford to go back and revisit all steps,
                         possibly undoing transformations. Such iteration would be prohibitive, both in
                         compilation time and in complexity. Thus, compilers make assumptions about
                         the ability of later steps to deal with certain problems. For example, compilers usu-
                         ally have to choose which procedure calls to expand inline before they know the
                         exact size of the procedure being called. Compiler writers call this problem the
                         phase-ordering problem.
                             How does this ordering of transformations interact with the instruction set
                         architecture? A good example occurs with the optimization called global common
                         subexpression elimination. This optimization finds two instances of an expression
                         that compute the same value and saves the value of the first computation in a tem-
                         porary. It then uses the temporary value, eliminating the second computation of the
                         common expression.
                             For this optimization to be significant, the temporary must be allocated to a
                         register. Otherwise, the cost of storing the temporary in memory and later reloading
                         it may negate the savings gained by not recomputing the expression. There are, in
                         fact, cases where this optimization actually slows down code when the temporary
                         is not register allocated. Phase ordering complicates this problem because register
                         allocation is typically done near the end of the global optimization pass, just before
                         code generation. Thus, an optimizer that performs this optimization must assume
                         that the register allocator will allocate the temporary to a register.
                             Optimizations performed by modern compilers can be classified by the style of
                         the transformation, as follows:

                         ■   High-level optimizations are often done on the source with output fed to later
                             optimization passes.
                         ■   Local optimizations optimize code only within a straight-line code fragment
                             (called a basic block by compiler people).
                         ■   Global optimizations extend the local optimizations across branches and intro-
                             duce a set of transformations aimed at optimizing loops.
                         ■   Register allocation associates registers with operands.
                         ■   Processor-dependent optimizations attempt to take advantage of specific archi-
                             tectural knowledge.

Register Allocation
Because of the central role that register allocation plays, both in speeding up the
code and in making other optimizations useful, it is one of the most important—
if not the most important—of the optimizations. Register allocation algorithms
today are based on a technique called graph coloring. The basic idea behind
graph coloring is to construct a graph representing the possible candidates
for allocation to a register and then to use the graph to allocate registers.
Roughly speaking, the problem is how to use a limited set of colors so that
no two adjacent nodes in a dependency graph have the same color. The empha-
sis in the approach is to achieve 100% register allocation of active variables.
The problem of coloring a graph in general can take exponential time as a
function of the size of the graph (NP-complete). There are heuristic algorithms,
however, that work well in practice, yielding close allocations that run in near-
linear time.
    Graph coloring works best when there are at least 16 (and preferably more)
general-purpose registers available for global allocation for integer variables
and additional registers for floating point. Unfortunately, graph coloring does
not work very well when the number of registers is small because the heuristic
algorithms for coloring the graph are likely to fail.

Impact of Optimizations on Performance
It is sometimes difficult to separate some of the simpler optimizations—local and
processor-dependent optimizations—from transformations done in the code gen-
erator. Examples of typical optimizations are given in Figure A.20. The last col-
umn of Figure A.20 indicates the frequency with which the listed optimizing
transforms were applied to the source program.
     Figure A.21 shows the effect of various optimizations on instructions executed
for two programs. In this case, optimized programs executed roughly 25%–90%
fewer instructions than unoptimized programs. The figure illustrates the impor-
tance of looking at optimized code before suggesting new instruction set features,
because a compiler might completely remove the instructions the architect was try-
ing to improve.

The Impact of Compiler Technology on the Architect’s
Decisions
The interaction of compilers and high-level languages significantly affects how
programs use an instruction set architecture. There are two important questions:
how are variables allocated and addressed? How many registers are needed to allo-
cate variables appropriately? To address these questions, we must look at the three
separate areas in which current high-level languages allocate their data:

                                                                                     Percentage of the total number
Optimization name           Explanation                                              of optimizing transforms
High-level                  At or near the source level; processor-independent
Procedure integration       Replace procedure call by procedure body                               N.M.
Local                       Within straight-line code
Common subexpression        Replace two instances of the same computation by                       18%
elimination                 single copy
Constant propagation        Replace all instances of a variable that is assigned a                 22%
                            constant with the constant
Stack height reduction      Rearrange expression tree to minimize resources                        N.M.
                            needed for expression evaluation
Global                      Across a branch
Global common               Same as local, but this version crosses branches                       13%
subexpression elimination
Copy propagation            Replace all instances of a variable A that has been                    11%
                            assigned X (i.e., A ¼ X) with X
Code motion                 Remove code from a loop that computes same                             16%
                            value each iteration of the loop
Induction variable          Simplify/eliminate array addressing calculations                       2%
elimination                 within loops
Processor-dependent         Depends on processor knowledge
Strength reduction          Many examples, such as replace multiply by a                           N.M.
                            constant with adds and shifts
Pipeline scheduling         Reorder instructions to improve pipeline                               N.M.
                            performance
Branch offset               Choose the shortest branch displacement that                           N.M.
optimization                reaches target

Figure A.20 Major types of optimizations and examples in each class. These data tell us about the relative fre-
quency of occurrence of various optimizations. The third column lists the static frequency with which some of
the common optimizations are applied in a set of 12 small Fortran and Pascal programs. There are nine local and
global optimizations done by the compiler included in the measurement. Six of these optimizations are covered
in the figure, and the remaining three account for 18% of the total static occurrences. The abbreviation N.M. means
that the number of occurrences of that optimization was not measured. Processor-dependent optimizations are usu-
ally done in a code generator, and none of those was measured in this experiment. The percentage is the portion of
the static optimizations that are of the specified type. Data from Chow, F.C., 1983. A Portable Machine-Independent
Global Optimizer—Design and Measurements (Ph.D. thesis). Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA (collected using the
Stanford UCODE compiler).

                            ■    The stack is used to allocate local variables. The stack is grown or shrunk on
                                 procedure call or return, respectively. Objects on the stack are addressed rel-
                                 ative to the stack pointer and are primarily scalars (single variables) rather
                                 than arrays. The stack is used for activation records, not as a stack for eval-
                                 uating expressions. Hence, values are almost never pushed or popped on
                                 the stack.

                                                                                                      Branches/calls
                                           lucas, level 3          11%                                Floating-point ALU ops

    Program, compiler optimization level
                                                                                                      Loads-stores
                                           lucas, level 2          12%
                                                                                                      Integer ALU ops
                                           lucas, level 1                21%

                                           lucas, level 0                                                                   100%

                                            mcf, level 3                                                 76%

                                            mcf, level 2                                                 76%

                                            mcf, level 1                                                       84%

                                            mcf, level 0                                                                    100%

                                                            0%        20%         40%        60%          80%          100%
                                                                   Percentage of unoptimized instructions executed

Figure A.21 Change in instruction count for the programs lucas and mcf from the
SPEC2000 as compiler optimization levels vary. Level 0 is the same as unoptimized
code. Level 1 includes local optimizations, code scheduling, and local register allocation.
Level 2 includes global optimizations, loop transformations (software pipelining), and
global register allocation. Level 3 adds procedure integration. These experiments were
performed on Alpha compilers.

■                              The global data area is used to allocate statically declared objects, such as
                               global variables and constants. A large percentage of these objects are arrays
                               or other aggregate data structures.
■                              The heap is used to allocate dynamic objects that do not adhere to a stack disci-
                               pline. Objects in the heap are accessed with pointers and are typically not scalars.

Register allocation is much more effective for stack-allocated objects than for
global variables, and register allocation is essentially impossible for heap-allocated
objects because they are accessed with pointers. Global variables and some stack
variables are impossible to allocate because they are aliased—there are multiple
ways to refer to the address of a variable, making it illegal to put it into a register.
(Most heap variables are effectively aliased for today’s compiler technology.)
    For example, consider the following code sequence, where & returns the
address of a variable and * dereferences a pointer:
                               p ¼&a – gets address of a in p
                               a ¼... – assigns to a directly
                               *p ¼... – uses p to assign to a
                               ...a... – accesses a
    The variable a could not be register allocated across the assignment to *p with-
out generating incorrect code. Aliasing causes a substantial problem because it is

                         often difficult or impossible to decide what objects a pointer may refer to. A com-
                         piler must be conservative; some compilers will not allocate any local variables of a
                         procedure in a register when there is a pointer that may refer to one of the local
                         variables.

                         How the Architect Can Help the Compiler Writer
                         Today, the complexity of a compiler does not come from translating simple state-
                         ments like A ¼ B + C. Most programs are locally simple, and simple translations
                         work fine. Rather, complexity arises because programs are large and globally com-
                         plex in their interactions, and because the structure of compilers means decisions
                         are made one step at a time about which code sequence is best.
                             Compiler writers often are working under their own corollary of a basic prin-
                         ciple in architecture: make the frequent cases fast and the rare case correct. That is,
                         if we know which cases are frequent and which are rare, and if generating code for
                         both is straightforward, then the quality of the code for the rare case may not be
                         very important—but it must be correct!
                             Some instruction set properties help the compiler writer. These properties
                         should not be thought of as hard-and-fast rules, but rather as guidelines
                         that will make it easier to write a compiler that will generate efficient and cor-
                         rect code.

                         ■   Provide regularity—Whenever it makes sense, the three primary components
                             of an instruction set—the operations, the data types, and the addressing
                             modes—should be orthogonal. Two aspects of an architecture are said to
                             be orthogonal if they are independent. For example, the operations and
                             addressing modes are orthogonal if, for every operation to which one addres-
                             sing mode can be applied, all addressing modes are applicable. This regular-
                             ity helps simplify code generation and is particularly important when the
                             decision about what code to generate is split into two passes in the compiler.
                             A good counterexample of this property is restricting what registers can be
                             used for a certain class of instructions. Compilers for special-purpose register
                             architectures typically get stuck in this dilemma. This restriction can result
                             in the compiler finding itself with lots of available registers, but none of
                             the right kind!
                         ■   Provide primitives, not solutions—Special features that “match” a language
                             construct or a kernel function are often unusable. Attempts to support high-
                             level languages may work only with one language or do more or less than
                             is required for a correct and efficient implementation of the language. An
                             example of how such attempts have failed is given in Section A.10.
                         ■   Simplify trade-offs among alternatives—One of the toughest jobs a compiler
                             writer has is figuring out what instruction sequence will be best for every seg-
                             ment of code that arises. In earlier days, instruction counts or total code size
                             might have been good metrics, but—as we saw in Chapter 1—this is no longer

    true. With caches and pipelining, the trade-offs have become very complex.
    Anything the designer can do to help the compiler writer understand the costs
    of alternative code sequences would help improve the code. One of the most
    difficult instances of complex trade-offs occurs in a register-memory architec-
    ture in deciding how many times a variable should be referenced before it is
    cheaper to load it into a register. This threshold is hard to compute and, in fact,
    may vary among models of the same architecture.
■   Provide instructions that bind the quantities known at compile time as con-
    stants—A compiler writer hates the thought of the processor interpreting at
    runtime a value that was known at compile time. Good counterexamples of this
    principle include instructions that interpret values that were fixed at compile
    time. For instance, the VAX procedure call instruction (calls) dynamically
    interprets a mask saying what registers to save on a call, but the mask is fixed at
    compile time (see Section A.10).

Compiler Support (or Lack Thereof) for Multimedia Instructions
Alas, the designers of the SIMD instructions (see Section 4.3 in Chapter 4) basi-
cally ignored the previous subsection. These instructions tend to be solutions, not
primitives; they are short of registers; and the data types do not match existing pro-
gramming languages. Architects hoped to find an inexpensive solution that would
help some users, but often only a few low-level graphics library routines use them.
    The SIMD instructions are really an abbreviated version of an elegant architec-
ture style that has its own compiler technology. As explained in Section 4.2, vector
architectures operate on vectors of data. Invented originally for scientific codes,
multimedia kernels are often vectorizable as well, albeit often with shorter vectors.
As Section 4.3 suggests, we can think of Intel’s MMX and SSE or PowerPC’s Alti-
Vec, or the RISC-V P extension, as simply short vector computers: MMX with
vectors of eight 8-bit elements, four 16-bit elements, or two 32-bit elements,
and AltiVec with vectors twice that length. They are implemented as simply adja-
cent, narrow elements in wide registers.
    These microprocessor architectures build the vector register size into the archi-
tecture: the sum of the sizes of the elements is limited to 64 bits for MMX and 128
bits for AltiVec. When Intel decided to expand to 128-bit vectors, it added a whole
new set of instructions, called streaming SIMD extension (SSE).
    A major advantage of vector computers is hiding latency of memory access by
loading many elements at once and then overlapping execution with data transfer.
The goal of vector addressing modes is to collect data scattered about memory,
place them in a compact form so that they can be operated on efficiently, and then
place the results back where they belong.
    Vector computers include strided addressing and gather/scatter addressing
(see Section 4.2) to increase the number of programs that can be vectorized. Strided
addressing skips a fixed number of words between each access, so sequential
addressing is often called unit stride addressing. Gather and scatter find their

                         addresses in another vector register: think of it as register indirect addressing for
                         vector computers. From a vector perspective, in contrast, these short-vector SIMD
                         computers support only unit strided accesses: memory accesses load or store all
                         elements at once from a single wide memory location. Because the data for mul-
                         timedia applications are often streams that start and end in memory, strided and
                         gather/scatter addressing modes are essential to successful vectorization (see
                         Section 4.7).

             Example     As an example, compare a vector computer with MMX for color representation
                         conversion of pixels from RGB (red, green, blue) to YUV (luminosity chromi-
                         nance), with each pixel represented by 3 bytes. The conversion is just three lines
                         of C code placed in a loop:
                             Y ¼(9798*R +19235*G +3736*B) / 32768;
                             U ¼(-4784*R 9437*G +4221*B) / 32768 +128;
                             V ¼(20218*R 16941*G 3277*B) / 32768 +128;
                            A 64-bit-wide vector computer can calculate 8 pixels simultaneously. One vec-
                         tor computer for media with strided addresses takes

                         ■   3 vector loads (to get RGB)
                         ■   3 vector multiplies (to convert R)
                         ■   6 vector multiply adds (to convert G and B)
                         ■   3 vector shifts (to divide by 32,768)
                         ■   2 vector adds (to add 128)
                         ■   3 vector stores (to store YUV)

                         The total is 20 instructions to perform the 20 operations in the previous C code to
                         convert 8 pixels (Kozyrakis, 2000). (Because a vector might have 32 64-bit ele-
                         ments, this code actually converts up to 32 ? 8 or 256 pixels.)
                            In contrast, Intel’s website shows that a library routine to perform the same
                         calculation on 8 pixels takes 116 MMX instructions plus 6 80x86 instructions
                         (Intel, 2001). This six-fold increase in instructions is due to the large number of
                         instructions to load and unpack RGB pixels and to pack and store YUV pixels,
                         because there are no strided memory accesses.

                         Having short, architecture-limited vectors with few registers and simple memory
                         addressing modes makes it more difficult to use vectorizing compiler technology.
                         Hence, these SIMD instructions are more likely to be found in hand-coded libraries
                         than in compiled code.

                         Summary: The Role of Compilers
                         This section leads to several recommendations. First, we expect a new instruction
                         set architecture to have at least 16 general-purpose registers—not counting

      separate registers for floating-point numbers—to simplify allocation of registers
      using graph coloring. The advice on orthogonality suggests that all supported
      addressing modes apply to all instructions that transfer data. Finally, the last three
      pieces of advice—provide primitives instead of solutions, simplify trade-offs
      between alternatives, don’t bind constants at runtime—all suggest that it is better
      to err on the side of simplicity. In other words, understand that less is more in the
      design of an instruction set. Alas, SIMD extensions are more an example of good
      marketing than of outstanding achievement of hardware–software co-design.

A.9   Putting It All Together: The RISC-V Architecture
      In this section we describe the load-store architecture called RISC-V. RISC-V is a
      freely licensed open standard, similar to many of the RISC architectures, and based
      on observations similar to those covered in the last sections. (In Section M.3 we
      discuss how and why these architectures became popular.) RISC-V builds on
      30 years of experience with RISC architectures and “cleans up” most of the
      short-term inclusions and omissions, leading to an architecture that is easier
      and more efficient to implement. RISC-V provides a both a 32-bit and a 64-bit
      instruction set, as well as a variety of extensions for features like floating point;
      these extensions can be added to either the 32-bit or 64-bit base instruction set.
      We discuss a 64-bit version of RISC-V, RV64, which is a superset of the 32-bit
      version RV32.
          Reviewing our expectations from each section, for desktop and server
      applications:

      ■   Section A.2—Use general-purpose registers with a load-store architecture.
      ■   Section A.3—Support these addressing modes: displacement (with an address
          offset size of 12–16 bits), immediate (size 8–16 bits), and register indirect.
      ■   Section A.4—Support these data sizes and types: 8-, 16-, 32-, and 64-bit inte-
          gers and 64-bit IEEE 754 floating-point numbers.
      ■   Section A.5—Support these simple instructions, because they will dominate
          the number of instructions executed: load, store, add, subtract, move
          register-register, and shift.
      ■   Section A.6—Compare equal, compare not equal, compare less, branch (with a
          PC-relative address at least 8 bits long), jump, call, and return.
      ■   Section A.7—Use fixed instruction encoding if interested in performance,
          and use variable instruction encoding if interested in code size. In some
          low-end, embedded applications, with small or only one-level caches, larger
          code size may have significant performance implications. ISAs that provide
          a compressed instruction set extension provide a way of addressing this
          difference.
      ■   Section A.8—Provide at least 16, and preferably 32, general-purpose registers,
          be sure all addressing modes apply to all data transfer instructions, and aim for

                             a minimalist instruction set. This section didn’t cover floating-point programs,
                             but they often use separate floating-point registers. The justification is to
                             increase the total number of registers without raising problems in the instruc-
                             tion format or in the speed of the general-purpose register file. This compro-
                             mise, however, is not orthogonal.

                         We introduce RISC-V by showing how it follows these recommendations. Like its
                         RISC predecessors, RISC-V emphasizes

                         ■   A simple load-store instruction set.
                         ■   Design for pipelining efficiency (discussed in Appendix C), including a fixed
                             instruction set encoding.
                         ■   Efficiency as a compiler target.

                         RISC-V provides a good architectural model for study, not only because of the pop-
                         ularity of this type of processor, but also because it is an easy architecture to under-
                         stand. We will use this architecture again in Appendix C and in Chapter 3, and it
                         forms the basis for a number of exercises and programming projects.

                         RISC-V Instruction Set Organization
                         The RISC-V instruction set is organized as three base instruction sets that support
                         32-bit or 64-bit integers, and a variety of optional extensions to one of the base instruc-
                         tion sets. This allows RISC-V to be implemented for a wide range of potential appli-
                         cations from a small embedded processor with a minimal budget for logic and memory
                         that likely costs $1 or less, to high-end processor configurations with full support for
                         floating point, vectors, and multiprocessor configurations. Figure A.22 summarizes
                         the three base instruction sets and the instruction set extensions with their basic func-
                         tionality. For purposes of this text, we use RV64IMAFD (also known as RV64G, for
                         short) in examples. RV32G is the 32-bit subset of the 64-bit architecture RV64G.

                         Registers for RISC-V
                         RV64G has 32 64-bit general-purpose registers (GPRs), named x0, x1, … , x31.
                         GPRs are also sometimes known as integer registers. Additionally, with the F and
                         D extensions for floating point that are part of RV64G, come a set of 32 floating-
                         point registers (FPRs), named f0, f1, … , f31, which can hold 32 single-precision
                         (32-bit) values or 32 double-precision (64-bit) values. (When holding one single-
                         precision number, the other half of the FPR is unused.) Both single- and double-
                         precision floating-point operations (32-bit and 64-bit) are provided.
                             The value of x0 is always 0. We shall see later how we can use this register to
                         synthesize a variety of useful operations from a simple instruction set.
                             A few special registers can be transferred to and from the general-purpose reg-
                         isters. An example is the floating-point status register, used to hold information

Name of base
or extension             Functionality
RV32I                    Base 32-bit integer instruction set with 32 registers
RV32E                    Base 32-bit instruction set but with only 16 registers; intended for
                         very low-end embedded applications
RV64I                    Base 64-bit instruction set; all registers are 64-bits, and instructions
                         to move 64-bit from/to the registers (LD and SD) are added
M                        Adds integer multiply and divide instructions
A                        Adds atomic instructions needed for concurrent processing; see
                         Chapter 5
F                        Adds single precision (32-bit) IEEE floating point, includes 32 32-
                         bit floating point registers, instructions to load and store those
                         registers and operate on them
D                        Extends floating point to double precision, 64-bit, making the
                         registers 64-bits, adding instructions to load, store, and operate on
                         the registers
Q                        Further extends floating point to add support for quad precision,
                         adding 128-bit operations
L                        Adds support for 64- and 128-bit decimal floating point for the
                         IEEE standard
C                        Defines a compressed version of the instruction set intended for
                         small-memory-sized embedded applications. Defines 16-bit
                         versions of common RV32I instructions
V                        A future extension to support vector operations (see Chapter 4)
B                        A future extension to support operations on bit fields
T                        A future extension to support transactional memory
P                        An extension to support packed SIMD instructions: see Chapter 4
RV128I                   A future base instruction set providing a 128-bit address space

Figure A.22 RISC-V has three base instructions sets (and a reserved spot for a future
fourth); all the extensions extend one of the base instruction sets. An instruction set is
thus named by the base name followed by the extensions. For example, RISC-V64IMAFD
refers to the base 64-bit instruction set with extensions M, A, F, and D. For consistency of
naming and software, this combination is given the abbreviated name: RV64G, and we
use RV64G through most of this text.

about the results of floating-point operations. There are also instructions for mov-
ing between an FPR and a GPR.

Data Types for RISC-V
The data types are 8-bit bytes, 16-bit half words, 32-bit words, and 64-bit double-
words for integer data and 32-bit single precision and 64-bit double precision for
floating point. Half words were added because they are found in languages like C

                         and are popular in some programs, such as the operating systems, concerned about
                         size of data structures. They will also become more popular if Unicode becomes
                         widely used.
                             The RV64G operations work on 64-bit integers and 32- or 64-bit floating point.
                         Bytes, half words, and words are loaded into the general-purpose registers with
                         either zeros or the sign bit replicated to fill the 64 bits of the GPRs. Once loaded,
                         they are operated on with the 64-bit integer operations.

                         Addressing Modes for RISC-V Data Transfers
                         The only data addressing modes are immediate and displacement, both with 12-bit
                         fields. Register indirect is accomplished simply by placing 0 in the 12-bit displace-
                         ment field, and limited absolute addressing with a 12-bit field is accomplished by
                         using register 0 as the base register. Embracing zero gives us four effective modes,
                         although only two are supported in the architecture.
                             RV64G memory is byte addressable with a 64-bit address and uses Little End-
                         ian byte numbering. As it is a load-store architecture, all references between mem-
                         ory and either GPRs or FPRs are through loads or stores. Supporting the data types
                         mentioned herein, memory accesses involving GPRs can be to a byte, half word,
                         word, or double word. The FPRs may be loaded and stored with single-precision or
                         double-precision numbers. Memory accesses need not be aligned; however, it may
                         be that unaligned accesses run extremely slow. In practice, programmers and com-
                         pilers would be stupid to use unaligned accesses.

                         RISC-V Instruction Format
                         Because RISC-V has just two addressing modes, these can be encoded into the
                         opcode. Following the advice on making the processor easy to pipeline and
                         decode, all instructions are 32 bits with a 7-bit primary opcode. Figure A.23 shows
                         the instruction layout of the four major instruction types. These formats are simple
                         while providing 12-bit fields for displacement addressing, immediate constants, or
                         PC-relative branch addresses.

                          31               25 24         20 19         15 14   12 11          7 6            0
                                funct7             rs2           rs1      funct3       rd           opcode       R-type

                                   imm[11:0]                     rs1      funct3       rd           opcode       I-type

                               imm[11:5]           rs2           rs1      funct3   imm[4:0]         opcode       S-type

                                               imm[31:12]                              rd           opcode       U-type

                         Figure A.23 The RISC-V instruction layout. There are two variations on these formata,
                         called the SB and UJ formats; they deal with a slightly different treatment for immediate
                         fields.

Instruction
format         Primary use           rd                  rs1                      rs2                  Immediate
R-type         Register-register     Destination         First source             Second source
               ALU instructions
I-type         ALU immediates        Destination         First source base                             Value
               Load                                      register                                      displacement
S-type         Store                                     Base register first      Data source to       Displacement
               Compare and                               source                   store second         offset
               branch                                                             source
U-type         Jump and link         Register            Target address for                            Target address
               Jump and link         destination for     jump and link                                 for jump and link
               register              return PC           register

Figure A.24 The use of instruction fields for each instruction type. Primary use shows the major instructions that
use the format. A blank indicates that the corresponding field is not present in this instruction type. The I-format is
used for both loads and ALU immediates, with the 12-bit immediate holding either the value for an immediate or the
displacement for a load. Similarly, the S-format encodes both store instructions (where the first source register is the
base register and the second contains the register source for the value to store) and compare and branch instructions
(where the register fields contain the sources to compare and the immediate field specifies the offset of the branch
target). There are actually two other formats: SB and UJ that follow the same basic organization as S and J, but slightly
modify the interpretation of the immediate fields.

                                  The instruction formats and the use of the instruction fields is described in
                              Figure A.24. The opcode specifies the general instruction type (ALU instruction,
                              ALU immediate, load, store, branch, or jump), while the funct fields are used for
                              specific operations. For example, an ALU instruction is encoded with a single
                              opcode with the funct field dictating the exact operation: add, subtract, and, etc.
                              Notice that several formats encode multiple types of instructions, including the
                              use of the I-format for both ALU immediates and loads, and the use of the S-format
                              for stores and conditional branches.

                              RISC-V Operations
                              RISC-V (or more properly RV64G) supports the list of simple operations
                              recommended herein plus a few others. There are four broad classes of
                              instructions: loads and stores, ALU operations, branches and jumps, and
                              floating-point operations.
                                  Any of the general-purpose or floating-point registers may be loaded or stored,
                              except that loading x0 has no effect. Figure A.25 gives examples of the load and
                              store instructions. Single-precision floating-point numbers occupy half a floating-
                              point register. Conversions between single and double precision must be done
                              explicitly. The floating-point format is IEEE 754 (see Appendix J). A list of all
                              the RV64G instructions appears in Figure A.28 (page A.42).

Example instruction             Instruction name          Meaning
ld x1,80(x2)                    Load doubleword           Regs[x1]      Mem[80 + Regs[x2]]
lw x1,60(x2)                    Load word                 Regs[x1] 64 Mem[60 + Regs[x2]]0)32 ##
                                                          Mem[60 + Regs[x2]]
                                                                            32
lwu x1,60(x2)                   Load word unsigned        Regs[x1]      64 0   ## Mem[60 + Regs[x2]]
                                                                                                  56
lb x1,40(x3)                    Load byte                 Regs[x1]      64 (Mem[40 + Regs[x3]]0)     ##
                                                          Mem[40 + Regs[x3]]
                                                                            56
lbu x1,40(x3)                   Load byte unsigned        Regs[x1]      64 0   ## Mem[40 + Regs[x3]]
lh x1,40(x3)                    Load half word            Regs[x1]      64 (Mem[40  + Regs[x3]]0)48 ##
                                                          Mem[40 + Regs[x3]]
                                                                                                       32
flw f0,50(x3)                   Load FP single            Regs[f0]      64 Mem[50 + Regs[x3]] ## 0

fld f0,50(x2)                   Load FP double            Regs[f0]      64 Mem[50 + Regs[x2]]

sd x2,400(x3)                   Store double              Mem[400 + Regs[x3]]        64 Regs[x2]

sw x3,500(x4)                   Store word                Mem[500 + Regs[x4]]        32 Regs[x3]32..63

fsw f0,40(x3)                   Store FP single           Mem[40 + Regs[x3]]        32 Regs[f0]0..31

fsd f0,40(x3)                   Store FP double           Mem[40 + Regs[x3]]        64 Regs[f0]

sh x3,502(x2)                   Store half                Mem[502 + Regs[x2]]        16 Regs[x3]48..63

sb x2,41(x3)                    Store byte                Mem[41 + Regs[x3]]        8 Regs[x2]56..63

Figure A.25 The load and store instructions in RISC-V. Loads shorter than 64 bits are available in both sign-
extended and zero-extended forms. All memory references use a single addressing mode. Of course, both loads
and stores are available for all the data types shown. Because RV64G supports double precision floating point, all
single precision floating point loads must be aligned in the FP register, which are 64-bits wide.

                                To understand these figures we need to introduce a few additional extensions to
                            our C description language used initially on page A-9:

                            ■     A subscript is appended to the symbol whenever the length of the datum
                                  being transferred might not be clear. Thus, n means transfer an n-bit quantity.
                                  We use x, y z to indicate that z should be transferred to x and y.
                            ■     A subscript is used to indicate selection of a bit from a field. Bits are labeled
                                  from the most-significant bit starting at 0. The subscript may be a single digit
                                  (e.g., Regs[x4]0 yields the sign bit of x4) or a subrange (e.g., Regs
                                  [x3]56..63 yields the least-significant byte of x3).
                            ■     The variable Mem, used as an array that stands for main memory, is indexed by
                                  a byte address and may transfer any number of bytes.
                            ■     A superscript is used to replicate a field (e.g., 048 yields a field of zeros of
                                  length 48 bits).
                            ■     The symbol ## is used to concatenate two fields and may appear on either side
                                  of a data transfer, and the symbols ≪ and ≫ shift the first operand left or right
                                  by the amount of the second operand.

Example
instrucmtion           Instruction name          Meaning
add x1,x2,x3           Add                       Regs[x1]       Regs[x2] + Regs[x3]
addi x1,x2,3           Add immediate             Regs[x1]       Regs[x2] + 3
                       unsigned
lui x1,42              Load upper                Regs[x1]       032##42##012
                       immediate
sll x1,x2,5            Shift left logical        Regs[x1]       Regs[x2] << 5
slt x1,x2,x3           Set less than             if (Regs[x2] < Regs[x3])
                                                 Regs[x1] 1 else Regs[x1]              0

Figure A.26 The basic ALU instructions in RISC-V are available both with register-
register operands and with one immediate operand. LUI uses the U-format that
employs the rs1 field as part of the immediate, yielding a 20-bit immediate.

As an example, assuming that x8 and x10 are 32-bit registers:
                                                  32
    Regs[x10]        64(Mem[Regs[x8]]0)             ## Mem[Regs[R8]]
means that the word at the memory location addressed by the contents of register
x8 is sign-extended to form a 64-bit quantity that is stored into register x10.
     All ALU instructions are register-register instructions. Figure A.26 gives some
examples of the arithmetic/logical instructions. The operations include simple
arithmetic and logical operations: add, subtract, AND, OR, XOR, and shifts. Immediate
forms of all these instructions are provided using a 12-bit sign-extended immedi-
ate. The operation LUI (load upper immediate) loads bits 12–31 of a register, sign-
extends the immediate field to the upper 32-bits, and sets the low-order 12-bits of
the register to 0. LUI allows a 32-bit constant to be built in two instructions, or a
data transfer using any constant 32-bit address in one extra instruction.
     As mentioned herein, x0 is used to synthesize popular operations. Loading
a constant is simply an add immediate where the source operand is x0, and a
register-register move is simply an add (or an or) where one of the sources is
x0. (We sometimes use the mnemonic li, standing for load immediate, to represent
the former, and the mnemonic mv for the latter.)

RISC-V Control Flow Instructions
Control is handled through a set of jumps and a set of branches, and Figure A.27
gives some typical branch and jump instructions. The two jump instructions (jump
and link and jump and link register) are unconditional transfers and always store
the “link,” which is the address of the instruction sequentially following the jump
instruction, in the register specified by the rd field. In the event that the link address
is not needed, the rd field can simply be set to x0, which results in a typical uncon-
ditional jump. The two jump instructions are differentiated by whether the address
is computed by adding an immediate field to the PC or by adding the immediate

Example instruction        Instruction name          Meaning
jal x1,offset              Jump and link             Regs[x1]       PC + 4; PC     PC + (offset << 1)
jalr x1,x2,offset          Jump and link register    Regs[x1]       PC + 4; PC     Regs[x2] + offset
beq x3,x4,offset           Branch equal zero         if (Regs[x3]==Regs[x4]) PC               PC + (offset << 1)
bgt x3,x4,name             Branch not equal zero     if (Regs[x3] > Regs[x4]) PC             PC + (offset << 1)

Figure A.27 Typical control flow instructions in RISC-V. All control instructions, except jumps to an address in a
register, are PC-relative.

                            field to the contents of a register. The offset is interpreted as a half word offset for
                            compatibility with the compressed instruction set, R64C, which includes 16-bit
                            instructions.
                                All branches are conditional. The branch condition is specified by the instruc-
                            tion, and any arithmetic comparison (equal, greater than, less than, and their
                            inverses) is permitted. The branch-target address is specified with a 12-bit signed
                            offset that is shifted left one place (to get 16-bit alignment) and then added to the
                            current program counter. Branches based on the contents of the floating point
                            registers are implemented by executing a floating point comparison (e.g., feq.d
                            or fle.d), which sets an integer register to 0 or 1 based on the comparison, and then
                            executing a beq or bne with x0 as an operand.
                                The observant reader will have noticed that there are very few 64-bit only
                            instructions in RV64G. Primarily, these are the 64-bit loads and stores and versions
                            of 32-bit, 16-bit, and 8-bit loads that do not sign extend (the default is to sign-extend).
                            To support 32-bit modular arithmetic without additional instructions, there are ver-
                            sions of the instructions that ignore the upper 32 bits of a 64-bit register, such as add
                            and subtract word (addw, subw). Amazingly, everything else just works.

                            RISC-V Floating-Point Operations
                            Floating-point instructions manipulate the floating-point registers and indicate
                            whether the operation to be performed is single or double precision. The
                            floating-point operations are add, subtract, multiply, divide, square root, as well
                            as fused multiply-add and multiply-subtract. All floating point instructions begin
                            with the letter f and use the suffix d for double precision and s for single precision
                            (e.g., fadd.d, fadd.s, fmul.d, fmul.s, fmadd.d fmadd.s). Floating-
                            point compares set an integer register based on the comparison, similarly to the
                            integer instruction set-less-than and set-great-than.
                                In addition to floating-point loads and stores (flw, fsw, fld, fsd), instruc-
                            tions are provided for converting between different FP precisions, for moving between
                            integer and FP registers (fmv), and for converting between floating point and integer
                            (fcvt, which uses the integer registers for source or destination as appropriate).
                                Figure A.28 contains a list of nearly all the RV64G instructions and a summary
                            of their meaning.

Instruction type/opcode                     Instruction meaning
Data transfers                              Move data between registers and memory, or between the integer and FP;
                                            only memory address mode is 12-bit displacement + contents of a GPR
lb, lbu, sb                                 Load byte, load byte unsigned, store byte (to/from integer registers)
lh, lhu, sh                                 Load half word, load half word unsigned, store half word (to/from integer
                                            registers)
lw, lwu, sw                                 Load word, store word (to/from integer registers)
ld, sd                                      Load doubleword, store doubleword
Arithmetic/logical                          Operations on data in GPRs. Word versions ignore upper 32 bits
add, addi, addw, addiw, sub,                Add and subtract, with both word and immediate versions
subi, subw, subiw
slt, sltu, slti, sltiu                      set-less-than with signed and unsigned, and immediate
and, or, xor, andi, ori, xori               and, or, xor, both register-register and register-immediate
lui                                         Load upper immediate: loads bits 31..12 of a register with the immediate
                                            value. Upper 32 bits are set to 0
auipc                                       Sums an immediate and the upper 20-bits of the PC into a register; used for
                                            building a branch to any 32-bit address
sll, srl, sra, slli, srli,                  Shifts: logical shift left and right and arithmetic shift right, both immediate
srai, sllw,slliw, srli,                     and word versions (word versions leave the upper 32 bit untouched)
srliw, srai, sraiw
mul, mulw, mulh, mulhsu,                    Integer multiply, divide, and remainder, signed and unsigned with support for
mulhu, div,divw, divu, rem,                 64-bit products in two instructions. Also word versions
remu, remw, remuw
Control                                     Conditional branches and jumps; PC-relative or through register
beq, bne, blt, bge, bltu, bgeu              Branch based on compare of two registers, equal, not equal, less than, greater
                                            or equal, signed and unsigned
jal,jalr                                    Jump and link address relative to a register or the PC
Floating point                              All FP operation appear in double precision (.d) and single (.s)
flw, fld, fsw, fsd                          Load, store, word (single precision), doubleword (double precision)
fadd, fsub, fmult, fiv, fsqrt,              Add, subtract, multiply, divide, square root, multiply-add, multiply-subtract,
fmadd, fmsub, fnmadd, fnmsub,               negate multiply-add, negate multiply-subtract, maximum, minimum, and
fmin, fmax, fsgn, fsgnj, fsjnx              instructions to replace the sign bit. For single precision, the opcode is
                                            followed by: .s, for double precision: .d. Thus fadd.s, fadd.d
feq, flt, fle                               Compare two floating point registers; result is 0 or 1 stored into a GPR
fmv.x.*, fmv.*.x                            Move between the FP register abd GPR, “*” is s or d
fcvt.*.l, fcvt.l.*, fcvt.*.                 Converts between a FP register and integer register, where “*” is S or D for
lu, fcvt.lu.*, fcvt.*.w, fcvt.              single or double precision. Signed and unsigned versions and word,
w.*, fcvt.*.wu, fcvt.wu.*                   doubleword versions

Figure A.28 A list of the vast majority of instructions in RV64G. This list can also be found on the back inside cover.
This table omits system instructions, synchronization and atomic instructions, configuration instructions, instructions
to reset and access performance counters, about 10 instructions in total.

Program                Loads             Stores             Branches              Jumps              ALU operations
astar                   28%                 6%                 18%                  2%                     46%
bzip                    20%                 7%                 11%                  1%                     54%
gcc                     17%               23%                  20%                  4%                     36%
gobmk                   21%               12%                  14%                  2%                     50%
h264ref                 33%               14%                   5%                  2%                     45%
hmmer                   28%                 9%                 17%                  0%                     46%
libquantum              16%                 6%                 29%                  0%                     48%
mcf                     35%               11%                  24%                  1%                     29%
omnetpp                 23%               15%                  17%                  7%                     31%
perlbench               25%               14%                  15%                  7%                     39%
sjeng                   19%                 7%                 15%                  3%                     56%
xalancbmk               30%                 8%                 27%                  3%                     31%

Figure A.29 RISC-V dynamic instruction mix for the SPECint2006 programs. Omnetpp includes 7% of the instruc-
tions that are floating point loads, stores, operations, or compares; no other program includes even 1% of other
instruction types. A change in gcc in SPECint2006, creates an anomaly in behavior. Typical integer programs have
load frequencies that are 1/5 to 3x the store frequency. In gcc, the store frequency is actually higher than the load
frequency! This arises because a large fraction of the execution time is spent in a loop that clears memory by storing
x0 (not where a compiler like gcc would usually spend most of its execution time!). A store instruction that stores a
register pair, which some other RISC ISAs have included, would address this issue.

                              RISC-V Instruction Set Usage
                              To give an idea of which instructions are popular, Figure A.29 shows the frequency
                              of instructions and instruction classes for the SPECint2006 programs, using
                              RV32G.

                 A.10         Fallacies and Pitfalls
                              Architects have repeatedly tripped on common, but erroneous, beliefs. In this sec-
                              tion we look at a few of them.
                   Pitfall    Designing a “high-level” instruction set feature specifically oriented to supporting
                              a high-level language structure.
                              Attempts to incorporate high-level language features in the instruction set have led
                              architects to provide powerful instructions with a wide range of flexibility. How-
                              ever, often these instructions do more work than is required in the frequent case, or
                              they don’t exactly match the requirements of some languages. Many such efforts
                              have been aimed at eliminating what in the 1970s was called the semantic gap.
                              Although the idea is to supplement the instruction set with additions that bring

          the hardware up to the level of the language, the additions can generate what Wulf
          et al. (1981) have called a semantic clash:
          … by giving too much semantic content to the instruction, the computer
          designer made it possible to use the instruction only in limited contexts. [p. 43]
          More often the instructions are simply overkill—they are too general for the most
          frequent case, resulting in unneeded work and a slower instruction. Again, the
          VAX CALLS is a good example. CALLS uses a callee save strategy (the registers
          to be saved are specified by the callee), but the saving is done by the call instruction
          in the caller. The CALLS instruction begins with the arguments pushed on the
          stack, and then takes the following steps:

          1. Align the stack if needed.
          2. Push the argument count on the stack.
          3. Save the registers indicated by the procedure call mask on the stack (as men-
             tioned in Section A.8). The mask is kept in the called procedure’s code—this
             permits the callee to specify the registers to be saved by the caller even with
             separate compilation.
          4. Push the return address on the stack, and then push the top and base of stack
             pointers (for the activation record).
          5. Clear the condition codes, which sets the trap enable to a known state.
          6. Push a word for status information and a zero word on the stack.
          7. Update the two stack pointers.
          8. Branch to the first instruction of the procedure.

              The vast majority of calls in real programs do not require this amount of over-
          head. Most procedures know their argument counts, and a much faster linkage
          convention can be established using registers to pass arguments rather than the
          stack in memory. Furthermore, the CALLS instruction forces two registers to
          be used for linkage, while many languages require only one linkage register.
          Many attempts to support procedure call and activation stack management have
          failed to be useful, either because they do not match the language needs or
          because they are too general and hence too expensive to use.
              The VAX designers provided a simpler instruction, JSB, that is much faster
          because it only pushes the return PC on the stack and jumps to the procedure. How-
          ever, most VAX compilers use the more costly CALLS instructions. The call
          instructions were included in the architecture to standardize the procedure linkage
          convention. Other computers have standardized their calling convention by agree-
          ment among compiler writers and without requiring the overhead of a complex,
          very general procedure call instruction.

Fallacy   There is such a thing as a typical program.

                                                                                  60%
                              Double word                                                              94%
                                 (64 bits)                        31%
                                                                                   62%

                                                                        40%
                                     Word           6%
                                  (32 bits)                     28%
                                                          18%                                       applu
                                               0%                                                   equake
                                 Half word     0%                                                   gzip
                                  (16 bits)               19%                                       perl
                                                   3%

                                               0%
                                      Byte     0%
                                   (8 bits)                 22%
                                                          18%

                                              0%         20%          40%      60%          80%         100%

                          Figure A.30 Data reference size of four programs from SPEC2000. Although you can
                          calculate an average size, it would be hard to claim the average is typical of programs.

                          Many people would like to believe that there is a single “typical” program that
                          could be used to design an optimal instruction set. For example, see the synthetic
                          benchmarks discussed in Chapter 1. The data in this appendix clearly show that
                          programs can vary significantly in how they use an instruction set. For example,
                          Figure A.30 shows the mix of data transfer sizes for four of the SPEC2000 pro-
                          grams: It would be hard to say what is typical from these four programs. The var-
                          iations are even larger on an instruction set that supports a class of applications,
                          such as decimal instructions, that are unused by other applications.
                Pitfall   Innovating at the instruction set architecture to reduce code size without account-
                          ing for the compiler.
                          Figure A.31 shows the relative code sizes for four compilers for the MIPS instruction
                          set. Whereas architects struggle to reduce code size by 30%–40%, different compiler
                          strategies can change code size by much larger factors. Similar to performance opti-
                          mization techniques, the architect should start with the tightest code the compilers
                          can produce before proposing hardware innovations to save space.

               Fallacy    An architecture with flaws cannot be successful.
                          The 80x86 provides a dramatic example: the instruction set architecture is one only
                          its creators could love (see Appendix K). Succeeding generations of Intel engineers
                          have tried to correct unpopular architectural decisions made in designing the
                          80x86. For example, the 80x86 supports segmentation, whereas all others picked
                          paging; it uses extended accumulators for integer data, but other processors use
                          general-purpose registers; and it uses a stack for floating-point data, when every-
                          one else abandoned execution stacks long before.

                                                               Green Hills
                                    Apogee software            Multi2000           Algorithmics
Compiler                              version 4.1              Version 2.0           SDE4.0B           IDT/c 7.2.1
Architecture                             MIPS IV                MIPS IV               MIPS 32              MIPS 32
Processor                             NEC VR5432              NEC VR5000             IDT 32334      IDT 79RC32364
Autocorrelation kernel                      1.0                    2.1                  1.1                  2.7
Convolutional encoder kernel                1.0                    1.9                  1.2                  2.4
Fixed-point bit allocation kernel           1.0                    2.0                  1.2                  2.3
Fixed-point complex FFT kernel              1.0                    1.1                  2.7                  1.8
Viterbi GSM decoder kernel                  1.0                    1.7                  0.8                  1.1
Geometric mean of five kernels              1.0                    1.7                  1.4                  2.0

Figure A.31 Code size relative to Apogee Software Version 4.1 C compiler for Telecom application of EEMBC
benchmarks. The instruction set architectures are virtually identical, yet the code sizes vary by factors of 2. These
results were reported February–June 2000.

                                   Despite these major difficulties, the 80x86 architecture has been enormously
                               successful. The reasons are threefold: first, its selection as the microprocessor in
                               the initial IBM PC makes 80x86 binary compatibility extremely valuable. Second,
                               Moore’s Law provided sufficient resources for 80x86 microprocessors to translate
                               to an internal RISC instruction set and then execute RISC-like instructions. This
                               mix enables binary compatibility with the valuable PC software base and perfor-
                               mance on par with RISC processors. Third, the very high volumes of PC micro-
                               processors mean Intel can easily pay for the increased design cost of hardware
                               translation. In addition, the high volumes allow the manufacturer to go up the
                               learning curve, which lowers the cost of the product.
                                   The larger die size and increased power for translation may be a liability for
                               embedded applications, but it makes tremendous economic sense for the desktop.
                               And its cost-performance in the desktop also makes it attractive for servers, with its
                               main weakness for servers being 32-bit addresses, which was resolved with a 64-
                               bit address extension.

                  Fallacy      You can design a flawless architecture.
                               All architecture design involves trade-offs made in the context of a set of hardware
                               and software technologies. Over time those technologies are likely to change, and
                               decisions that may have been correct at the time they were made look like mistakes.
                               For example, in 1975 the VAX designers overemphasized the importance of code
                               size efficiency, underestimating how important ease of decoding and pipelining
                               would be five years later. An example in the RISC camp is delayed branch (see
                               Appendix K). It was a simple matter to control pipeline hazards with five-stage
                               pipelines, but a challenge for processors with longer pipelines that issue multiple
                               instructions per clock cycle. In addition, almost all architectures eventually suc-
                               cumb to the lack of sufficient address space. This is one reason that RISC-V

                         has planned for the possibility of 128-bit addresses, although it may be decades
                         before such capability is needed.
                             In general, avoiding such flaws in the long run would probably mean
                         compromising the efficiency of the architecture in the short run, which is danger-
                         ous, since a new instruction set architecture must struggle to survive its first
                         few years.

              A.11       Concluding Remarks
                         The earliest architectures were limited in their instruction sets by the hardware
                         technology of that time. As soon as the hardware technology permitted, computer
                         architects began looking for ways to support high-level languages. This search led
                         to three distinct periods of thought about how to support programs efficiently. In
                         the 1960s, stack architectures became popular. They were viewed as being a good
                         match for high-level languages—and they probably were, given the compiler tech-
                         nology of the day. In the 1970s, the main concern of architects was how to reduce
                         software costs. This concern was met primarily by replacing software with hard-
                         ware, or by providing high-level architectures that could simplify the task of soft-
                         ware designers. The result was both the high-level language computer architecture
                         movement and powerful architectures like the VAX, which has a large number of
                         addressing modes, multiple data types, and a highly orthogonal architecture. In the
                         1980s, more sophisticated compiler technology and a renewed emphasis on pro-
                         cessor performance saw a return to simpler architectures, based mainly on the
                         load-store style of computer.
                             The following instruction set architecture changes occurred in the 1990s:

                         ■   Address size doubles—The 32-bit address instruction sets for most desktop and
                             server processors were extended to 64-bit addresses, expanding the width of
                             the registers (among other things) to 64 bits. Appendix K gives three examples
                             of architectures that have gone from 32 bits to 64 bits.
                         ■   Optimization of conditional branches via conditional execution—In Chapter 3,
                             we see that conditional branches can limit the performance of aggressive com-
                             puter designs. Hence, there was interest in replacing conditional branches with
                             conditional completion of operations, such as conditional move (see Appendix
                             H), which was added to most instruction sets.
                         ■   Optimization of cache performance via prefetch—Chapter 2 explains the
                             increasing role of memory hierarchy in the performance of computers, with
                             a cache miss on some computers taking as many instruction times as page faults
                             took on earlier computers. Hence, prefetch instructions were added to try to
                             hide the cost of cache misses by prefetching (see Chapter 2).
                         ■   Support for multimedia—Most desktop and embedded instruction sets were
                             extended with support for multimedia applications.
                                                    Exercises by Gregory D. Peterson            ■   A-47

         ■   Faster floating-point operations—Appendix J describes operations added to
             enhance floating-point performance, such as operations that perform a multiply
             and an add and paired single execution, which are part of RISC-V.
         Between 1970 and 1985 many thought the primary job of the computer architect was
         the design of instruction sets. As a result, textbooks of that era emphasize instruction
         set design, much as computer architecture textbooks of the 1950s and 1960s empha-
         sized computer arithmetic. The educated architect was expected to have strong opin-
         ions about the strengths and especially the weaknesses of the popular computers.
         The importance of binary compatibility in quashing innovations in instruction set
         design was unappreciated by many researchers and textbook writers, giving the
         impression that many architects would get a chance to design an instruction set.
              The definition of computer architecture today has been expanded to include
         design and evaluation of the full computer system—not just the definition of
         the instruction set and not just the processor—and hence there are plenty of topics
         for the architect to study. In fact, the material in this appendix was a central point of
         the book in its first edition in 1990, but now is included in an appendix primarily as
         reference material!
              Appendix K may satisfy readers interested in instruction set architecture; it
         describes a variety of instruction sets, which are either important in the marketplace
         today or historically important, and it compares nine popular load-store computers
         with RISC-V.

A.12     Historical Perspective and References
         Section M.4 (available online) features a discussion on the evolution of instruction
         sets and includes references for further reading and exploration of related topics.

         Exercises by Gregory D. Peterson
   A.1   [10] < A.9 > Compute the effective CPI for an implementation of an embedded
         RISC-V CPU using Figure A.29. Assume we have made the following measure-
         ments of average CPI for each of the instruction types:

                      Instruction                                                Clock cycles
                      All ALU operations                                               1.0
                      Loads                                                            5.0
                      Stores                                                           3.0
                      Branches
                         Taken                                                         5.0
                         Not taken                                                     3.0
                      Jumps                                                            3.0
                      Average the instruction frequencies of astar and gcc to obtain the
                         instruction mix.

                   A.2   [10] < A.9 > Compute the effective CPI for RISC-V using Figure A.29 and the
                         table above. Average the instruction frequencies of bzip and hmmer to obtain
                         the instruction mix. You may assume that all other instructions (for instructions
                         not accounted for by the types in Table A.29) require 3.0 clock cycles each.
                   A.3   [10] < A.9 > Compute the effective CPI for an implementation of a RISC-V CPU
                         using Figure A.29. Assume we have made the following measurements of average
                         CPI for each of the instruction types:

                                     Instruction                                              Clock cycles
                                     All ALU operations                                             1.0
                                     Loads                                                          3.5
                                     Stores                                                         2.8
                                     Branches
                                          Taken                                                     4.0
                                          Not taken                                                 2.0
                                     Jumps                                                          2.4
                                     Average the instruction frequencies of gobmk and mcf to obtain the
                                        instruction mix. You may assume that all other instructions (for
                                        instructions not accounted for by the types in Table A.29)
                                        require 3.0 clock cycles each.

                   A.4   [10] < A.9 > Compute the effective CPI for RISC-V using Figure A.29 and the
                         table above. Average the instruction frequencies of perlbench and sjeng to obtain
                         the instruction mix.
                   A.5   [10] < A.8 > Consider this high-level code sequence of three statements:
                             A = B + C;
                             B = A + C;
                             D = A – B;
                             Use the technique of copy propagation (see Figure A.20) to transform the
                         code sequence to the point where no operand is a computed value. Note the
                         instances in which the transformation has reduced the computational work of a
                         statement and those cases where the work has increased. What does this suggest
                         about the technical challenge faced in trying to satisfy the desire for optimizing
                         compilers?
                   A.6   [30] < A.8 > Compiler optimizations may result in improvements to code size
                         and/or performance. Consider one or more of the benchmark programs from
                         the SPEC CPU2017 or the EEMBC benchmark suites. Use the RISC-V processor
                         or a processor available to you along with the GNU C compiler to optimize the
                         benchmark program(s) using no optimization, –O1, –O2, and –O3. Compare
                         the performance and size of the resulting programs. Also compare your results
                         to Figure A.21.
                                          Exercises by Gregory D. Peterson      ■   A-49

A.7   [20/20/20/25/10] < A.2, A.9 > Consider the following fragment of C code:
         for (i = 0; i < 100; i++) {
                A[i] = B[i] + C;
         }
          Assume that A and B are arrays of 64-bit integers, and C and i are 64-bit inte-
      gers. Assume that all data values and their addresses are kept in memory (at
      addresses 1000, 3000, 5000, and 7000 for A, B, C, and i, respectively) except when
      they are operated on. Assume that values in registers are lost between iterations of
      the loop. Assume all addresses and words are 64 bits.
      a. [20] < A.2, A.9 > Write the code for RISC-V. How many instructions are
         required dynamically? How many memory-data references will be executed?
         What is the code size in bytes?
      b. [20] < A.2 > Write the code for x86. How many instructions are required
         dynamically? How many memory-data references will be executed? What is the
         code size in bytes?
      c. [20] < A.2 > Write the code for a stack machine. Assume all operations occur
         on top of the stack. Push and pop are the only instructions that access memory;
         all others remove their operands from the stack and replace them with the result.
         The implementation uses a hardwired stack for only the top two stack entries,
         which keeps the processor circuit very small and low in cost. Additional stack
         positions are kept in memory locations, and accesses to these stack positions
         require memory references. How many instructions are required dynamically?
         How many memory-data references will be executed?
      d. [25] < A.2, A.9 > Instead of the code fragment above, write a routine for
         computing a matrix multiplication for dense, single precision matrices, also
         known as SGEMM. For input matrices of size 100 ? 100, how many instruc-
         tions are required dynamically? How many memory-data references will be
         executed?
      e. [10] < A.2, A.9 > As the matrix size increases, how does this affect the number
         of instructions executed dynamically or the number of memory-data
         references?
A.8   [25/25] < A.2, A.8, A.9 > Consider the following fragment of C code:
      for(p = 0; p <8; p++) {
           Y[p] = (9798*R[p] +19235*G[p] + 3736*B[p])/32768;
           U[p] =(-4784*R[p] ? 9437*G[p] +4221*B[p])/32768 +128;
           V[p] = (20218*R[p]?16941*G[p]?3277*B[p])/32768 +128;
      }
          Assume that R, G, B, Y, U, and V are arrays of 64-bit integers. Assume that
      all data values and their addresses are kept in memory (at addresses 1000, 2000,
      3000, 4000, 5000, and 6000 for R, G, B, Y, U, and V, respectively) except when
      they are operated on. Assume that values in registers are lost between iterations of
      the loop. Assume all addresses and words are 64 bits.

                         a. [25] < A.2, A.9 > Write the code for RISC-V. How many instructions are
                            required dynamically? How many memory-data references will be executed?
                            What is the code size in bytes?
                         b. [25] < A.2 > Write the code for x86. How many instructions are required
                            dynamically? How many memory-data references will be executed? What is
                            the code size in bytes? Compare your results to the multimedia instructions
                            (MMX) and vector implementations discussed in the A.8.
                   A.9   [10/10/10/10] < A.2, A.7 > For the following, we consider instruction encoding for
                         instruction set architectures.
                         a. [10] < A.2, A.7 > Consider the case of a processor with an instruction length of
                            14 bits and with 64 general-purpose registers so the size of the address fields is
                            6 bits. Is it possible to have instruction encodings for the following?
                            ■   3 two-address instructions
                            ■   63 one-address instructions
                            ■   45 zero-address instructions
                         b. [10] < A.2, A.7 > Assuming the same instruction length and address field sizes
                            as above, determine if it is possible to have
                            ■   3 two-address instructions
                            ■   65 one-address instructions
                            ■   35 zero-address instructions
                            Explain your answer.
                         c. [10] < A.2, A.7 > Assume the same instruction length and address field sizes as
                            above. Further assume there are already 3 two-address and 24 zero-address
                            instructions. What is the maximum number of one-address instructions that
                            can be encoded for this processor?
                         d. [10] < A.2, A.7 > Assume the same instruction length and address field sizes as
                            above. Further assume there are already 3 two-address and 65 zero-address
                            instructions. What is the maximum number of one-address instructions that
                            can be encoded for this processor?
                  A.10   [10/15] < A.2 > For the following assume that integer values A, B, C, D, E, and F
                         reside in memory. Also assume that instruction operation codes are represented in
                         8 bits, memory addresses are 64 bits, and register addresses are 6 bits.
                         a. [10] < A.2 > For each instruction set architecture shown in Figure A.2, how
                            many addresses, or names, appear in each instruction for the code to compute
                            C = A + B, and what is the total code size?
                         b. [15] < A.2 > Some of the instruction set architectures in Figure A.2 destroy
                            operands in the course of computation. This loss of data values from processor
                            internal storage has performance consequences. For each architecture in Figure
                            A.2, write the code sequence to compute:
                            C=A+B
                            D=A – E
                            F=C+D
                                            Exercises by Gregory D. Peterson       ■   A-51

           In your code, mark each operand that is destroyed during execution and mark
       each “overhead” instruction that is included just to overcome this loss of data from
       processor internal storage. What is the total code size, the number of bytes of
       instructions and data moved to or from memory, the number of overhead instruc-
       tions, and the number of overhead data bytes for each of your code sequences?
A.11   [15] < A.2, A.7, A.9 > The design of RISC-V provides for 32 general-purpose reg-
       isters and 32 floating-point registers. If registers are good, are more registers bet-
       ter? List and discuss as many trade-offs as you can that should be considered by
       instruction set architecture designers examining whether to, and how much to,
       increase the number of RISC-V registers.
A.12   [5] < A.3 > Consider a C struct that includes the following members:
          struct foo {
              char a;
              bool b;
              int c;
              double d;
              short e;
              float f;
              double g;
              char *cptr;
              float *fptr;
              int x;
          };

           Note that for C, the compiler must keep the elements of the struct in the same
       order as given in the struct definition. For a 32-bit machine, what is the size of the
       foo struct? What is the minimum size required for this struct, assuming you may
       arrange the order of the struct members as you wish? What about for a 64-bit machine?
A.13   [30] < A.7 > Many computer manufacturers now include tools or simulators that
       allow you to measure the instruction set usage of a user program. Among the
       methods in use are machine simulation, hardware-supported trapping, and tech-
       niques that instrument the object code module by inserting counters in software
       or using built-in hardware counters. Pick a processor and tools to instrument user
       programs. (The open source RISC-V architecture supports a collection of tools.
       Tools such as the Performance API (PAPI) work with x86 processors.) Use the
       processor and tools to measure the instruction set mix for one of the SPEC
       CPU2017 benchmarks. Compare the results to those shown in this chapter.
A.14   [30] < A.8 > Newer processors such as Intel's i7 Kaby Lake include support for
       AVX2 vector/multimedia instructions. Write a dense matrix multiply function
       using single-precision values and compile it with different compilers and optimi-
       zation flags. Linear algebra codes using Basic Linear Algebra Subroutine (BLAS)
       routines such as SGEMM include optimized versions of dense matrix multiply.
       Compare the code size and performance of your code to that of BLAS SGEMM.
       Explore what happens when using double-precision values and DGEMM.

                  A.15   [30] < A.8 > For the SGEMM code developed above for the i7 processor, include
                         the use of AVX2 intrinsics to improve the performance. In particular, try to vec-
                         torize your code to better utilize the AVX hardware. Compare the code size and
                         performance to the original code. Compare your results to Intel's Math Kernel
                         Library (MKL) implementation for SGEMM.
                  A.16   [30] < A.7, A.9 > The RISC-V processor is open source and boasts an impressive
                         collection of implementations, simulators, compilers, and other tools. See riscv.org
                         for an overview of tools, including spike, a simulator for RISC-V processors. Use
                         spike or another simulator to measure the instruction set mix for some SPEC
                         CPU2017 benchmark programs.
                  A.17   [35/35/35/35] < A.2–A.8 > gcc targets most modern instruction set architectures
                         (see www.gnu.org/software/gcc/). Create a version of gcc for several architectures
                         that you have access to, such as x86, RISC-V, PowerPC, and ARM.
                         a. [35] < A.2–A.8 > Compile a subset of SPEC CPU2017 integer benchmarks and
                            create a table of code sizes. Which architecture is best for each program?
                         b. [35] < A.2–A.8 > Compile a subset of SPEC CPU2017 floating-point
                            benchmarks and create a table of code sizes. Which architecture is best for each
                            program?
                         c. [35] < A.2–A.8 > Compile a subset of EEMBC AutoBench benchmarks (see
                            www.eembc.org/home.php) and create a table of code sizes. Which architecture
                            is best for each program?
                         d. [35] < A.2–A.8 > Compile a subset of EEMBC FPBench floating-point bench-
                            marks and create a table of code sizes. Which architecture is best for each
                            program?
                  A.18   [40] < A.2–A.8 > Power efficiency has become very important for modern proces-
                         sors, particularly for embedded systems. Create a version of gcc for two architec-
                         tures that you have access to, such as x86, RISC-V, PowerPC, Atom, and ARM.
                         (Note that the different versions of RISC-V can also be explored and compared.)
                         Compile a subset of EEMBC benchmarks while using EnergyBench to measure
                         energy usage during execution. Compare code size, performance, and energy
                         usage for the processors. Which is best for each program?
                  A.19   [20/15/15/20] Your task is to compare the memory efficiency of four different
                         styles of instruction set architectures. The architecture styles are:
                         ■   Accumulator—All operations occur between a single register and a memory
                             location.
                         ■   Memory-memory—All instruction addresses reference only memory locations.
                         ■   Stack—All operations occur on top of the stack. Push and pop are the only
                             instructions that access memory; all others remove their operands from the
                             stack and replace them with the result. The implementation uses a hardwired
                             stack for only the top two stack entries, which keeps the processor circuit very
                             small and low in cost. Additional stack positions are kept in memory loca-
                             tions, and accesses to these stack positions require memory references.
                                           Exercises by Gregory D. Peterson       ■   A-53

       ■   Load-store—All operations occur in registers, and register-to-register instruc-
           tions have three register names per instruction.

       To measure memory efficiency, make the following assumptions about all four
       instruction sets:
       ■   All instructions are an integral number of bytes in length.
       ■   The opcode is always one byte (8 bits).
       ■   Memory accesses use direct, or absolute, addressing.
       ■   The variables A, B, C, and D are initially in memory.

       a. [20] < A.2, A.3 > Invent your own assembly language mnemonics (Figure
          A.2 provides a useful sample to generalize), and for each architecture write
          the best equivalent assembly language code for this high-level language code
          sequence:
           A = B + C;
           B = A + C;
           D = A – B;

       b. [15] < A.3 > Label each instance in your assembly codes for part (a) where a
          value is loaded from memory after having been loaded once. Also label each
          instance in your code where the result of one instruction is passed to another
          instruction as an operand, and further classify these events as involving storage
          within the processor or storage in memory.
       c. [15] < A.7 > Assume that the given code sequence is from a small, embedded
          computer application that uses a 16-bit memory address and data operands. If
          a load-store architecture is used, assume it has 16 general-purpose registers.
          For each architecture answer the following questions: How many instruction bytes
          are fetched? How many bytes of data are transferred from/to memory? Which
          architecture is most efficient as measured by total memory traffic (code + data)?
       d. [20] < A.7 > Now assume a processor with 64-bit memory addresses and data
          operands. For each architecture answer the questions of part (c). How have the
          relative merits of the architectures changed for the chosen metrics?
A.20   [30] < A.2, A.3 > Use the four different instruction set architecture styles from
       above, but assume that the memory operations supported include register indirect
       as well as direct addressing. Invent your own assembly language mnemonics (Fig-
       ure A.2 provides a useful sample to generalize), and for each architecture, write the
       best equivalent assembly language code for this fragment of C code:
            for (i = 0; i <= 100; i++) {
                 A[i] = B[i]* C + D ;
            }
           Assume that A and B are arrays of 64-bit integers, and C, D, and i are 64-bit
       integers.

                  A.21   [20/20] < A.3, A.6, A.9 > The size of displacement values needed for the displace-
                         ment addressing mode or for PC-relative addressing can be extracted from com-
                         piled applications. Use a disassembler with one or more of the SPEC CPU2017
                         or EEMBC benchmarks compiled for the RISC-V processor.
                         a. [20] < A.3, A.9 > For each instruction using displacement addressing, record
                            the displacement value used. Create a histogram of displacement values. Com-
                            pare the results to those shown in this appendix in Figure A.8.
                         b. [20] < A.6, A.9 > For each branch instruction using PC-relative addressing,
                            record the offset value used. Create a histogram of offset values. Compare
                            the results to those shown in this chapter in Figure A.15.
                  A.22   [15/15/10/10/10/10] < A.3 > The value represented by the hexadecimal number
                         5249 5343 5643 5055 is to be stored in an aligned 64-bit double word.
                         a. [15] < A.3 > Using the physical arrangement of the first row in Figure A.5,
                            write the value to be stored using Big Endian byte order. Next, interpret each
                            byte as an ASCII character and below each byte write the corresponding char-
                            acter, forming the character string as it would be stored in Big Endian order.
                         b. [15] < A.3 > Using the same physical arrangement as in part (a), write the value
                            to be stored using Little Endian byte order, and below each byte write the cor-
                            responding ASCII character.
                         c. [10] < A.3 > What are the hexadecimal values of all misaligned 2-byte words
                            that can be read from the given 64-bit double word when stored in Big Endian
                            byte order?
                         d. [10] < A.3 > What are the hexadecimal values of all misaligned 2-byte words
                            that can be read from the given 64-bit double word when stored in Big Endian
                            byte order?
                         e. [10] < A.3 > What are the hexadecimal values of all misaligned 2-byte words
                            that can be read from the given 64-bit double word when stored in Little Endian
                            byte order?
                          f. [10] < A.3 > What are the hexadecimal values of all misaligned 4-byte words
                             that can be read from the given 64-bit double word when stored in Little Endian
                             byte order?
                  A.23   [25,25] < A.3, A.9 > The relative frequency of different addressing modes impacts the
                         choices of addressing modes support for an instruction set architecture. Figure A.7
                         illustrates the relative frequency of addressing modes for three applications on the
                         VAX.
                         a. [25] < A.3 > Compile one or more programs from the SPEC CPU2017 or
                            EEMBC benchmark suites to target the x86 architecture. Using a disassembler,
                            inspect the instructions and the relative frequency of various addressing modes.
                            Create a histogram to illustrate the relative frequency of the addressing modes.
                            How do your results compare to Figure A.7?
                                          Exercises by Gregory D. Peterson      ■   A-55

       b. [25] < A.3, A.9 > Compile one or more programs from the SPEC CPU2017 or
          EEMBC benchmark suites to target the RISC-V architecture. Using a disassem-
          bler, inspect the instructions and the relative frequency of various addressing
          modes. Create a histogram to illustrate the relative frequency of the addressing
          modes. How do your results compare to Figure A.7?
A.24   [Discussion] < A.2–A.12 > Consider typical applications for desktop, server,
       cloud, and embedded computing. How would instruction set architecture be
       impacted for machines targeting each of these markets?
