C.1    Introduction                                                  C-2
C.2    The Major Hurdle of Pipelining—Pipeline Hazards              C-10
C.3    How Is Pipelining Implemented?                               C-26
C.4    What Makes Pipelining Hard to Implement?                     C-37
C.5    Extending the RISC V Integer Pipeline to Handle Multicycle
             Operations                                             C-45
C.6    Putting It All Together: The MIPS R4000 Pipeline             C-55
C.7    Cross-Cutting Issues                                         C-65
C.8    Fallacies and Pitfalls                                       C-70
C.9    Concluding Remarks                                           C-71
C.10   Historical Perspective and References                        C-71
       Updated Exercises by Diana Franklin                          C-71
C
    Pipelining: Basic and
    Intermediate Concepts

    It is quite a three-pipe problem.
                                       Sir Arthur Conan Doyle,
                               The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes
C-2   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

               C.1       Introduction
                         Many readers of this text will have covered the basics of pipelining in another text
                         (such as our more basic text Computer Organization and Design) or in another
                         course. Because Chapter 3 builds heavily on this material, readers should ensure
                         that they are familiar with the concepts discussed in this appendix before proceed-
                         ing. As you read Chapter 3, you may find it helpful to turn to this material for a
                         quick review.
                             We begin the appendix with the basics of pipelining, including discussing the
                         data path implications, introducing hazards, and examining the performance of
                         pipelines. This section describes the basic five-stage RISC pipeline that is the basis
                         for the rest of the appendix. Section C.2 describes the issue of hazards, why they
                         cause performance problems, and how they can be dealt with. Section C.3 dis-
                         cusses how the simple five-stage pipeline is actually implemented, focusing on
                         control and how hazards are dealt with.
                             Section C.4 discusses the interaction between pipelining and various aspects of
                         instruction set design, including discussing the important topic of exceptions and
                         their interaction with pipelining. Readers unfamiliar with the concepts of precise
                         and imprecise interrupts and resumption after exceptions will find this material
                         useful, because they are key to understanding the more advanced approaches in
                         Chapter 3.
                             Section C.5 discusses how the five-stage pipeline can be extended to handle
                         longer-running floating-point instructions. Section C.6 puts these concepts
                         together in a case study of a deeply pipelined processor, the MIPS R4000/4400,
                         including both the eight-stage integer pipeline and the floating-point pipeline.
                         The MIPS R40000 is similar to a single-issue embedded processor, such as the
                         ARM Cortex-A5, which became available in 2010, and was used in several smart
                         phones and tablets.
                             Section C.7 introduces the concept of dynamic scheduling and the use of
                         scoreboards to implement dynamic scheduling. It is introduced as a cross-cutting
                         issue, because it can be used to serve as an introduction to the core concepts in
                         Chapter 3, which focused on dynamically scheduled approaches. Section C.7 is
                         also a gentle introduction to the more complex Tomasulo’s algorithm covered
                         in Chapter 3. Although Tomasulo’s algorithm can be covered and understood with-
                         out introducing scoreboarding, the scoreboarding approach is simpler and easier to
                         comprehend.

                         What Is Pipelining?
                         Pipelining is an implementation technique whereby multiple instructions are over-
                         lapped in execution; it takes advantage of parallelism that exists among the actions
                         needed to execute an instruction. Today, pipelining is the key implementation tech-
                         nique used to make fast processors, and even processors that cost less than a dollar
                         are pipelined.
                                                         C.1   Introduction    ■   C-3

    A pipeline is like an assembly line. In an automobile assembly line, there are
many steps, each contributing something to the construction of the car. Each step
operates in parallel with the other steps, although on a different car. In a computer
pipeline, each step in the pipeline completes a part of an instruction. Like the
assembly line, different steps are completing different parts of different instruc-
tions in parallel. Each of these steps is called a pipe stage or a pipe segment.
The stages are connected one to the next to form a pipe—instructions enter at
one end, progress through the stages, and exit at the other end, just as cars would
in an assembly line.
    In an automobile assembly line, throughput is defined as the number of cars per
hour and is determined by how often a completed car exits the assembly line. Like-
wise, the throughput of an instruction pipeline is determined by how often an
instruction exits the pipeline. Because the pipe stages are hooked together, all
the stages must be ready to proceed at the same time, just as we would require
in an assembly line. The time required between moving an instruction one step
down the pipeline is a processor cycle. Because all stages proceed at the same time,
the length of a processor cycle is determined by the time required for the slowest
pipe stage, just as in an auto assembly line the longest step would determine the
time between advancing cars in the line. In a computer, this processor cycle is
almost always 1 clock cycle.
    The pipeline designer’s goal is to balance the length of each pipeline stage, just
as the designer of the assembly line tries to balance the time for each step in the
process. If the stages are perfectly balanced, then the time per instruction on the
pipelined processor—assuming ideal conditions—is equal to
                     Time per instruction on unpipelined machine
                               Number of pipe stages

Under these conditions, the speedup from pipelining equals the number of pipe
stages, just as an assembly line with n stages can ideally produce cars n times
as fast. Usually, however, the stages will not be perfectly balanced; furthermore,
pipelining does involve some overhead. Thus, the time per instruction on the pipe-
lined processor will not have its minimum possible value, yet it can be close.
    Pipelining yields a reduction in the average execution time per instruction. If
the starting point is a processor that takes multiple clock cycles per instruction, then
pipelining reduces the CPI. This is the primary view we will take.
    Pipelining is an implementation technique that exploits parallelism among
the instructions in a sequential instruction stream. It has the substantial advantage
that, unlike some speedup techniques (see Chapter 4), it is not visible to the
programmer.

The Basics of the RISC V Instruction Set
Throughout this book we use RISC V, a load-store architecture, to illustrate the
basic concepts. Nearly all the ideas we introduce in this book are applicable to other
C-4   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         processors, but the implementation may be much more complicated with complex
                         instructions. In this section, we make use of the core of the RISC V architecture;
                         see Chapter 1 for a full description. Although we use RISC V, the concepts are
                         significantly similar in that they will apply to any RISC, including the core archi-
                         tectures of ARM and MIPS. All RISC architectures are characterized by a few key
                         properties:

                         ■   All operations on data apply to data in registers and typically change the entire
                             register (32 or 64 bits per register).
                         ■   The only operations that affect memory are load and store operations that move
                             data from memory to a register or to memory from a register, respectively.
                             Load and store operations that load or store less than a full register (e.g., a byte,
                             16 bits, or 32 bits) are often available.
                         ■   The instruction formats are few in number, with all instructions typically being
                             one size. In RISC V, the register specifiers: rs1, rs2, and rd are always in the
                             same place simplifying the control.

                         These simple properties lead to dramatic simplifications in the implementation of
                         pipelining, which is why these instruction sets were designed this way. Chapter 1
                         contains a full description of the RISC V ISA, and we assume the reader has read
                         Chapter 1.

                         A Simple Implementation of a RISC Instruction Set
                         To understand how a RISC instruction set can be implemented in a pipelined
                         fashion, we need to understand how it is implemented without pipelining. This
                         section shows a simple implementation where every instruction takes at most 5
                         clock cycles. We will extend this basic implementation to a pipelined version,
                         resulting in a much lower CPI. Our unpipelined implementation is not the most eco-
                         nomical or the highest-performance implementation without pipelining. Instead, it
                         is designed to lead naturally to a pipelined implementation. Implementing the
                         instruction set requires the introduction of several temporary registers that are
                         not part of the architecture; these are introduced in this section to simplify pipelin-
                         ing. Our implementation will focus only on a pipeline for an integer subset of a
                         RISC architecture that consists of load-store word, branch, and integer ALU
                         operations.
                             Every instruction in this RISC subset can be implemented in, at most, 5 clock
                         cycles. The 5 clock cycles are as follows.

                         1. Instruction fetch cycle (IF):
                             Send the program counter (PC) to memory and fetch the current instruction from
                             memory. Update the PC to the next sequential instruction by adding 4 (because
                             each instruction is 4 bytes) to the PC.
                                                       C.1   Introduction    ■   C-5

2. Instruction decode/register fetch cycle (ID):
   Decode the instruction and read the registers corresponding to register source
   specifiers from the register file. Do the equality test on the registers as they
   are read, for a possible branch. Sign-extend the offset field of the instruction
   in case it is needed. Compute the possible branch target address by adding
   the sign-extended offset to the incremented PC.
       Decoding is done in parallel with reading registers, which is possible because
   the register specifiers are at a fixed location in a RISC architecture. This tech-
   nique is known as fixed-field decoding. Note that we may read a register we don’t
   use, which doesn’t help but also doesn’t hurt performance. (It does waste energy
   to read an unneeded register, and power-sensitive designs might avoid this.) For
   loads and ALU immediate operations, the immediate field is always in the same
   place, so we can easily sign extend it. (For a more complete implementation of
   RISC V, we would need to compute two different sign-extended values, because
   the immediate field for store is in a different location.)
3. Execution/effective address cycle (EX):
   The ALU operates on the operands prepared in the prior cycle, performing one
   of three functions, depending on the instruction type.
   ■   Memory reference—The ALU adds the base register and the offset to form
       the effective address.
   ■   Register-Register ALU instruction—The ALU performs the operation spec-
        ified by the ALU opcode on the values read from the register file.
   ■   Register-Immediate ALU instruction—The ALU performs the operation
        specified by the ALU opcode on the first value read from the register file
        and the sign-extended immediate.
   ■   Conditional branch—Determine whether the condition is true.
      In a load-store architecture the effective address and execution cycles can be
   combined into a single clock cycle, because no instruction needs to simulta-
   neously calculate a data address and perform an operation on the data.
4. Memory access (MEM):
   If the instruction is a load, the memory does a read using the effective address
   computed in the previous cycle. If it is a store, then the memory writes the data
   from the second register read from the register file using the effective address.
5. Write-back cycle (WB):
   ■   Register-Register ALU instruction or load instruction:
   Write the result into the register file, whether it comes from the memory system
   (for a load) or from the ALU (for an ALU instruction).

    In this implementation, branch instructions require three cycles, store instruc-
tions require four cycles, and all other instructions require five cycles. Assuming a
C-6    ■    Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                                branch frequency of 12% and a store frequency of 10%, a typical instruction dis-
                                tribution leads to an overall CPI of 4.66. This implementation, however, is not opti-
                                mal either in achieving the best performance or in using the minimal amount of
                                hardware given the performance level; we leave the improvement of this design
                                as an exercise for you and instead focus on pipelining this version.

                                The Classic Five-Stage Pipeline for a RISC Processor
                                We can pipeline the execution described in the previous section with almost no
                                changes by simply starting a new instruction on each clock cycle. (See why we
                                chose this design?) Each of the clock cycles from the previous section becomes
                                a pipe stage—a cycle in the pipeline. This results in the execution pattern shown
                                in Figure C.1, which is the typical way a pipeline structure is drawn. Although each
                                instruction takes 5 clock cycles to complete, during each clock cycle the hardware
                                will initiate a new instruction and will be executing some part of the five different
                                instructions.
                                    You may find it hard to believe that pipelining is as simple as this; it’s not. In
                                this and the following sections, we will make our RISC pipeline “real” by dealing
                                with problems that pipelining introduces.
                                    To start with, we have to determine what happens on every clock cycle of the
                                processor and make sure we don’t try to perform two different operations with the
                                same data path resource on the same clock cycle. For example, a single ALU can-
                                not be asked to compute an effective address and perform a subtract operation at
                                the same time. Thus, we must ensure that the overlap of instructions in the pipeline
                                cannot cause such a conflict. Fortunately, the simplicity of a RISC instruction set
                                makes resource evaluation relatively easy. Figure C.2 shows a simplified version
                                of a RISC data path drawn in pipeline fashion. As you can see, the major functional
                                units are used in different cycles, and hence overlapping the execution of multiple

                                                                  Clock number
Instruction number         1          2        3         4           5           6          7            8          9
Instruction i              IF        ID       EX       MEM          WB
Instruction i + 1                    IF       ID        EX         MEM         WB
Instruction i + 2                             IF        ID          EX        MEM          WB
Instruction i + 3                                        IF         ID          EX        MEM          WB
Instruction i + 4                                                   IF          ID         EX         MEM          WB

Figure C.1 Simple RISC pipeline. On each clock cycle, another instruction is fetched and begins its five-cycle
execution. If an instruction is started every clock cycle, the performance will be up to five times that of a processor
that is not pipelined. The names for the stages in the pipeline are the same as those used for the cycles in the unpi-
pelined implementation: IF ¼ instruction fetch, ID ¼ instruction decode, EX ¼ execution, MEM ¼ memory access, and
WB ¼ write-back.
                                                                                                                            C.1     Introduction   ■    C-7

                                            Time (in clock cycles)

                                            CC 1         CC 2          CC 3         CC 4         CC 5         CC 6         CC 7          CC 8          CC 9
Program execution order (in instructions)

                                                                         ALU
                                             IM          Reg                         DM          Reg

                                                                                       ALU
                                                          IM           Reg                        DM           Reg

                                                                                                   ALU
                                                                       IM            Reg                       DM          Reg

                                                                                                               ALU
                                                                                     IM          Reg                       DM          Reg

                                                                                                                              ALU
                                                                                                  IM          Reg                         DM           Reg

Figure C.2 The pipeline can be thought of as a series of data paths shifted in time. This figure shows the overlap
among the parts of the data path, with clock cycle 5 (CC 5) showing the steady-state situation. Because the reg-
ister file is used as a source in the ID stage and as a destination in the WB stage, it appears twice. We show that it
is read in one part of the stage and written in another by using a solid line, on the right or left, respectively, and a
dashed line on the other side. The abbreviation IM is used for instruction memory, DM for data memory, and CC
for clock cycle.

                                                                     instructions introduces relatively few conflicts. There are three observations on
                                                                     which this fact rests.
                                                                         First, we use separate instruction and data memories, which we would typically
                                                                     implement with separate instruction and data caches (discussed in Chapter 2). The
                                                                     use of separate caches eliminates a conflict for a single memory that would arise
                                                                     between instruction fetch and data memory access. Notice that if our pipelined pro-
                                                                     cessor has a clock cycle that is equal to that of the unpipelined version, the memory
                                                                     system must deliver five times the bandwidth. This increased demand is one cost of
                                                                     higher performance.
                                                                         Second, the register file is used in the two stages: one for reading in ID and one
                                                                     for writing in WB. These uses are distinct, so we simply show the register file in
                                                                     two places. Hence, we need to perform two reads and one write every clock cycle.
C-8   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         To handle reads and a write to the same register (and for another reason, which will
                         become obvious shortly), we perform the register write in the first half of the clock
                         cycle and the read in the second half.
                             Third, Figure C.2 does not deal with the PC. To start a new instruction every
                         clock, we must increment and store the PC every clock, and this must be done dur-
                         ing the IF stage in preparation for the next instruction. Furthermore, we must also
                         have an adder to compute the potential branch target address during ID. One further
                         problem is that we need the ALU in the ALU stage to evaluate the branch condi-
                         tion. Actually, we don’t really need a full ALU to evaluate the comparison between
                         two registers, but we need enough of the function that it has to occur in this
                         pipestage.
                             Although it is critical to ensure that instructions in the pipeline do not attempt to
                         use the hardware resources at the same time, we must also ensure that instructions
                         in different stages of the pipeline do not interfere with one another. This separation
                         is done by introducing pipeline registers between successive stages of the pipeline,
                         so that at the end of a clock cycle all the results from a given stage are stored into a
                         register that is used as the input to the next stage on the next clock cycle. Figure C.3
                         shows the pipeline drawn with these pipeline registers.
                             Although many figures will omit such registers for simplicity, they are required
                         to make the pipeline operate properly and must be present. Of course, similar reg-
                         isters would be needed even in a multicycle data path that had no pipelining
                         (because only values in registers are preserved across clock boundaries). In the case
                         of a pipelined processor, the pipeline registers also play the key role of carrying
                         intermediate results from one stage to another where the source and destination
                         may not be directly adjacent. For example, the register value to be stored during
                         a store instruction is read during ID, but not actually used until MEM; it is passed
                         through two pipeline registers to reach the data memory during the MEM stage.
                         Likewise, the result of an ALU instruction is computed during EX, but not actually
                         stored until WB; it arrives there by passing through two pipeline registers. It is
                         sometimes useful to name the pipeline registers, and we follow the convention
                         of naming them by the pipeline stages they connect, so the registers are called
                         IF/ID, ID/EX, EX/MEM, and MEM/WB.

                         Basic Performance Issues in Pipelining
                         Pipelining increases the processor instruction throughput—the number of instruc-
                         tions completed per unit of time—but it does not reduce the execution time of an
                         individual instruction. In fact, it usually slightly increases the execution time
                         of each instruction due to overhead in the control of the pipeline. The increase
                         in instruction throughput means that a program runs faster and has lower total exe-
                         cution time, even though no single instruction runs faster!
                             The fact that the execution time of each instruction does not decrease puts
                         limits on the practical depth of a pipeline, as we will see in the next section. In
                         addition to limitations arising from pipeline latency, limits arise from imbalance
                                                                                         C.1   Introduction     ■   C-9

   Time (in clock cycles)

   CC 1                CC 2                 CC 3               CC 4                CC 5                CC 6

                                              ALU
    IM                 Reg                                      DM                 Reg

                                                                  ALU
                        IM                  Reg                                     DM                 Reg

                                                                                         ALU
                                            IM                 Reg
                                                                                                        DM

                                                                                                          ALU
                                                                IM                 Reg

                                                                                    IM                 Reg

Figure C.3 A pipeline showing the pipeline registers between successive pipeline stages. Notice that the registers
prevent interference between two different instructions in adjacent stages in the pipeline. The registers also play the
critical role of carrying data for a given instruction from one stage to the other. The edge-triggered property of reg-
isters—that is, that the values change instantaneously on a clock edge—is critical. Otherwise, the data from one
instruction could interfere with the execution of another!

                              among the pipe stages and from pipelining overhead. Imbalance among the pipe
                              stages reduces performance because the clock can run no faster than the time
                              needed for the slowest pipeline stage. Pipeline overhead arises from the combina-
                              tion of pipeline register delay and clock skew. The pipeline registers add setup
                              time, which is the time that a register input must be stable before the clock signal
                              that triggers a write occurs, plus propagation delay to the clock cycle. Clock skew,
                              which is the maximum delay between when the clock arrives at any two registers,
C-10   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         also contributes to the lower limit on the clock cycle. Once the clock cycle is as
                         small as the sum of the clock skew and latch overhead, no further pipelining is
                         useful, because there is no time left in the cycle for useful work. The interested
                         reader should see Kunkel and Smith (1986).

             Example     Consider the unpipelined processor in the previous section. Assume that it has a
                         4 GHz clock (or a 0.5 ns clock cycle) and that it uses four cycles for ALU oper-
                         ations and branches and five cycles for memory operations. Assume that the rel-
                         ative frequencies of these operations are 40%, 20%, and 40%, respectively.
                         Suppose that due to clock skew and setup, pipelining the processor adds 0.1 ns
                         of overhead to the clock. Ignoring any latency impact, how much speedup in
                         the instruction execution rate will we gain from a pipeline?

               Answer    The average instruction execution time on the unpipelined processor is
                               Average instruction execution time ¼ Clock cycle ? Average CPI

                                                                   ¼ 0:5 ns ? ½ð40% + 20%Þ ? 4 + 40% ? 5?
                                                                   ¼ 0:5 ns ? 4:4
                                                                   ¼ 2:2 ns

                         In the pipelined implementation, the clock must run at the speed of the slowest
                         stage plus overhead, which will be 0.5 + 0.1 or 0.6 ns; this is the average instruction
                         execution time. Thus, the speedup from pipelining is
                                                                 Average instruction time unpipelined
                                    Speedup from pipelining ¼
                                                                  Average instruction time pipelined
                                                                 2:2 ns
                                                             ¼          ¼ 3:7 times
                                                                 0:6 ns
                         The 0.1 ns overhead essentially establishes a limit on the effectiveness of pipelin-
                         ing. If the overhead is not affected by changes in the clock cycle, Amdahl’s Law
                         tells us that the overhead limits the speedup.

                             This simple RISC pipeline would function just fine for integer instructions if
                         every instruction were independent of every other instruction in the pipeline. In
                         reality, instructions in the pipeline can depend on one another; this is the topic
                         of the next section.

               C.2       The Major Hurdle of Pipelining—Pipeline Hazards
                         There are situations, called hazards, that prevent the next instruction in the instruc-
                         tion stream from executing during its designated clock cycle. Hazards reduce the
                         performance from the ideal speedup gained by pipelining. There are three classes
                         of hazards:
            C.2    The Major Hurdle of Pipelining—Pipeline Hazards                 ■   C-11

1. Structural hazards arise from resource conflicts when the hardware cannot sup-
   port all possible combinations of instructions simultaneously in overlapped exe-
   cution. In modern processors, structural hazards occur primarily in special
   purpose functional units that are less frequently used (such as floating point
   divide or other complex long running instructions). They are not a major per-
   formance factor, assuming programmers and compiler writers are aware of the
   lower throughput of these instructions. Instead of spending more time on this
   infrequent case, we focus on the two other hazards that are much more frequent.
2. Data hazards arise when an instruction depends on the results of a previous
   instruction in a way that is exposed by the overlapping of instructions in the
   pipeline.
3. Control hazards arise from the pipelining of branches and other instructions
   that change the PC.

     Hazards in pipelines can make it necessary to stall the pipeline. Avoiding a haz-
ard often requires that some instructions in the pipeline be allowed to proceed while
others are delayed. For the pipelines we discuss in this appendix, when an instruction
is stalled, all instructions issued later than the stalled instruction—and hence not as
far along in the pipeline—are also stalled. Instructions issued earlier than the stalled
instruction—and hence farther along in the pipeline—must continue, because oth-
erwise the hazard will never clear. As a result, no new instructions are fetched during
the stall. We will see several examples of how pipeline stalls operate in this section—
don’t worry, they aren’t as complex as they might sound!

Performance of Pipelines With Stalls
A stall causes the pipeline performance to degrade from the ideal performance.
Let’s look at a simple equation for finding the actual speedup from pipelining,
starting with the formula from the previous section:
                                      Average instruction time unpipelined
        Speedup from pipelining ¼
                                       Average instruction time pipelined
                                      CPI unpipelined ? Clock cycle unpipelined
                                  ¼
                                        CPI pipelined ? Clock cycle pipelined
                                      CPI unpipelined ? Clock cycle unpipelined
                                  ¼
                                        CPI pipelined ? Clock cycle pipelined
Pipelining can be thought of as decreasing the CPI or the clock cycle time. Because
it is traditional to use the CPI to compare pipelines, let’s start with that assumption.
The ideal CPI on a pipelined processor is almost always 1. Hence, we can compute
the pipelined CPI:
         CPI pipelined ¼ Ideal CPI + Pipeline stall clock cycles per instruction
                       ¼ 1 + Pipelines stall clock cycles per instruction
C-12   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         If we ignore the cycle time overhead of pipelining and assume that the stages
                         are perfectly balanced, then the cycle time of the two processors can be equal,
                         leading to
                                                                    CPI unpiplined
                                            Speedup ¼
                                                        1 + Pipeline stall cycles per instruction
                         One important simple case is where all instructions take the same number of cycles,
                         which must also equal the number of pipeline stages (also called the depth of the
                         pipeline). In this case, the unpipelined CPI is equal to the depth of the pipeline,
                         leading to
                                                                     Pipeline depth
                                            Speedup ¼
                                                        1 + Pipeline stall cycles per instruction
                         If there are no pipeline stalls, this leads to the intuitive result that pipelining can
                         improve performance by the depth of the pipeline.

                         Data Hazards
                         A major effect of pipelining is to change the relative timing of instructions by over-
                         lapping their execution. This overlap introduces data and control hazards. Data
                         hazards occur when the pipeline changes the order of read/write accesses to
                         operands so that the order differs from the order seen by sequentially executing
                         instructions on an unpipelined processor. Assume instruction i occurs in program
                         order before instruction j and both instructions use register x, then there are three
                         different types of hazards that can occur between i and j:

                         1. Read After Write (RAW) hazard: the most common, these occur when a
                            read of register x by instruction j occurs before the write of register x by instruc-
                            tion i. If this hazard were not prevented instruction j would use the wrong value
                            of x.
                         2. Write After Read (WAR) hazard: this hazard occurs when read of register x by
                            instruction i occurs after a write of register x by instruction j. In this case,
                            instruction i would use the wrong value of x. WAR hazards are impossible
                            in the simple five stage, integrer pipeline, but they occur when instructions
                            are reordered, as we will see when we discuss dynamically scheduled pipelines
                            beginning on page C.65.
                         3. Write After Write (WAW) hazard: this hazard occurs when write of register x by
                            instruction i occurs after a write of register x by instruction j. When this occurs,
                            register x will have the wrong value going forward. WAR hazards are also
                            impossible in the simple five stage, integrer pipeline, but they occur when
                            instructions are reordered or when running times vary, as we will see later.

                         Chapter 3 explores the issues of data dependence and hazards in much more detail.
                         For now, we focus only on RAW hazards.
                                         C.2    The Major Hurdle of Pipelining—Pipeline Hazards          ■   C-13

                                Consider the pipelined execution of these instructions:
                                add            x1,x2,x3
                                sub            x4,x1,x5
                                and            x6,x1,x7
                                or             x8,x1,x9
                                xor            x10,x1,x11
                            All the instructions after the add use the result of the add instruction. As shown in
                            Figure C.4, the add instruction writes the value of x1 in the WB pipe stage, but the
                            sub instruction reads the value during its ID stage, which results in a RAW hazard.
                            Unless precautions are taken to prevent it, the sub instruction will read the wrong
                            value and try to use it. In fact, the value used by the sub instruction is not even
                            deterministic: though we might think it logical to assume that sub would always
                            use the value of x1 that was assigned by an instruction prior to add, this is not

Figure C.4 The use of the result of the add instruction in the next three instructions causes a hazard, because the
register is not written until after those instructions read it.
C-14   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         always the case. If an interrupt should occur between the add and sub
                         instructions, the WB stage of the add will complete, and the value of x1 at that
                         point will be the result of the add. This unpredictable behavior is obviously
                         unacceptable.
                             The and instruction also creates a possible RAW hazard. As we can see from
                         Figure C.4, the write of x1 does not complete until the end of clock cycle 5. Thus,
                         the and instruction that reads the registers during clock cycle 4 will receive the
                         wrong results.
                             The xor instruction operates properly because its register read occurs in
                         clock cycle 6, after the register write. The or instruction also operates without
                         incurring a hazard because we perform the register file reads in the second half
                         of the cycle and the writes in the first half. Note that the xor instruction still
                         depends on the add, but it no longer creates a hazard; a topic we explore in more
                         detail in Chapter 3.
                             The next subsection discusses a technique to eliminate the stalls for the hazard
                         involving the sub and and instructions.

                         Minimizing Data Hazard Stalls by Forwarding
                         The problem posed in Figure C.4 can be solved with a simple hardware technique
                         called forwarding (also called bypassing and sometimes short-circuiting). The key
                         insight in forwarding is that the result is not really needed by the sub until after the
                         add actually produces it. If the result can be moved from the pipeline register
                         where the add stores it to where the sub needs it, then the need for a stall can
                         be avoided. Using this observation, forwarding works as follows:

                         1. The ALU result from both the EX/MEM and MEM/WB pipeline registers is
                            always fed back to the ALU inputs.
                         2. If the forwarding hardware detects that the previous ALU operation has written
                            the register corresponding to a source for the current ALU operation, control
                            logic selects the forwarded result as the ALU input rather than the value read
                            from the register file.

                         Notice that with forwarding, if the sub is stalled, the add will be completed and
                         the bypass will not be activated. This relationship is also true for the case of an
                         interrupt between the two instructions.
                             As the example in Figure C.4 shows, we need to forward results not only from
                         the immediately previous instruction but also possibly from an instruction that
                         started two cycles earlier. Figure C.5 shows our example with the bypass paths
                         in place and highlighting the timing of the register read and writes. This code
                         sequence can be executed without stalls.
                             Forwarding can be generalized to include passing a result directly to the func-
                         tional unit that requires it: a result is forwarded from the pipeline register corre-
                         sponding to the output of one unit to the input of another, rather than just from
                                         C.2    The Major Hurdle of Pipelining—Pipeline Hazards           ■   C-15

Figure C.5 A set of instructions that depends on the add result uses forwarding paths to avoid the data hazard.
The inputs for the sub and and instructions forward from the pipeline registers to the first ALU input. The or
receives its result by forwarding through the register file, which is easily accomplished by reading the registers
in the second half of the cycle and writing in the first half, as the dashed lines on the registers indicate. Notice
that the forwarded result can go to either ALU input; in fact, both ALU inputs could use forwarded inputs from
either the same pipeline register or from different pipeline registers. This would occur, for example, if the and
instruction was and x6,x1,x4.

                             the result of a unit to the input of the same unit. Take, for example, the following
                             sequence:
                                 add           x1,x2,x3
                                 ld            x4,0(x1)
                                 sd            x4,12(x1)
                             To prevent a stall in this sequence, we would need to forward the values of
                             the ALU output and memory unit output from the pipeline registers to the
                             ALU and data memory inputs. Figure C.6 shows all the forwarding paths for this
                             example.
C-16    ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

Figure C.6 Forwarding of operand required by stores during MEM. The result of the load is forwarded from the
memory output to the memory input to be stored. In addition, the ALU output is forwarded to the ALU input for the
address calculation of both the load and the store (this is no different than forwarding to another ALU operation). If
the store depended on an immediately preceding ALU operation (not shown herein), the result would need to be
forwarded to prevent a stall.

                             Data Hazards Requiring Stalls
                             Unfortunately, not all potential data hazards can be handled by bypassing. Con-
                             sider the following sequence of instructions:
                                 ld           x1,0(x2)
                                 sub          x4,x1,x5
                                 and          x6,x1,x7
                                 or           x8,x1,x9
                             The pipelined data path with the bypass paths for this example is shown in
                             Figure C.7. This case is different from the situation with back-to-back ALU oper-
                             ations. The ld instruction does not have the data until the end of clock cycle 4 (its
                             MEM cycle), while the sub instruction needs to have the data by the beginning of
                             that clock cycle. Thus, the data hazard from using the result of a load instruction
                             cannot be completely eliminated with simple hardware. As Figure C.7 shows, such
                             a forwarding path would have to operate backward in time—a capability not yet
                             available to computer designers! We can forward the result immediately to the
                             ALU from the pipeline registers for use in the and operation, which begins 2 clock
                             cycles after the load. Likewise, the or instruction has no problem, because it
                             receives the value through the register file. For the sub instruction, the forwarded
                                         C.2    The Major Hurdle of Pipelining—Pipeline Hazards             ■   C-17

Figure C.7 The load instruction can bypass its results to the and and or instructions, but not to the sub, because
that would mean forwarding the result in “negative time.”

                            result arrives too late—at the end of a clock cycle, when it is needed at the
                            beginning.
                                The load instruction has a delay or latency that cannot be eliminated by for-
                            warding alone. Instead, we need to add hardware, called a pipeline interlock, to
                            preserve the correct execution pattern. In general, a pipeline interlock detects a haz-
                            ard and stalls the pipeline until the hazard is cleared. In this case, the interlock stalls
                            the pipeline, beginning with the instruction that wants to use the data until the
                            source instruction produces it. This pipeline interlock introduces a stall or bubble,
                            just as it did for the structural hazard. The CPI for the stalled instruction increases
                            by the length of the stall (1 clock cycle in this case).
                                Figure C.8 shows the pipeline before and after the stall using the names of the
                            pipeline stages. Because the stall causes the instructions starting with the sub to
                            move one cycle later in time, the forwarding to the and instruction now goes
                            through the register file, and no forwarding at all is needed for the or instruction.
                            The insertion of the bubble causes the number of cycles to complete this sequence
                            to grow by one. No instruction is started during clock cycle 4 (and none finishes
                            during cycle 6).
C-18    ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

ld x1,0(x2)           IF      ID        EX         MEM          WB
sub x4,x1,x5                   IF       ID          EX         MEM            WB
and x6,x1,x7                             IF         ID           EX           MEM         WB
or x8,x1,x9                                         IF              ID        EX         MEM           WB
ld x1,0(x2)           IF      ID        EX         MEM          WB
sub x4,x1,x5                   IF       ID         Stall         EX           MEM         WB
and x6,x1,x7                             IF        Stall            ID        EX         MEM           WB
or x8,x1,x9                                        Stall            IF        ID           EX         MEM          WB

Figure C.8 In the top half, we can see why a stall is needed: the MEM cycle of the load produces a value that is
needed in the EX cycle of the sub, which occurs at the same time. This problem is solved by inserting a stall, as
shown in the bottom half.

                            Branch Hazards
                            Control hazards can cause a greater performance loss for our RISC V pipeline than
                            do data hazards. When a branch is executed, it may or may not change the PC
                            to something other than its current value plus 4. Recall that if a branch changes
                            the PC to its target address, it is a taken branch; if it falls through, it is not
                            taken, or untaken. If instruction i is a taken branch, then the PC is usually not chan-
                            ged until the end of ID, after the completion of the address calculation and
                            comparison.
                                Figure C.9 shows that the simplest method of dealing with branches is to redo
                            the fetch of the instruction following a branch, once we detect the branch during ID
                            (when instructions are decoded). The first IF cycle is essentially a stall, because it
                            never performs useful work. You may have noticed that if the branch is untaken,
                            then the repetition of the IF stage is unnecessary because the correct instruction was
                            indeed fetched. We will develop several schemes to take advantage of this fact
                            shortly.
                                One stall cycle for every branch will yield a performance loss of 10% to 30%
                            depending on the branch frequency, so we will examine some techniques to deal
                            with this loss.

                            Branch instruction        IF      ID         EX     MEM         WB
                            Branch successor                   IF        IF        ID       EX        MEM         WB
                            Branch successor + 1                                   IF       ID         EX        MEM
                            Branch successor + 2                                             IF        ID          EX

                            Figure C.9 A branch causes a one-cycle stall in the five-stage pipeline. The instruction
                            after the branch is fetched, but the instruction is ignored, and the fetch is restarted once
                            the branch target is known. It is probably obvious that if the branch is not taken, the
                            second IF for branch successor is redundant. This will be addressed shortly.
                                              C.2    The Major Hurdle of Pipelining—Pipeline Hazards            ■   C-19

                              Reducing Pipeline Branch Penalties
                              There are many methods for dealing with the pipeline stalls caused by branch delay;
                              we discuss four simple compile time schemes in this subsection. In these four
                              schemes the actions for a branch are static—they are fixed for each branch during
                              the entire execution. The software can try to minimize the branch penalty using
                              knowledge of the hardware scheme and of branch behavior. We will then look at
                              hardware-based schemes that dynamically predict branch behavior, and Chapter 3
                              looks at more powerful hardware techniques for dynamic branch prediction.
                                  The simplest scheme to handle branches is to freeze or flush the pipeline, holding
                              or deleting any instructions after the branch until the branch destination is known.
                              The attractiveness of this solution lies primarily in its simplicity both for hardware
                              and software. It is the solution used earlier in the pipeline shown in Figure C.9. In this
                              case, the branch penalty is fixed and cannot be reduced by software.
                                  A higher-performance, and only slightly more complex, scheme is to treat
                              every branch as not taken, simply allowing the hardware to continue as if the
                              branch were not executed. Here, care must be taken not to change the processor
                              state until the branch outcome is definitely known. The complexity of this scheme
                              arises from having to know when the state might be changed by an instruction and
                              how to “back out” such a change.
                                  In the simple five-stage pipeline, this predicted-not-taken or predicted-untaken
                              scheme is implemented by continuing to fetch instructions as if the branch were a
                              normal instruction. The pipeline looks as if nothing out of the ordinary is happen-
                              ing. If the branch is taken, however, we need to turn the fetched instruction into a
                              no-op and restart the fetch at the target address. Figure C.10 shows both situations.
                                  An alternative scheme is to treat every branch as taken. As soon as the branch is
                              decoded and the target address is computed, we assume the branch to be taken and

Untaken branch instruction       IF      ID         EX     MEM         WB
Instruction i + 1                        IF         ID      EX        MEM          WB
Instruction i + 2                                   IF       ID         EX        MEM          WB
Instruction i + 3                                            IF         ID          EX        MEM          WB
Instruction i + 4                                                       IF          ID         EX         MEM        WB

Taken branch instruction         IF      ID         EX     MEM         WB
Instruction i + 1                        IF         idle    idle        idle       idle
Branch target                                       IF       ID         EX        MEM          WB
Branch target + 1                                            IF         ID          EX        MEM          WB
Branch target + 2                                                       IF          ID         EX         MEM        WB

Figure C.10 The predicted-not-taken scheme and the pipeline sequence when the branch is untaken (top) and
taken (bottom). When the branch is untaken, determined during ID, we fetch the fall-through and just continue. If the
branch is taken during ID, we restart the fetch at the branch target. This causes all instructions following the branch to
stall 1 clock cycle.
C-20     ■    Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                               begin fetching and executing at the target. This buys us a one-cycle improvement
                               when the branch is actually taken, because we know the target address at the end
                               of ID, one cycle before we know whether the branch condition is satisfied in the
                               ALU stage. In either a predicted-taken or predicted-not-taken scheme, the compiler
                               can improve performance by organizing the code so that the most frequent path
                               matches the hardware’s choice.
                                   A fourth scheme, which was heavily used in early RISC processors is called
                               delayed branch. In a delayed branch, the execution cycle with a branch delay
                               of one is
                                   branch instruction
                                   sequential successor1
                                   branch target if taken
                               The sequential successor is in the branch delay slot. This instruction is executed
                               whether or not the branch is taken. The pipeline behavior of the five-stage pipeline
                               with a branch delay is shown in Figure C.11. Although it is possible to have a
                               branch delay longer than one, in practice almost all processors with delayed branch
                               have a single instruction delay; other techniques are used if the pipeline has a lon-
                               ger potential branch penalty.The job of the compiler is to make the successor
                               instructions valid and useful.
                                   Although the delayed branch was useful for short simple pipelines at a time
                               when hardware prediction was too expensive, the technique complicates imple-
                               mentation when there is dynamic branch prediction. For this reason, RISC V
                               appropriately omitted delayed branches.

Untaken branch instruction          IF     ID      EX      MEM         WB
Branch delay instruction (i + 1)            IF     ID       EX        MEM         WB
Instruction i + 2                                  IF        ID        EX        MEM         WB
Instruction i + 3                                            IF         ID         EX       MEM         WB
Instruction i + 4                                                       IF         ID         EX       MEM         WB

Taken branch instruction            IF     ID      EX      MEM         WB
Branch delay instruction (i + 1)            IF     ID       EX        MEM         WB
Branch target                                      IF        ID        EX        MEM         WB
Branch target + 1                                            IF         ID         EX       MEM         WB
Branch target + 2                                                       IF         ID         EX       MEM         WB

Figure C.11 The behavior of a delayed branch is the same whether or not the branch is taken. The instructions in
the delay slot (there was only one delay slot for most RISC architectures that incorporated them) are executed. If the
branch is untaken, execution continues with the instruction after the branch delay instruction; if the branch is taken,
execution continues at the branch target. When the instruction in the branch delay slot is also a branch, the meaning
is unclear: if the branch is not taken, what should happen to the branch in the branch delay slot? Because of this
confusion, architectures with delay branches often disallow putting a branch in the delay slot.
                                          C.2    The Major Hurdle of Pipelining—Pipeline Hazards                 ■       C-21

                             Performance of Branch Schemes
                             What is the effective performance of each of these schemes? The effective pipeline
                             speedup with branch penalties, assuming an ideal CPI of 1, is
                                                                                Pipeline depth
                                              Pipeline speedup ¼
                                                                   1 + Pipeline stall cycles from branches

                             Because of the following:
                                    Pipeline stall cycles from branches ¼ Branch frequency ? Branch penalty

                             we obtain:
                                                                               Pipeline depth
                                           Pipeline speedup ¼
                                                                   1 + Branch frequency ? Branch penalty

                             The branch frequency and branch penalty can have a component from both uncon-
                             ditional and conditional branches. However, the latter dominate because they are
                             more frequent.

                  Example    For a deeper pipeline, such as that in a MIPS R4000 and later RISC processors, it
                             takes at least three pipeline stages before the branch-target address is known
                             and an additional cycle before the branch condition is evaluated, assuming no
                             stalls on the registers in the conditional comparison. A three-stage delay leads
                             to the branch penalties for the three simplest prediction schemes listed in
                             Figure C.12.
                                Find the effective addition to the CPI arising from branches for this pipeline,
                             assuming the following frequencies:

                                              Unconditional branch                         4%
                                              Conditional branch, untaken                  6%
                                              Conditional branch, taken                   10%

                    Answer   We find the CPIs by multiplying the relative frequency of unconditional, condi-
                             tional untaken, and conditional taken branches by the respective penalties. The
                             results are shown in Figure C.13.

Branch scheme                  Penalty unconditional                     Penalty untaken                     Penalty taken
Flush pipeline                            2                                      3                                   3
Predicted taken                           2                                      3                                   2
Predicted untaken                         2                                      0                                   3

Figure C.12 Branch penalties for the three simplest prediction schemes for a deeper pipeline.
C-22     ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                                             Additions to the CPI from branch costs
                      Unconditional           Untaken conditional            Taken conditional            All
Branch scheme           branches                   branches                      branches              branches
Frequency of               4%                          6%                           10%                   20%
event
Stall pipeline             0.08                        0.18                         0.30                  0.56
Predicted taken            0.08                        0.18                         0.20                  0.46
Predicted untaken          0.08                        0.00                         0.30                  0.38

Figure C.13 CPI penalties for three branch-prediction schemes and a deeper pipeline.

                              The differences among the schemes are substantially increased with this longer
                           delay. If the base CPI were 1 and branches were the only source of stalls, the ideal
                           pipeline would be 1.56 times faster than a pipeline that used the stall-pipeline
                           scheme. The predicted-untaken scheme would be 1.13 times better than the
                           stall-pipeline scheme under the same assumptions.

                           Reducing the Cost of Branches Through Prediction
                           As pipelines get deeper and the potential penalty of branches increases, using
                           delayed branches and similar schemes becomes insufficient. Instead, we need to
                           turn to more aggressive means for predicting branches. Such schemes fall into
                           two classes: low-cost static schemes that rely on information available at compile
                           time and strategies that predict branches dynamically based on program behavior.
                           We discuss both approaches here.

                           Static Branch Prediction
                           A key way to improve compile-time branch prediction is to use profile information
                           collected from earlier runs. The key observation that makes this worthwhile is that
                           the behavior of branches is often bimodally distributed; that is, an individual
                           branch is often highly biased toward taken or untaken. Figure C.14 shows the suc-
                           cess of branch prediction using this strategy. The same input data were used for
                           runs and for collecting the profile; other studies have shown that changing the input
                           so that the profile is for a different run leads to only a small change in the accuracy
                           of profile-based prediction.
                                The effectiveness of any branch prediction scheme depends both on the accu-
                           racy of the scheme and the frequency of conditional branches, which vary in SPEC
                           from 3% to 24%. The fact that the misprediction rate for the integer programs is
                           higher and such programs typically have a higher branch frequency is a major lim-
                           itation for static branch prediction. In the next section, we consider dynamic branch
                           predictors, which most recent processors have employed.
               C.2                 The Major Hurdle of Pipelining—Pipeline Hazards                  ■   C-23

                                 25%
                                              22%

                                 20%                18%

            Misprediction rate
                                                                                              15%
                                 15%
                                        12%                     12%
                                                          11%
                                 10%                                               9% 10%

                                                                           5% 6%
                                 5%

                                 0%

                                        s

                                              pr t
                                                   so

                                                    c

                                                                li

                                                                                     c

                                                                                     r

                                                                                     d

                                                                                     p

                                                                                   or
                                              ot

                                                                                 ea
                                        es

                                                 gc

                                                                       du

                                                                                o2

                                                                                  jd
                                                                               2c
                                                es
                                             nt

                                                                               dl
                                      pr

                                                                      do

                                                                              dr
                                         eq

                                                                            su
                                                                            m
                                  m

                                                                           hy
                                              es
                                 co

                                                   Integer                   Floating-point
                                                                 Benchmark

Figure C.14 Misprediction rate on SPEC92 for a profile-based predictor varies widely
but is generally better for the floating-point programs, which have an average mis-
prediction rate of 9% with a standard deviation of 4%, than for the integer programs,
which have an average misprediction rate of 15% with a standard deviation of 5%.
The actual performance depends on both the prediction accuracy and the branch fre-
quency, which vary from 3% to 24%.

Dynamic Branch Prediction and Branch-Prediction Buffers
The simplest dynamic branch-prediction scheme is a branch-prediction buffer or
branch history table. A branch-prediction buffer is a small memory indexed by the
lower portion of the address of the branch instruction. The memory contains a bit
that says whether the branch was recently taken or not. This scheme is the simplest
sort of buffer; it has no tags and is useful only to reduce the branch delay when it is
longer than the time to compute the possible target PCs.
    With such a buffer, we don’t know, in fact, if the prediction is correct—it may
have been put there by another branch that has the same low-order address bits. But
this doesn’t matter. The prediction is a hint that is assumed to be correct, and fetch-
ing begins in the predicted direction. If the hint turns out to be wrong, the predic-
tion bit is inverted and stored back.
    This buffer is effectively a cache where every access is a hit, and, as we will see,
the performance of the buffer depends on both how often the prediction is for the
branch of interest and how accurate the prediction is when it matches. Before we
analyze the performance, it is useful to make a small, but important, improvement
in the accuracy of the branch-prediction scheme.
C-24   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                             This simple 1-bit prediction scheme has a performance shortcoming: even if a
                         branch is almost always taken, we will likely predict incorrectly twice, rather than
                         once, when it is not taken, because the misprediction causes the prediction bit to be
                         flipped.
                             To remedy this weakness, 2-bit prediction schemes are often used. In a 2-bit
                         scheme, a prediction must miss twice before it is changed. Figure C.15 shows
                         the finite-state processor for a 2-bit prediction scheme.
                             A branch-prediction buffer can be implemented as a small, special “cache”
                         accessed with the instruction address during the IF pipe stage, or as a pair of bits
                         attached to each block in the instruction cache and fetched with the instruction. If
                         the instruction is decoded as a branch and if the branch is predicted as taken, fetch-
                         ing begins from the target as soon as the PC is known. Otherwise, sequential fetch-
                         ing and executing continue. As Figure C.15 shows, if the prediction turns out to be
                         wrong, the prediction bits are changed.
                             What kind of accuracy can be expected from a branch-prediction buffer using 2
                         bits per entry on real applications? Figure C.16 shows that for the SPEC89 bench-
                         marks a branch-prediction buffer with 4096 entries results in a prediction accuracy

                                       Taken

                                                                  Not taken
                                   Predict taken                                            Predict taken
                                        11                                                       10

                                                                    Taken

                              Taken                                                  Not taken

                                                                  Not taken
                                 Predict not taken                                        Predict not taken
                                        01                                                       00

                                                                    Taken

                                                                                               Not taken

                         Figure C.15 The states in a 2-bit prediction scheme. By using 2 bits rather than 1, a
                         branch that strongly favors taken or not taken—as many branches do—will be mispre-
                         dicted less often than with a 1-bit predictor. The 2 bits are used to encode the four states
                         in the system. The 2-bit scheme is actually a specialization of a more general scheme
                         that has an n-bit saturating counter for each entry in the prediction buffer. With an
                         n-bit counter, the counter can take on values between 0 and 2n ? 1: when the counter
                         is greater than or equal to one-half of its maximum value (2n ? 1), the branch is pre-
                         dicted as taken; otherwise, it is predicted as untaken. Studies of n-bit predictors have
                         shown that the 2-bit predictors do almost as well, thus most systems rely on 2-bit branch
                         predictors rather than the more general n-bit predictors.
                             C.2        The Major Hurdle of Pipelining—Pipeline Hazards    ■    C-25

                            nasa7            1%

                         matrix300           0%

                          tomcatv            1%

     SPEC89 benchmarks
                            doduc                      5%

                             spice                               9%

                            fpppp                                9%

                              gcc                                        12%

                         espresso                      5%

                           eqntott                                                         18%

                                   li                              10%

                                        0%   2%   4%     6%    8% 10% 12% 14% 16%         18%
                                                       Frequency of mispredictions

Figure C.16 Prediction accuracy of a 4096-entry 2-bit prediction buffer for the
SPEC89 benchmarks. The misprediction rate for the integer benchmarks (gcc, espresso,
eqntott, and li) is substantially higher (average of 11%) than that for the floating-point
programs (average of 4%). Omitting the floating-point kernels (nasa7, matrix300, and
tomcatv) still yields a higher accuracy for the FP benchmarks than for the integer bench-
marks. These data, as well as the rest of the data in this section, are taken from a branch-
prediction study done using the IBM Power architecture and optimized code for that
system. See Pan et al. (1992). Although these data are for an older version of a subset
of the SPEC benchmarks, the newer benchmarks are larger and would show slightly
worse behavior, especially for the integer benchmarks.

ranging from over 99% to 82%, or a misprediction rate of 1%–18%. A 4K entry
buffer, like that used for these results, is considered small in 2017, and a larger
buffer could produce somewhat better results.
     As we try to exploit more ILP, the accuracy of our branch prediction becomes
critical. As we can see in Figure C.16, the accuracy of the predictors for integer
programs, which typically also have higher branch frequencies, is lower than
for the loop-intensive scientific programs. We can attack this problem in two ways:
by increasing the size of the buffer and by increasing the accuracy of the scheme we
use for each prediction. A buffer with 4K entries, however, as Figure C.17 shows,
performs quite comparably to an infinite buffer, at least for benchmarks like those
in SPEC. The data in Figure C.17 make it clear that the hit rate of the buffer is not
the major limiting factor. As we mentioned, simply increasing the number of bits
per predictor without changing the predictor structure also has little impact.
Instead, we need to look at how we might increase the accuracy of each predictor,
as we will in Chapter 3.
C-26   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                                                                   1%
                                                    nasa7
                                                                   0%

                                                                   0%                                 4096 entries:
                                                 matrix300                                            2 bits per entry
                                                                   0%
                                                                                                      Unlimited entries:
                                                                                                      2 bits per entry
                                                                   1%
                                                  tomcatv
                                                                   0%

                                                                              5%
                                                    doduc
                                                                              5%
                             SPEC89 benchmarks

                                                                                           9%
                                                     spice
                                                                                           9%

                                                                                           9%
                                                    fpppp
                                                                                           9%

                                                                                                     12%
                                                      gcc
                                                                                                  11%

                                                                              5%
                                                 espresso
                                                                              5%

                                                                                                                           18%
                                                   eqntott
                                                                                                                           18%

                                                                                                10%
                                                         li
                                                                                                10%

                                                              0%   2%   4%     6%    8%    10%    12% 14% 16% 18%
                                                                             Frequency of mispredictions

                         Figure C.17 Prediction accuracy of a 4096-entry 2-bit prediction buffer versus an
                         infinite buffer for the SPEC89 benchmarks. Although these data are for an older
                         version of a subset of the SPEC benchmarks, the results would be comparable for
                         newerversionswithperhapsasmanyas8Kentriesneededtomatchaninfinite2-bitpredictor.

               C.3       How Is Pipelining Implemented?
                         Before we proceed to basic pipelining, we need to review a simple implementation
                         of an unpipelined version of RISC V.

                         A Simple Implementation of RISC V
                         In this section we follow the style of Section C.1, showing first a simple unpipe-
                         lined implementation and then the pipelined implementation. This time, however,
                         our example is specific to the RISC V architecture.
                                 C.3   How Is Pipelining Implemented?          ■   C-27

     In this subsection, we focus on a pipeline for an integer subset of RISC V that con-
sists of load-store word, branch equal, and integer ALU operations. Later in this
appendix we will incorporate the basic floating-point operations. Although we discuss
only a subset of RISC V, the basic principles can be extended to handle all the instruc-
tions; for example, adding store involves some additional computing of the immediate
field. We initially used a less aggressive implementation of a branch instruction. We
show how to implement the more aggressive version at the end of this section.
     Every RISC V instruction can be implemented in, at most, 5 clock cycles. The 5
clock cycles are as follows:

1. Instruction fetch cycle (IF):
   IR Mem[PC];
   NPC PC + 4;
   Operation—Send out the PC and fetch the instruction from memory into the
   instruction register (IR); increment the PC by 4 to address the next sequential
   instruction. The IR is used to hold the instruction that will be needed on subsequent
   clock cycles; likewise, the register NPC is used to hold the next sequential PC.
2. Instruction decode/register fetch cycle (ID):
   A Regs[rs1];
   B Regs[rs2];
   Imm sign-extended immediate field of IR;
   Operation—Decode the instruction and access the register file to read the reg-
   isters (rs1 and rs2 are the register specifiers). The outputs of the general-purpose
   registers are read into two temporary registers (A and B) for use in later clock
   cycles. The lower 16 bits of the IR are also sign extended and stored into the
   temporary register Imm, for use in the next cycle.
       Decoding is done in parallel with reading registers, which is possible
   because these fields are at a fixed location in the RISC V instruction format.
   Because the immediate portion of a load and an ALU immediate is located
   in an identical place in every RISC V instruction, the sign-extended immediate
   is also calculated during this cycle in case it is needed in the next cycle. For
   stores, a separate sign-extension is needed, because the immediate field is split
   in two pieces.
3. Execution/effective address cycle (EX):
   The ALU operates on the operands prepared in the prior cycle, performing one
   of four functions depending on the RISC V instruction type:
   ■   Memory reference:
       ALUOutput         A + Imm;
   Operation—The ALU adds the operands to form the effective address and
   places the result into the register ALUOutput.
C-28   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                            ■   Register-register ALU instruction:
                                ALUOutput        A func B;
                            Operation—The ALU performs the operation specified by the function code
                            (a combination of the func3 and func7 fields) on the value in register A
                            and on the value in register B. The result is placed in the temporary register
                            ALUOutput.
                            ■   Register-Immediate ALU instruction:
                                ALUOutput        A op Imm;
                            Operation—The ALU performs the operation specified by the opcode on the
                            value in register A and on the value in register Imm. The result is placed in
                            the temporary register ALUOutput.
                            ■   Branch:
                                ALUOutput NPC + (Imm << 2);
                                Cond (A == B)
                            Operation—The ALU adds the NPC to the sign-extended immediate value in
                            Imm, which is shifted left by 2 bits to create a word offset, to compute the
                            address of the branch target. Register A, which has been read in the prior cycle,
                            is checked to determine whether the branch is taken, by comparison with Reg-
                            ister B, because we consider only branch equal.
                                The load-store architecture of RISC V means that effective address and
                            execution cycles can be combined into a single clock cycle, because no instruc-
                            tion needs to simultaneously calculate a data address, calculate an instruction
                            target address, and perform an operation on the data. The other integer instruc-
                            tions not included herein are jumps of various forms, which are similar to
                            branches.
                         4. Memory access/branch completion cycle (MEM):
                            The PC is updated for all instructions: PC     NPC;
                            ■   Memory reference:
                                LMD Mem[ALUOutput] or
                                Mem[ALUOutput] B;
                            Operation—Access memory if needed. If the instruction is a load, data return
                            from memory and are placed in the LMD (load memory data) register; if it is a
                            store, then the data from the B register are written into memory. In either case,
                            the address used is the one computed during the prior cycle and stored in the
                            register ALUOutput.
                                C.3    How Is Pipelining Implemented?         ■   C-29

    ■   Branch:
        if (cond) PC         ALUOutput
    Operation—If the instruction branches, the PC is replaced with the branch des-
    tination address in the register ALUOutput.

5. Write-back cycle (WB):
    ■   Register-register or Register-immediate ALU instruction:
        Regs[rd]        ALUOutput;
    ■   Load instruction:
        Regs[rd]        LMD;
    Operation—Write the result into the register file, whether it comes from the
    memory system (which is in LMD) or from the ALU (which is in ALUOutput)
    with rd designating the register.

     Figure C.18 shows how an instruction flows through the data path. At the end
of each clock cycle, every value computed during that clock cycle and required on
a later clock cycle (whether for this instruction or the next) is written into a storage
device, which may be memory, a general-purpose register, the PC, or a temporary
register (i.e., LMD, Imm, A, B, IR, NPC, ALUOutput, or Cond). The temporary
registers hold values between clock cycles for one instruction, while the other stor-
age elements are visible parts of the state and hold values between successive
instructions.
     Although all processors today are pipelined, this multicycle implementation is a
reasonable approximation of how most processors would have been implemented in
earlier times. A simple finite-state machine could be used to implement the control
following the five-cycle structure shown herein. For a much more complex proces-
sor, microcode control could be used. In either event, an instruction sequence like the
one described in this section would determine the structure of the control.
     There are some hardware redundancies that could be eliminated in this multi-
cycle implementation. For example, there are two ALUs: one to increment the PC
and one used for effective address and ALU computation. Because they are not
needed on the same clock cycle, we could merge them by adding additional mul-
tiplexers and sharing the same ALU. Likewise, instructions and data could be
stored in the same memory, because the data and instruction accesses happen
on different clock cycles.
     Rather than optimize this simple implementation, we will leave the design as it
is in Figure C.18, because this provides us with a better base for the pipelined
implementation.
C-30    ■      Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                                                                           Execute/
                                            Instruction decode/            address                  Memory         Write-
            Instruction fetch
                                               register fetch             calculation               access         back

                                                                                                    M
                                                                                                    u
                                                                                                    x

                      Add       NPC
                                                                             Branch
             4                                                         =?           Cond
                                                                              taken

  PC                                                                  M
                                                                      u
                  Instruction                                     A   x
                   memory       IR            Registers                      ALU         ALU
                                                                      M                 output
                                                                  B   u                           Data              M
                                                                                                             LMD
                                                                      x                          memory             u
                                                                                                                    x
                                             12            32
                                                   Sign-        lmm
                                                  extend

Figure C.18 The implementation of the RISC V data path allows every instruction to be executed in 4 or 5 clock
cycles. Although the PC is shown in the portion of the data path that is used in instruction fetch and the registers are
shown in the portion of the data path that is used in instruction decode/register fetch, both of these functional units
are read as well as written by an instruction. Although we show these functional units in the cycle corresponding to
where they are read, the PC is written during the memory access clock cycle and the registers are written during the
write-back clock cycle. In both cases, the writes in later pipe stages are indicated by the multiplexer output (in mem-
ory access or write-back), which carries a value back to the PC or registers. These backward-flowing signals introduce
much of the complexity of pipelining, because they indicate the possibility of hazards.

                                 A Basic Pipeline for RISC V
                                 As before, we can pipeline the data path of Figure C.18 with almost no changes by
                                 starting a new instruction on each clock cycle. Because every pipe stage is active
                                 on every clock cycle, all operations in a pipe stage must complete in 1 clock cycle
                                 and any combination of operations must be able to occur at once. Furthermore,
                                 pipelining the data path requires that values passed from one pipe stage to the next
                                 must be placed in registers. Figure C.19 shows the RISC V pipeline with the appro-
                                 priate registers, called pipeline registers or pipeline latches, between each pipeline
                                 stage. The registers are labeled with the names of the stages they connect.
                                                                           C.3       How Is Pipelining Implemented?   ■    C-31

                            IF/ID                                  ID/EX                        EX/MEM            MEM/WB

       4
                    M                                                                     Branch
            ADD     u                                                                     taken
                    x
                                                                                 =?
                                          IR19..15

  PC                                     IR24..20                                M
                                                                                 u
           Instruction IR
                                                                                 x
            memory                    MEM/WB.IR Registers                                 ALU
                                                                                 M
                                                                                 u                        Data             M
                                                                                 x                       memory            u
                                                                                                                           x

                                               12             32
                                                      Sign-
                                                     extend

Figure C.19 The data path is pipelined by adding a set of registers, one between each pair of pipe stages. The
registers serve to convey values and control information from one stage to the next. We can also think of the PC as a
pipeline register, which sits before the IF stage of the pipeline, leading to one pipeline register for each pipe stage.
Recall that the PC is an edge-triggered register written at the end of the clock cycle; hence, there is no race condition
in writing the PC. The selection multiplexer for the PC has been moved so that the PC is written in exactly one stage
(IF). If we didn’t move it, there would be a conflict when a branch occurred, because two instructions would try to
write different values into the PC. Most of the data paths flow from left to right, which is from earlier in time to later.
The paths flowing from right to left (which carry the register write-back information and PC information on a branch)
introduce complications into our pipeline.

                                    Figure C.19 is drawn so that connections through the pipeline registers from one
                                    stage to another are clear.
                                        All of the registers needed to hold values temporarily between clock cycles
                                    within one instruction are subsumed into these pipeline registers. The fields of
                                    the instruction register (IR), which is part of the IF/ID register, are labeled when
                                    they are used to supply register names. The pipeline registers carry both data and
                                    control from one pipeline stage to the next. Any value needed on a later pipeline
                                    stage must be placed in such a register and copied from one pipeline register to
                                    the next, until it is no longer needed. If we tried to just use the temporary registers
                                    we had in our earlier unpipelined data path, values could be overwritten before all
                                    uses were completed. For example, the field of a register operand used for a write
                                    on a load or ALU operation is supplied from the MEM/WB pipeline register rather
                                    than from the IF/ID register. This is because we want a load or ALU operation to
                                    write the register designated by that operation, not the register field of the
C-32     ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                               instruction currently transitioning from IF to ID! This destination register field is
                               simply copied from one pipeline register to the next, until it is needed during the
                               WB stage.
                                   Any instruction is active in exactly one stage of the pipeline at a time; therefore,
                               any actions taken on behalf of an instruction occur between a pair of pipeline reg-
                               isters. Thus, we can also look at the activities of the pipeline by examining what has
                               to happen on any pipeline stage depending on the instruction type. Figure C.20
                               shows this view. Fields of the pipeline registers are named so as to show the flow

Stage                                                     Any instruction
IF       IF/ID.IR Mem[PC]
         IF/ID.NPC,PC (if ((EX/MEM.opcode == branch) & EX/MEM.cond){EX/MEM.
         ALUOutput} else {PC + 4});
ID       ID/EX.A Regs[IF/ID.IR[rs1]]; ID/EX.B Regs[IF/ID.IR[rs2]];
         ID/EX.NPC IF/ID.NPC; ID/EX.IR IF/ID.IR;
         ID/EX.Imm sign-extend(IF/ID.IR[immediate field]);
         ALU instruction                        Load instruction                           Branch instruction
EX       EX/MEM.IR ID/EX.IR;                    EX/MEM.IR to ID/EX.IR                      EX/MEM.ALUOutput
         EX/MEM.ALUOutput                       EX/MEM.ALUOutput                           ID/EX.NPC +
         ID/EX.A func ID/EX.B;                  ID/EX.A + ID/EX.Imm;                       (ID/EX.Imm < < 2);
         or
         EX/MEM.ALUOutput
         ID/EX.A op ID/EX.Imm;
                                                EX/MEM.B       ID/EX.B;                    EX/MEM.cond
                                                                                           (ID/EX.A == ID/EX.B);
MEM      MEM/WB.IR EX/MEM.IR;                   MEM/WB.IR EX/MEM.IR;
         MEM/WB.ALUOutput                       MEM/WB.LMD
         EX/MEM.ALUOutput;                      Mem[EX/MEM.ALUOutput];
                                                or
                                                Mem[EX/MEM.ALUOutput]
                                                EX/MEM.B;
WB       Regs[MEM/WB.IR[rd]]                    For load only:
         MEM/WB.ALUOutput;                      Regs[MEM/WB.IR[rd]]
                                                MEM/WB.LMD;

Figure C.20 Events on every pipe stage of the RISC V pipeline. Let’s review the actions in the stages that are specific
to the pipeline organization. In IF, in addition to fetching the instruction and computing the new PC, we store the
incremented PC both into the PC and into a pipeline register (NPC) for later use in computing the branch-target
address. This structure is the same as the organization in Figure C.19, where the PC is updated in IF from one of
two sources. In ID, we fetch the registers, extend the sign of the 12 bits of the IR (the immediate field), and pass along
the IR and NPC. During EX, we perform an ALU operation or an address calculation; we pass along the IR and the B
register (if the instruction is a store). We also set the value of cond to 1 if the instruction is a taken branch. During the
MEM phase, we cycle the memory, write the PC if needed, and pass along values needed in the final pipe stage.
Finally, during WB, we update the register field from either the ALU output or the loaded value. For simplicity we
always pass the entire IR from one stage to the next, although as an instruction proceeds down the pipeline, less
and less of the IR is needed.
                                C.3   How Is Pipelining Implemented?         ■   C-33

of data from one stage to the next. Notice that the actions in the first two stages are
independent of the current instruction type; they must be independent because the
instruction is not decoded until the end of the ID stage. The IF activity depends on
whether the instruction in EX/MEM is a taken branch. If so, then the branch-target
address of the branch instruction in EX/MEM is written into the PC at the end of IF;
otherwise, the incremented PC will be written back. (As we said earlier, this effect
of branches leads to complications in the pipeline that we deal with in the next few
sections.) The fixed-position encoding of the register source operands is critical to
allowing the registers to be fetched during ID.
    To control this simple pipeline we need only determine how to set the con-
trol for the four multiplexers in the data path of Figure C.19. The two multi-
plexers in the ALU stage are set depending on the instruction type, which is
dictated by the IR field of the ID/EX register. The top ALU input multiplexer
is set by whether the instruction is a branch or not, and the bottom multiplexer is
set by whether the instruction is a register-register ALU operation or any other
type of operation. The multiplexer in the IF stage chooses whether to use the
value of the incremented PC or the value of the EX/MEM.ALUOutput (the
branch target) to write into the PC. This multiplexer is controlled by the field
EX/MEM.cond. The fourth multiplexer is controlled by whether the instruction
in the WB stage is a load or an ALU operation. In addition to these four mul-
tiplexers, there is one additional multiplexer needed that is not drawn in
Figure C.19, but whose existence is clear from looking at the WB stage of
an ALU operation. The destination register field is in one of two different places
depending on the instruction type (register-register ALU versus either ALU
immediate or load). Thus, we will need a multiplexer to choose the correct por-
tion of the IR in the MEM/WB register to specify the register destination field,
assuming the instruction writes a register.

Implementing the Control for the RISC V Pipeline
The process of letting an instruction move from the instruction decode stage (ID)
into the execution stage (EX) of this pipeline is usually called instruction issue; an
instruction that has made this step is said to have issued. For the RISC V integer
pipeline, all the data hazards can be checked during the ID phase of the pipeline. If
a data hazard exists, the instruction is stalled before it is issued. Likewise, we can
determine what forwarding will be needed during ID and set the appropriate con-
trols then. Detecting interlocks early in the pipeline reduces the hardware complex-
ity because the hardware never has to suspend an instruction that has updated the
state of the processor, unless the entire processor is stalled. Alternatively, we can
detect the hazard or forwarding at the beginning of a clock cycle that uses an oper-
and (EX and MEM for this pipeline). To show the differences in these two
approaches, we will show how the interlock for a read after write (RAW) hazard
with the source coming from a load instruction (called a load interlock) can be
implemented by a check in ID, while the implementation of forwarding paths to
C-34   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                                              Example code
                         Situation            sequence                 Action
                         No dependence        ld     x1,45(x2)         No hazard possible because no dependence
                                              add    x5,x6,x7          exists on x1 in the immediately following
                                              sub    x8,x6,x7          three instructions
                                              or     x9,x6,x7
                         Dependence           ld     x1,45(x2)         Comparators detect the use of x1 in the add
                         requiring stall      add    x5,x1,x7          and stall the add (and sub and or) before
                                              sub    x8,x6,x7          the add begins EX
                                              or     x9,x6,x7
                         Dependence           ld     x1,45(x2)         Comparators detect use of x1 in sub and
                         overcome by          add    x5,x6,x7          forward result of load to ALU in time for
                         forwarding           sub    x8,x1,x7          sub to begin EX
                                              or     x9,x6,x7
                         Dependence with      ld     x1,45(x2)         No action required because the read of x1 by
                         accesses in order    add    x5,x6,x7          or occurs in the second half of the ID phase,
                                              sub    x8,x6,x7          while the write of the loaded data occurred in
                                              or     x9,x1,x7          the first half

                         Figure C.21 Situations that the pipeline hazard detection hardware can see by com-
                         paring the destination and sources of adjacent instructions. This table indicates that
                         the only comparison needed is between the destination and the sources on the two
                         instructions following the instruction that wrote the destination. In the case of a stall,
                         the pipeline dependences will look like the third case once execution continues (depen-
                         dence overcome by forwarding). Of course, hazards that involve x0 can be ignored
                         because the register always contains 0, and the preceding test could be extended to
                         do this.

                         the ALU inputs can be done during EX. Figure C.21 lists the variety of circum-
                         stances that we must handle.
                              Let’s start with implementing the load interlock. If there is a RAW hazard with
                         the source instruction being a load, the load instruction will be in the EX stage
                         when an instruction that needs the load data will be in the ID stage. Thus, we
                         can describe all the possible hazard situations with a small table, which can be
                         directly translated to an implementation. Figure C.22 shows a table that detects
                         all load interlocks when the instruction using the load result is in the ID stage.
                              Once a hazard has been detected, the control unit must insert the pipeline stall
                         and prevent the instructions in the IF and ID stages from advancing. As we said
                         earlier, all the control information is carried in the pipeline registers. (Carrying
                         the instruction along is enough, because all control is derived from it.) Thus, when
                         we detect a hazard we need only change the control portion of the ID/EX pipeline
                         register to all 0s, which happens to be a no-op (an instruction that does nothing,
                         such as add x0,x0,x0). In addition, we simply recirculate the contents of the
                         IF/ID registers to hold the stalled instruction. In a pipeline with more complex haz-
                         ards, the same ideas would apply: we can detect the hazard by comparing some set
                         of pipeline registers and shift in no-ops to prevent erroneous execution.
                                  C.3    How Is Pipelining Implemented?          ■   C-35

Opcode field of ID/EX      Opcode field of IF/ID
(ID/EX.IR0..5)             (IF/ID.IR0..6)                    Matching operand fields
Load                       Register-register ALU, load,      ID/EX.IR[rd] ¼¼ IF/
                           store,                            ID.IR[rs1]
                           ALU immediate, or branch
Load                       Register-register ALU, or         ID/EX.IR[rd] ¼¼ IF/
                           branch                            ID.IR[rs2]

Figure C.22 The logic to detect the need for load interlocks during the ID stage of an
instruction requires two comparisons, one for each possible source. Remember that
the IF/ID register holds the state of the instruction in ID, which potentially uses the load
result, while ID/EX holds the state of the instruction in EX, which is the load instruction.

     Implementing the forwarding logic is similar, although there are more cases to
consider. The key observation needed to implement the forwarding logic is that
the pipeline registers contain both the data to be forwarded as well as the source
and destination register fields. All forwarding logically happens from the ALU or
data memory output to the ALU input, the data memory input, or the zero detec-
tion unit. Thus, we can implement the forwarding by a comparison of the desti-
nation registers of the IR contained in the EX/MEM and MEM/WB stages against
the source registers of the IR contained in the ID/EX and EX/MEM registers.
Figure C.23 shows the comparisons and possible forwarding operations where
the destination of the forwarded result is an ALU input for the instruction cur-
rently in EX.
     In addition to the comparators and combinational logic that we must determine
when a forwarding path needs to be enabled, we also must enlarge the multiplexers
at the ALU inputs and add the connections from the pipeline registers that are used
to forward the results. Figure C.24 shows the relevant segments of the pipelined
data path with the additional multiplexers and connections in place.
     For RISC V, the hazard detection and forwarding hardware is reasonably sim-
ple; we will see that things become somewhat more complicated when we extend
this pipeline to deal with floating point. Before we do that, we need to handle
branches.

Dealing With Branches in the Pipeline
In RISC V, conditional branches depend on comparing two register values, which
we assume occurs during the EX cycle, and uses the ALU for this function. We will
need to also compute the branch target address. Because testing the branch condi-
tion and determining the next PC will determine what the branch penalty is, we
would like to compute both the possible PCs and choose the correct PC before
the end of the EX cycle. We can do this by adding a separate adder that computes
the branch target address during ID. Because the instruction is not yet decoded, we
will be computing a possible target as if every instruction were a branch. This is
C-36    ■     Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

Pipeline                            Pipeline                                   Destination
register of    Opcode of            register of     Opcode of                  of the           Comparison (if
source         source               destination     destination                forwarded        equal then
instruction    instruction          instruction     instruction                result           forward)
EX/MEM         Register-            ID/EX           Register-register          Top ALU          EX/MEM.IR[rd] ==
               register ALU,                        ALU, ALU                   input            ID/EX.IR[rs1]
               ALU immediate                        immediate, load, store,
                                                    branch
EX/MEM         Register-            ID/EX           Register-register ALU      Bottom ALU       EX/MEM.IR[rd] ==
               register ALU,                                                   input            ID/EX.IR[rs2]
               ALU immediate
MEM/WB         Register-            ID/EX           Register-register          Top ALU          MEM/WB.IR[rd] ==
               register ALU,                        ALU, ALU                   input            ID/EX.IR[rs1]
               ALU                                  immediate, load, store,
               immediate,                           branch
               Load
MEM/WB         Register-            ID/EX           Register-register ALU      Bottom ALU       MEM/WB.IR[rd] ==
               register ALU,                                                   input            ID/EX.IR[rs2]
               ALU
               immediate,
               Load

Figure C.23 Forwarding of data to the two ALU inputs (for the instruction in EX) can occur from the ALU result (in
EX/MEM or in MEM/WB) or from the load result in MEM/WB. There are 10 separate comparisons needed to tell
whether a forwarding operation should occur. The top and bottom ALU inputs refer to the inputs corresponding
to the first and second ALU source operands, respectively, and are shown explicitly in Figure C.18 on page C.30
and in Figure C.24 on page C.36. Remember that the pipeline latch for destination instruction in EX is ID/EX, while
the source values come from the ALUOutput portion of EX/MEM or MEM/WB or the LMD portion of MEM/WB. There is
one complication not addressed by this logic: dealing with multiple instructions that write the same register. For
example, during the code sequence add x1, x2, x3; addi x1, x1, 2; sub x4, x3, x1, the logic must ensure
that the sub instruction uses the result of the addi instruction rather than the result of the add instruction. The logic
shown here can be extended to handle this case by simply testing that forwarding from MEM/WB is enabled only
when forwarding from EX/MEM is not enabled for the same input. Because the addi result will be in EX/MEM, it will
be forwarded, rather than the add result in MEM/WB.

                               likely faster than computing the target and evaluating the condition both in EX, but
                               does use slightly more energy.
                                   Figure C.25 shows a pipelined data path assuming the adder in ID and the eval-
                               uation of the branch condition in EX, a minor change of the pipeline structure. This
                               pipeline will incur a two-cycle penalty on branches. In some early RISC proces-
                               sors, such as MIPS, the condition test on branches was restricted to allow the test to
                               occur in ID, reducing the branch delay to one cycle. Of course, that meant that an
                               ALU operation to a register followed by a conditional branch based on that register
                               incurred a data hazard, which does not occur if the branch condition is evaluated
                               in EX.
                                   As pipeline depths increased, the branch delay increased, which made dynamic
                               branch prediction necessary. For example, a processor with separate decode and
                          C.4    What Makes Pipelining Hard to Implement?            ■   C-37

           ID/EX                                   EX/MEM                   MEM/WB

                                       =?

                             M
                             u
                             x

                                            ALU

                                                                  Data
                             M                                   memory
                             u
                             x

      Figure C.24 Forwarding of results to the ALU requires the addition of three extra
      inputs on each ALU multiplexer and the addition of three paths to the new inputs.
      The paths correspond to a bypass of: (1) the ALU output at the end of the EX, (2) the ALU
      output at the end of the MEM stage, and (3) the memory output at the end of the
      MEM stage.

      register fetch stages will probably have a branch delay that is at least 1 clock cycle
      longer. The branch delay, unless it is dealt with, turns into a branch penalty. Many
      older processors that implement more complex instruction sets have branch delays
      of 4 clock cycles or more, and large, deeply pipelined processors often have branch
      penalties of 6 or 7. Aggressive high-end superscalars, such as the Intel i7 discussed
      in Chapter 3, may have branch penalties of 10–15 cycles! In general, the deeper the
      pipeline, the worse the branch penalty in clock cycles, and the more critical that
      branches be accurately predicted.

C.4   What Makes Pipelining Hard to Implement?
      Now that we understand how to detect and resolve hazards, we can deal with some
      complications that we have avoided so far. The first part of this section considers
      the challenges of exceptional situations where the instruction execution order is
      changed in unexpected ways. In the second part of this section, we discuss some
      of the challenges raised by different instruction sets.
C-38    ■       Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                                                                      ID/EX
                                                                ADD

                                    IF/ID                                                EX/MEM            MEM/WB
                                                                                  =?
            4
                           M
                  ADD      u
                           x
                                                IR6..10

       PC                                      IR11..15
                   Instruction IR
                    memory
                                            MEM/WB.IR Registers                    ALU
                                                                              M
                                                                              u                    Data             M
                                                                              x                   memory            u
                                                                                                                    x

                                               16    Sign- 32
                                                    extend

Figure C.25 To minimize the impact of deciding whether a conditional branch is taken, we compute the branch
target address in ID while doing the conditional test and final selection of next PC in EX. As mentioned in
Figure C.19, the PC can be thought of as a pipeline register (e.g., as part of ID/IF), which is written with the address
of the next instruction at the end of each IF cycle.

                                    Dealing With Exceptions
                                    Exceptional situations are harder to handle in a pipelined processor because the over-
                                    lapping of instructions makes it more difficult to know whether an instruction can
                                    safely change the state of the processor. In a pipelined processor, an instruction is
                                    executed piece by piece and is not completed for several clock cycles. Unfortunately,
                                    other instructions in the pipeline can raise exceptions that may force the processor to
                                    abort the instructions in the pipeline before they complete. Before we discuss these
                                    problems and their solutions in detail, we need to understand what types of situations
                                    can arise and what architectural requirements exist for supporting them.

                                    Types of Exceptions and Requirements
                                    The terminology used to describe exceptional situations where the normal execu-
                                    tion order of instruction is changed varies among processors. The terms interrupt,
                                    fault, and exception are used, although not in a consistent fashion. We use the term
                                    exception to cover all these mechanisms, including the following:

                                    ■       I/O device request
                                    ■       Invoking an operating system service from a user program
                    C.4   What Makes Pipelining Hard to Implement?         ■   C-39

■   Tracing instruction execution
■   Breakpoint (programmer-requested interrupt)
■   Integer arithmetic overflow
■   FP arithmetic anomaly
■   Page fault (not in main memory)
■   Misaligned memory accesses (if alignment is required)
■   Memory protection violation
■   Using an undefined or unimplemented instruction
■   Hardware malfunctions
■   Power failure

When we wish to refer to some particular class of such exceptions, we will use a
longer name, such as I/O interrupt, floating-point exception, or page fault.
    Although we use the term exception to cover all of these events, individual
events have important characteristics that determine what action is needed in the
hardware. The requirements on exceptions can be characterized on five semi-
independent axes:

1. Synchronous versus asynchronous—If the event occurs at the same place every
   time the program is executed with the same data and memory allocation, the
   event is synchronous. With the exception of hardware malfunctions, asynchro-
   nous events are caused by devices external to the processor and memory. Asyn-
   chronous events usually can be handled after the completion of the current
   instruction, which makes them easier to handle.
2. User requested versus coerced—If the user task directly asks for it, it is a user-
   requested event. In some sense, user-requested exceptions are not really excep-
   tions, because they are predictable. They are treated as exceptions, however,
   because the same mechanisms that are used to save and restore the state are used
   for these user-requested events. Because the only function of an instruction that
   triggers this exception is to cause the exception, user-requested exceptions can
   always be handled after the instruction has completed. Coerced exceptions are
   caused by some hardware event that is not under the control of the user program.
   Coerced exceptions are harder to implement because they are not predictable.
3. User maskable versus user nonmaskable—If an event can be masked or dis-
   abled by a user task, it is user maskable. This mask simply controls whether
   the hardware responds to the exception or not.
4. Within versus between instructions—This classification depends on whether
   the event prevents instruction completion by occurring in the middle of execu-
   tion—no matter how short—or whether it is recognized between instructions.
   Exceptions that occur within instructions are usually synchronous, because
   the instruction triggers the exception. It’s harder to implement exceptions that
C-40    ■    Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                                occur within instructions than those between instructions, because the instruc-
                                tion must be stopped and restarted. Asynchronous exceptions that occur within
                                instructions arise from catastrophic situations (e.g., hardware malfunction) and
                                always cause program termination.
                             5. Resume versus terminate—If the program’s execution always stops after the
                                interrupt, it is a terminating event. If the program’s execution continues after
                                the interrupt, it is a resuming event. It is easier to implement exceptions that
                                terminate execution, because the processor need not be able to restart execution
                                of the same program after handling the exception.

                             Figure C.26 classifies the preceding examples according to these five categories.
                             The difficult task is implementing interrupts occurring within instructions where
                             the instruction must be resumed. Implementing such exceptions requires that
                             another program must be invoked to save the state of the executing program, cor-
                             rect the cause of the exception, and then restore the state of the program before the

                                                                 User                Within vs.
                            Synchronous vs.    User request      maskable vs.        between         Resume vs.
Exception type              asynchronous       vs. coerced       nonmaskable         instructions    terminate
I/O device request          Asynchronous       Coerced           Nonmaskable         Between         Resume
Invoke operating system     Synchronous        User request      Nonmaskable         Between         Resume
Tracing instruction         Synchronous        User request      User maskable       Between         Resume
execution
Breakpoint                  Synchronous        User request      User maskable       Between         Resume
Integer arithmetic          Synchronous        Coerced           User maskable       Within          Resume
overflow
Floating-point arithmetic   Synchronous        Coerced           User maskable       Within          Resume
overflow or underflow
Page fault                  Synchronous        Coerced           Nonmaskable         Within          Resume
Misaligned memory           Synchronous        Coerced           User maskable       Within          Resume
accesses
Memory protection           Synchronous        Coerced           Nonmaskable         Within          Resume
violations
Using undefined             Synchronous        Coerced           Nonmaskable         Within          Terminate
instructions
Hardware malfunctions       Asynchronous       Coerced           Nonmaskable         Within          Terminate
Power failure               Asynchronous       Coerced           Nonmaskable         Within          Terminate

Figure C.26 Five categories are used to define what actions are needed for the different exception types. Excep-
tions that must allow resumption are marked as resume, although the software may often choose to terminate the
program. Synchronous, coerced exceptions occurring within instructions that can be resumed are the most difficult
to implement. We might expect that memory protection access violations would always result in termination; how-
ever, modern operating systems use memory protection to detect events such as the first attempt to use a page or
the first write to a page. Thus, processors should be able to resume after such exceptions.
                    C.4   What Makes Pipelining Hard to Implement?            ■   C-41

instruction that caused the exception can be tried again. This process must be effec-
tively invisible to the executing program. If a pipeline provides the ability for the
processor to handle the exception, save the state, and restart without affecting the
execution of the program, the pipeline or processor is said to be restartable. While
early supercomputers and microprocessors often lacked this property, almost all
processors today support it, at least for the integer pipeline, because it is needed
to implement virtual memory (see Chapter 2).

Stopping and Restarting Execution
As in unpipelined implementations, the most difficult exceptions have two prop-
erties: (1) they occur within instructions (that is, in the middle of the instruction
execution corresponding to EX or MEM pipe stages), and (2) they must be restart-
able. In our RISC V pipeline, for example, a virtual memory page fault resulting
from a data fetch cannot occur until sometime in the MEM stage of the instruction.
By the time that fault is seen, several other instructions will be in execution. A page
fault must be restartable and requires the intervention of another process, such as
the operating system. Thus, the pipeline must be safely shut down and the state
saved so that the instruction can be restarted in the correct state. Restarting is usu-
ally implemented by saving the PC of the instruction at which to restart. If the
restarted instruction is not a branch, then we will continue to fetch the sequential
successors and begin their execution in the normal fashion. If the restarted instruc-
tion is a branch, then we will reevaluate the branch condition and begin fetching
from either the target or the fall-through. When an exception occurs, the pipeline
control can take the following steps to save the pipeline state safely:

1. Force a trap instruction into the pipeline on the next IF.
2. Until the trap is taken, turn off all writes for the faulting instruction and for all
   instructions that follow in the pipeline; this can be done by placing zeros into the
   pipeline latches of all instructions in the pipeline, starting with the instruction
   that generates the exception, but not those that precede that instruction. This
   prevents any state changes for instructions that will not be completed before
   the exception is handled.
3. After the exception-handling routine in the operating system receives control, it
   immediately saves the PC of the faulting instruction. This value will be used to
   return from the exception later.

After the exception has been handled, special instructions return the processor from
the exception by reloading the PCs and restarting the instruction stream (using the
exception return in RISC V). If the pipeline can be stopped so that the instructions
just before the faulting instruction are completed and those after it can be restarted
from scratch, the pipeline is said to have precise exceptions. Ideally, the faulting
instruction would not have changed the state, and correctly handling some excep-
tions requires that the faulting instruction have no effects. For other exceptions,
C-42   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         such as floating-point exceptions, the faulting instruction on some processors
                         writes its result before the exception can be handled. In such cases, the hardware
                         must be prepared to retrieve the source operands, even if the destination is identical
                         to one of the source operands. Because floating-point operations may run for many
                         cycles, it is highly likely that some other instruction may have written the source
                         operands (as we will see in the next section, floating-point operations often com-
                         plete out of order). To overcome this, many recent high-performance processors
                         have introduced two modes of operation. One mode has precise exceptions and
                         the other (fast or performance mode) does not. Of course, the precise exception
                         mode is slower, since it allows less overlap among floating-point instructions.
                             Supporting precise exceptions is a requirement in many systems, while in
                         others it is “just” valuable because it simplifies the operating system interface.
                         At a minimum, any processor with demand paging or IEEE arithmetic trap han-
                         dlers must make its exceptions precise, either in the hardware or with some soft-
                         ware support. For integer pipelines, the task of creating precise exceptions is easier,
                         and accommodating virtual memory strongly motivates the support of precise
                         exceptions for memory references. In practice, these reasons have led designers
                         and architects to always provide precise exceptions for the integer pipeline. In this
                         section we describe how to implement precise exceptions for the RISC V integer
                         pipeline. We will describe techniques for handling the more complex challenges
                         arising in the floating-point pipeline in Section C.5.

                         Exceptions in RISC V
                         Figure C.27 shows the RISC V pipeline stages and which problem exceptions
                         might occur in each stage. With pipelining, multiple exceptions may occur in
                         the same clock cycle because there are multiple instructions in execution. For
                         example, consider this instruction sequence:

                                 ld         IF       ID        EX          MEM         WB
                                 add                 IF        ID          EX          MEM          WB

                         Pipeline stage      Problem exceptions occurring
                         IF                  Page fault on instruction fetch; misaligned memory access; memory
                                             protection violation
                         ID                  Undefined or illegal opcode
                         EX                  Arithmetic exception
                         MEM                 Page fault on data fetch; misaligned memory access; memory
                                             protection violation
                         WB                  None

                         Figure C.27 Exceptions that may occur in the RISC V pipeline. Exceptions raised from
                         instruction or data memory access account for six out of eight cases.
                    C.4    What Makes Pipelining Hard to Implement?            ■    C-43

This pair of instructions can cause a data page fault and an arithmetic exception at
the same time, because the ld is in the MEM stage while the add is in the EX
stage. This case can be handled by dealing with only the data page fault and then
restarting the execution. The second exception will reoccur (but not the first, if
the software is correct), and when the second exception occurs it can be handled
independently.
     In reality, the situation is not as straightforward as this simple example. Excep-
tions may occur out of order; that is, an instruction may cause an exception before
an earlier instruction causes one. Consider again the preceding sequence of instruc-
tions, ld followed by add. The ld can get a data page fault, seen when the instruc-
tion is in MEM, and the add can get an instruction page fault, seen when the add
instruction is in IF. The instruction page fault will actually occur first, even though
it is caused by a later instruction!
     Because we are implementing precise exceptions, the pipeline is required to
handle the exception caused by the ld instruction first. To explain how this works,
let’s call the instruction in the position of the ld instruction i, and the instruction in
the position of the add instruction i + 1. The pipeline cannot simply handle an
exception when it occurs in time, because that will lead to exceptions occurring
out of the unpipelined order. Instead, the hardware posts all exceptions caused
by a given instruction in a status vector associated with that instruction. The excep-
tion status vector is carried along as the instruction goes down the pipeline. Once an
exception indication is set in the exception status vector, any control signal that may
cause a data value to be written is turned off (this includes both register writes and
memory writes). Because a store can cause an exception during MEM, the hardware
must be prepared to prevent the store from completing if it raises an exception.
     When an instruction enters WB (or is about to leave MEM), the exception sta-
tus vector is checked. If any exceptions are posted, they are handled in the order in
which they would occur in time on an unpipelined processor—the exception cor-
responding to the earliest instruction (and usually the earliest pipe stage for that
instruction) is handled first. This guarantees that all exceptions will be seen on
instruction i before any are seen on i + 1. Of course, any action taken in earlier pipe
stages on behalf of instruction i may be invalid, but because writes to the register
file and memory were disabled, no state could have been changed. As we will see
in Section C.5, maintaining this precise model for FP operations is much harder.
     In the next subsection we describe problems that arise in implementing excep-
tions in the pipelines of processors with more powerful, longer-running instructions.

Instruction Set Complications
No RISC V instruction has more than one result, and our RISC V pipeline writes that
result only at the end of an instruction’s execution. When an instruction is guaran-
teed to complete, it is called committed. In the RISC V integer pipeline, all instruc-
tions are committed when they reach the end of the MEM stage (or beginning of
WB) and no instruction updates the state before that stage. Thus, precise exceptions
C-44   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         are straightforward. Some processors have instructions that change the state in the
                         middle of the instruction execution, before the instruction and its predecessors are
                         guaranteed to complete. For example, autoincrement addressing modes in the IA-32
                         architecture cause the update of registers in the middle of an instruction execution. In
                         such a case, if the instruction is aborted because of an exception, it will leave the
                         processor state altered. Although we know which instruction caused the exception,
                         without additional hardware support the exception will be imprecise because the
                         instruction will be half finished. Restarting the instruction stream after such an
                         imprecise exception is difficult. Alternatively, we could avoid updating the state
                         before the instruction commits, but this may be difficult or costly, because there
                         may be dependences on the updated state: consider a VAX instruction that autoin-
                         crements the same register multiple times. Thus, to maintain a precise exception
                         model, most processors with such instructions have the ability to back out any state
                         changes made before the instruction is committed. If an exception occurs, the pro-
                         cessor uses this ability to reset the state of the processor to its value before the inter-
                         rupted instruction started. In the next section, we will see that a more powerful RISC
                         V floating-point pipeline can introduce similar problems, and Section C.7 introduces
                         techniques that substantially complicate exception handling.
                              A related source of difficulties arises from instructions that update memory
                         state during execution, such as the string copy operations on the Intel architecture
                         or IBM 360 (see Appendix K). To make it possible to interrupt and restart these
                         instructions, the instructions are defined to use the general-purpose registers as
                         working registers. Thus, the state of the partially completed instruction is always
                         in the registers, which are saved on an exception and restored after the exception,
                         allowing the instruction to continue.
                              A different set of difficulties arises from odd bits of state that may create addi-
                         tional pipeline hazards or may require extra hardware to save and restore. Condition
                         codes are a good example of this. Many processors set the condition codes implic-
                         itly as part of the instruction. This approach has advantages, because condition
                         codes decouple the evaluation of the condition from the actual branch. However,
                         implicitly set condition codes can cause difficulties in scheduling any pipeline
                         delays between setting the condition code and the branch, because most instructions
                         set the condition code and cannot be used in the delay slots between the condition
                         evaluation and the branch.
                              Additionally, in processors with condition codes, the processor must decide
                         when the branch condition is fixed. This involves finding out when the condition
                         code has been set for the last time before the branch. In most processors with
                         implicitly set condition codes, this is done by delaying the branch condition eval-
                         uation until all previous instructions have had a chance to set the condition code.
                              Of course, architectures with explicitly set condition codes allow the delay
                         between condition test and the branch to be scheduled; however, pipeline control
                         must still track the last instruction that sets the condition code to know when the
                         branch condition is decided. In effect, the condition code must be treated as an
                         operand that requires hazard detection for RAW hazards with branches, just as
                         RISC V must do on the registers.
C.5   Extending the RISC V Integer Pipeline to Handle Multicycle Operations           ■   C-45

             A final thorny area in pipelining is multicycle operations. Imagine trying to
         pipeline a sequence of x86 instructions such as this:
             mov       BX, AX      ; moves between registers
             add       42(BX+SI),BX;adds memory contents and register
                                   ; to same memory location
             sub       BX,AX       ;subtracts registers
             rep movsb             ;moves a character string of
                                   ; length given by register CX
              Although none of these instructions is particularly long (an x86 instruction
         can be up to 15 bytes), they do differ radically in the number of clock cycles they
         will require, from as low as one up to hundreds of clock cycles. These instructions
         also require different numbers of data memory accesses, from zero to possibly
         hundreds. The data hazards are very complex and occur both between and within
         instructions (nothing prevents the movsb from having an overlapping source and
         destination!). The simple solution of making all instructions execute for the
         same number of clock cycles is unacceptable because it introduces an enormous
         number of hazards and bypass conditions and makes an immensely long pipeline.
         Pipelining the x86 at the instruction level is difficult, but a clever solution
         was found, similar to one used for the VAX. They pipeline the microinstruction
         execution; a microinstruction is a simple instruction used in sequences to imple-
         ment a more complex instruction set. Because the microinstructions are simple
         (they look a lot like RISC V), the pipeline control is much easier. Since 1995,
         all Intel IA-32 microprocessors have used this strategy of converting the IA-32
         instructions into microoperations, and then pipelining the microoperations. In
         fact, this approach is even used for some of the more complex instructions in
         the ARM architecture.
              In comparison, load-store processors have simple operations with similar
         amounts of work and pipeline more easily. If architects realize the relationship
         between instruction set design and pipelining, they can design architectures for
         more efficient pipelining. In the next section, we will see how the RISC V pipeline
         deals with long-running instructions, specifically floating-point operations.
              For many years, the interaction between instruction sets and implementations
         was believed to be small, and implementation issues were not a major focus in
         designing instruction sets. In the 1980s, it became clear that the difficulty and inef-
         ficiency of pipelining could both be increased by instruction set complications. In
         the 1990s, all companies moved to simpler instructions sets with the goal of reduc-
         ing the complexity of aggressive implementations.

C.5      Extending the RISC V Integer Pipeline to Handle
         Multicycle Operations
         We now want to explore how our RISC V pipeline can be extended to handle
         floating-point operations. This section concentrates on the basic approach and
C-46   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         the design alternatives, closing with some performance measurements of a RISC V
                         floating-point pipeline.
                             It is impractical to require that all RISC V FP operations complete in 1 clock
                         cycle, or even in 2. Doing so would mean accepting a slow clock or using enor-
                         mous amounts of logic in the FP units, or both. Instead, the FP pipeline will allow
                         for a longer latency for operations. This is easier to grasp if we imagine the FP
                         instructions as having the same pipeline as the integer instructions, with two impor-
                         tant changes. First, the EX cycle may be repeated as many times as needed to com-
                         plete the operation—the number of repetitions can vary for different operations.
                         Second, there may be multiple FP functional units. A stall will occur if the instruc-
                         tion to be issued will cause either a structural hazard for the functional unit it uses
                         or a data hazard.
                             For this section, let’s assume that there are four separate functional units in our
                         RISC V implementation:

                         1. The main integer unit that handles loads and stores, integer ALU operations,
                            and branches
                         2. FP and integer multiplier
                         3. FP adder that handles FP add, subtract, and conversion
                         4. FP and integer divider

                         If we also assume that the execution stages of these functional units are not pipe-
                         lined, then Figure C.28 shows the resulting pipeline structure. Because EX is not
                         pipelined, no other instruction using that functional unit may issue until the previ-
                         ous instruction leaves EX. Moreover, if an instruction cannot proceed to the EX
                         stage, the entire pipeline behind that instruction will be stalled.
                             In reality, the intermediate results are probably not cycled around the EX unit
                         as Figure C.28 suggests; instead, the EX pipeline stage has some number of clock
                         delays larger than 1. We can generalize the structure of the FP pipeline shown in
                         Figure C.28 to allow pipelining of some stages and multiple ongoing operations.
                         To describe such a pipeline, we must define both the latency of the functional units
                         and also the initiation interval or repeat interval. We define latency the same way
                         we defined it earlier: the number of intervening cycles between an instruction that
                         produces a result and an instruction that uses the result. The initiation or repeat
                         interval is the number of cycles that must elapse between issuing two operations
                         of a given type. For example, we will use the latencies and initiation intervals
                         shown in Figure C.29.
                             With this definition of latency, integer ALU operations have a latency of 0,
                         because the results can be used on the next clock cycle, and loads have a latency
                         of 1, because their results can be used after one intervening cycle. Because most
                         operations consume their operands at the beginning of EX, the latency is usually
                         the number of stages after EX that an instruction produces a result—for example,
                         zero stages for ALU operations and one stage for loads. The primary exception is
                         stores, which consume the value being stored one cycle later. Hence, the latency to
C.5   Extending the RISC V Integer Pipeline to Handle Multicycle Operations            ■    C-47

                                                   EX

                                               Integer unit

                                                   EX

                                               FP/integer
                                                multiply
                   IF          ID                                       MEM       WB

                                                   EX

                                                FP adder

                                                   EX

                                               FP/integer
                                                divider

         Figure C.28 The RISC V pipeline with three additional unpipelined, floating-point,
         functional units. Because only one instruction issues on every clock cycle, all instruc-
         tions go through the standard pipeline for integer operations. The FP operations simply
         loop when they reach the EX stage. After they have finished the EX stage, they proceed
         to MEM and WB to complete execution.

         Functional unit                                      Latency         Initiation interval
         Integer ALU                                            0                      1
         Data memory (integer and FP loads)                     1                      1
         FP add                                                 3                      1
         FP multiply (also integer multiply)                    6                      1
         FP divide (also integer divide)                        24                     25

         Figure C.29 Latencies and initiation intervals for functional units.

         a store for the value being stored, but not for the base address register, will be one
         cycle less. Pipeline latency is essentially equal to one cycle less than the depth of
         the execution pipeline, which is the number of stages from the EX stage to the stage
         that produces the result. Thus, for the preceding example pipeline, the number
         of stages in an FP add is four, while the number of stages in an FP multiply is
         seven. To achieve a higher clock rate, designers need to put fewer logic levels
C-48    ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                             in each pipe stage, which makes the number of pipe stages required for more
                             complex operations larger. The penalty for the faster clock rate is thus longer
                             latency for operations.
                                 The example pipeline structure in Figure C.29 allows up to four outstanding FP
                             adds, seven outstanding FP/integer multiplies, and one FP divide. Figure C.30
                             shows how this pipeline can be drawn by extending Figure C.28. The repeat inter-
                             val is implemented in Figure C.30 by adding additional pipeline stages, which will
                             be separated by additional pipeline registers. Because the units are independent, we
                             name the stages differently. The pipeline stages that take multiple clock cycles,
                             such as the divide unit, are further subdivided to show the latency of those stages.
                             Because they are not complete stages, only one operation may be active. The pipe-
                             line structure can also be shown using the familiar diagrams from earlier in the
                             appendix, as Figure C.31 shows for a set of independent FP operations and FP
                             loads and stores. Naturally, the longer latency of the FP operations increases the
                             frequency of RAW hazards and resultant stalls, as we will see later in this section.
                                 The structure of the pipeline in Figure C.30 requires the introduction of the
                             additional pipeline registers (e.g.,A1/A2, A2/A3, A3/A4) and the modification
                             of the connections to those registers. The ID/EX register must be expanded to

                                                   Integer unit
                                                       EX

                                            FP/integer multiply
                             M1      M2     M3      M4         M5     M6   M7

   IF        ID                                                                                     MEM        WB
                                                     FP adder
                                            A1      A2         A3     A4

                                                 FP/integer divider
                                                         DIV

Figure C.30 A pipeline that supports multiple outstanding FP operations. The FP multiplier and adder are fully
pipelined and have a depth of seven and four stages, respectively. The FP divider is not pipelined, but requires
24 clock cycles to complete. The latency in instructions between the issue of an FP operation and the use of the result
of that operation without incurring a RAW stall is determined by the number of cycles spent in the execution stages.
For example, the fourth instruction after an FP add can use the result of the FP add. For integer ALU operations, the
depth of the execution pipeline is always one and the next instruction can use the results.
                   C.5    Extending the RISC V Integer Pipeline to Handle Multicycle Operations            ■   C-49

fmul.d        IF     ID       M1      M2       M3       M4          M5          M6          M7       MEM         WB
fadd.d               IF       ID      A1       A2       A3          A4          MEM         WB
fadd.d                        IF      ID       EX       MEM         WB
fsd                                   IF       ID       EX          MEM         WB

Figure C.31 The pipeline timing of a set of independent FP operations. The stages in italics show where data are
needed, while the stages in bold show where a result is available. FP loads and stores use a 64-bit path to memory so
that the pipelining timing is just like an integer load or store.

                             connect ID to EX, DIV, M1, and A1; we can refer to the portion of the register
                             associated with one of the next stages with the notation ID/EX, ID/DIV, ID/
                             M1, or ID/A1. The pipeline register between ID and all the other stages may be
                             thought of as logically separate registers and may, in fact, be implemented as sep-
                             arate registers. Because only one operation can be in a pipe stage at a time, the
                             control information can be associated with the register at the head of the stage.

                             Hazards and Forwarding in Longer Latency Pipelines
                             There are a number of different aspects to the hazard detection and forwarding for a
                             pipeline like that shown in Figure C.30.

                             1. Because the divide unit is not fully pipelined, structural hazards can occur.
                                These will need to be detected and issuing instructions will need to be stalled.
                             2. Because the instructions have varying running times, the number of register
                                writes required in a cycle can be larger than 1.
                             3. Write after write (WAW) hazards are possible, because instructions no longer
                                reach WB in order. Note that write after read (WAR) hazards are not possible,
                                because the register reads always occur in ID.
                             4. Instructions can complete in a different order than they were issued, causing
                                problems with exceptions; we deal with this in the next subsection.
                             5. Because of longer latency of operations, stalls for RAW hazards will be more
                                frequent.

                             The increase in stalls arising from longer operation latencies is fundamentally the
                             same as that for the integer pipeline. Before describing the new problems that arise
                             in this FP pipeline and looking at solutions, let’s examine the potential impact of
                             RAW hazards. Figure C.32 shows a typical FP code sequence and the resultant
                             stalls. At the end of this section, we’ll examine the performance of this FP pipeline
                             for our SPEC subset.
                                  Now look at the problems arising from writes, described as (2) and (3) in the
                             earlier list. If we assume that the FP register file has one write port, sequences of FP
                             operations, as well as an FP load together with FP operations, can cause conflicts
C-50    ■     Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                                                                        Clock cycle number
Instruction               1 2 3       4        5         6    7     8      9    10       11   12   13 14     15    16     17
fld      f4,0(x2)         IF ID EX MEM WB
fmul.d f0,f4,f6                IF ID Stall     M1 M2 M3 M4 M5 M6 M7 MEM WB
fadd.d f2,f0,f8                   IF Stall     ID        Stall Stall Stall Stall Stall Stall A1    A2 A3     A4    MEM WB
fsd      f2,0(x2)                              IF        Stall Stall Stall Stall Stall Stall ID    EX Stall Stall Stall   MEM

Figure C.32 A typical FP code sequence showing the stalls arising from RAW hazards. The longer pipeline sub-
stantially raises the frequency of stalls versus the shallower integer pipeline. Each instruction in this sequence is
dependent on the previous and proceeds as soon as data are available, which assumes the pipeline has full bypassing
and forwarding. The fsd must be stalled an extra cycle so that its MEM does not conflict with the fadd.d. Extra
hardware could easily handle this case.

                               for the register write port. Consider the pipeline sequence shown in Figure C.33. In
                               clock cycle 11, all three instructions will reach WB and want to write the register
                               file. With only a single register file write port, the processor must serialize the
                               instruction completion. This single register port represents a structural hazard.
                               We could increase the number of write ports to solve this, but that solution may
                               be unattractive because the additional write ports would be used only rarely. This
                               is because the maximum steady-state number of write ports needed is 1. Instead,
                               we choose to detect and enforce access to the write port as a structural hazard.
                                    There are two different ways to implement this interlock. The first is to track the
                               use of the write port in the ID stage and to stall an instruction before it issues, just as
                               we would for any other structural hazard. Tracking the use of the write port can be
                               done with a shift register that indicates when already-issued instructions will use
                               the register file. If the instruction in ID needs to use the register file at the same time

                                                                      Clock cycle number
Instruction               1      2        3         4         5           6          7        8        9          10       11
fmul.d f0,f4,f6           IF     ID       M1        M2        M3          M4         M5       M6       M7         MEM      WB
...                              IF       ID        EX        MEM         WB
...                                       IF        ID        EX          MEM        WB
fadd.d f2,f4,f6                                     IF        ID          A1         A2       A3       A4         MEM      WB
...                                                           IF          ID         EX       MEM      WB
...                                                                       IF         ID       EX       MEM        WB
fld      f2,0(x2)                                                                    IF       ID       EX         MEM      WB

Figure C.33 Three instructions want to perform a write-back to the FP register file simultaneously, as shown in
clock cycle 11. This is not the worst case, because an earlier divide in the FP unit could also finish on the same clock.
Note that although the fmul.d, fadd.d, and fld are in the MEM stage in clock cycle 10, only the fld actually uses
the memory, so no structural hazard exists for MEM.
C.5   Extending the RISC V Integer Pipeline to Handle Multicycle Operations             ■   C-51

         as an instruction already issued, the instruction in ID is stalled for a cycle. On each
         clock the reservation register is shifted 1 bit. This implementation has an advan-
         tage: It maintains the property that all interlock detection and stall insertion occurs
         in the ID stage. The cost is the addition of the shift register and write conflict logic.
         We will assume this scheme throughout this section.
              An alternative scheme is to stall a conflicting instruction when it tries to enter
         either the MEM or WB stage. If we wait to stall the conflicting instructions until
         they want to enter the MEM or WB stage, we can choose to stall either instruction.
         A simple, though sometimes suboptimal, heuristic is to give priority to the unit
         with the longest latency, because that is the one most likely to have caused another
         instruction to be stalled for a RAW hazard. The advantage of this scheme is that it
         does not require us to detect the conflict until the entrance of the MEM or WB
         stage, where it is easy to see. The disadvantage is that it complicates pipeline con-
         trol, as stalls can now arise from two places. Notice that stalling before entering
         MEM will cause the EX, A4, or M7 stage to be occupied, possibly forcing the stall
         to trickle back in the pipeline. Likewise, stalling before WB would cause MEM to
         back up.
              Our other problem is the possibility of WAW hazards. To see that these exist,
         consider the example in Figure C.33. If the fadd.d instruction were issued one
         cycle earlier and had a destination of f2, then it would create a WAW hazard,
         because it would write f2 one cycle earlier than the fadd.d. Note that this hazard
         only occurs when the result of the fadd.d is overwritten without any instruction
         ever using it! If there were a use of f2 between the fadd.d and the fadd.d, the
         pipeline would need to be stalled for a RAW hazard, and the fadd.d would not
         issue until the fadd.d was completed. We could argue that, for our pipeline,
         WAW hazards only occur when a useless instruction is executed, but we must still
         detect them and make sure that the result of the fadd.d appears in f2 when we
         are done. (As we will see in Section C.8, such sequences sometimes do occur in
         reasonable code.)
              There are two possible ways to handle this WAW hazard. The first approach is
         to delay the issue of the load instruction until the fadd.d enters MEM. The sec-
         ond approach is to stamp out the result of the fadd.d by detecting the hazard and
         changing the control so that the fadd.d does not write its result. Then the
         fadd.d can issue right away. Because this hazard is rare, either scheme will
         work fine—you can pick whatever is simpler to implement. In either case, the
         hazard can be detected during ID when the fadd.d is issuing, and stalling
         the fadd.d or making the fadd.d a no-op is easy. The difficult situation is
         to detect that the fadd.d might finish before the fadd.d, because that requires
         knowing the length of the pipeline and the current position of the fadd.d. Luck-
         ily, this code sequence (two writes with no intervening read) will be very rare, so
         we can use a simple solution: if an instruction in ID wants to write the same reg-
         ister as an instruction already issued, do not issue the instruction to EX. In
         Section C.7, we will see how additional hardware can eliminate stalls for such
         hazards. First, let’s put together the pieces for implementing the hazard and issue
         logic in our FP pipeline.
C-52   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                             In detecting the possible hazards, we must consider hazards among FP instruc-
                         tions, as well as hazards between an FP instruction and an integer instruction.
                         Except for FP loads-stores and FP-integer register moves, the FP and integer
                         registers are distinct. All integer instructions operate on the integer registers, while
                         the FP operations operate only on their own registers. Thus, we need only consider
                         FP loads-stores and FP register moves in detecting hazards between FP and integer
                         instructions. This simplification of pipeline control is an additional advantage of
                         having separate register files for integer and floating-point data. (The main advan-
                         tages are a doubling of the number of registers, without making either set larger,
                         and an increase in bandwidth without adding more ports to either set. The main
                         disadvantage, beyond the need for an extra register file, is the small cost of occa-
                         sional moves needed between the two register sets.) Assuming that the pipeline
                         does all hazard detection in ID, there are three checks that must be performed
                         before an instruction can issue:
                         1. Check for structural hazards—Wait until the required functional unit is not
                            busy (this is only needed for divides in this pipeline) and make sure the register
                            write port is available when it will be needed.
                         2. Check for a RAW data hazard—Wait until the source registers are not listed as
                            pending destinations in a pipeline register that will not be available when this
                            instruction needs the result. A number of checks must be made here, depending
                            on both the source instruction, which determines when the result will be avail-
                            able, and the destination instruction, which determines when the value is
                            needed. For example, if the instruction in ID is an FP operation with source reg-
                            ister f2, then f2 cannot be listed as a destination in ID/A1, A1/A2, or A2/A3,
                            which correspond to FP add instructions that will not be finished when the
                            instruction in ID needs a result. (ID/A1 is the portion of the output register
                            of ID that is sent to A1.) Divide is somewhat more tricky, if we want to allow
                            the last few cycles of a divide to be overlapped, because we need to handle the
                            case when a divide is close to finishing as special. In practice, designers might
                            ignore this optimization in favor of a simpler issue test.
                         3. Check for a WAW data hazard—Determine if any instruction in A1, … , A4, D,
                            M1, … , M7 has the same register destination as this instruction. If so, stall the
                            issue of the instruction in ID.
                         Although the hazard detection is more complex with the multicycle FP operations,
                         the concepts are the same as for the RISC V integer pipeline. The same is true for
                         the forwarding logic. The forwarding can be implemented by checking if the
                         destination register in any of the EX/MEM, A4/MEM, M7/MEM, D/MEM, or
                         MEM/WB registers is one of the source registers of a floating-point instruction.
                         If so, the appropriate input multiplexer will have to be enabled so as to choose
                         the forwarded data. In the exercises, you will have the opportunity to specify
                         the logic for the RAW and WAW hazard detection as well as for forwarding.
                             Multicycle FP operations also introduce problems for our exception mecha-
                         nisms, which we deal with next.
C.5   Extending the RISC V Integer Pipeline to Handle Multicycle Operations             ■   C-53

         Maintaining Precise Exceptions
         Another problem caused by these long-running instructions can be illustrated with
         the following sequence of code:
             fdiv.d            f0,f2,f4
             fadd.d            f10,f10,f8
             fsub.d            f12,f12,f14
         This code sequence looks straightforward; there are no dependences. A problem
         arises, however, because an instruction issued early may complete after an instruc-
         tion issued later. In this example, we can expect fadd.d and fsub.d to complete
         before the fdiv.d completes. This is called out-of-order completion and is com-
         mon in pipelines with long-running operations (see Section C.7). Because hazard
         detection will prevent any dependence among instructions from being violated,
         why is out-of-order completion a problem? Suppose that the fsub.d causes a
         floating-point arithmetic exception at a point where the fadd.d has completed
         but the fdiv.d has not. The result will be an imprecise exception, something
         we are trying to avoid. It may appear that this could be handled by letting the
         floating-point pipeline drain, as we do for the integer pipeline. But the exception
         may be in a position where this is not possible. For example, if the fdiv.d decided to
         take a floating-point-arithmetic exception after the add completed, we could not
         have a precise exception at the hardware level. In fact, because the fadd.d destroys
         one of its operands, we could not restore the state to what it was before the fdiv.d,
         even with software help.
              This problem arises because instructions are completing in a different order
         than they were issued. There are four possible approaches to dealing with out-
         of-order completion. The first is to ignore the problem and settle for imprecise
         exceptions. This approach was used in the 1960s and early 1970s. It was still used
         in some supercomputers in thepast fifteen years, where certain classes of excep-
         tions were not allowed or were handled by the hardware without stopping the pipe-
         line. It is difficult to use this approach in most processors built today because of
         features such as virtual memory and the IEEE floating-point standard that essen-
         tially require precise exceptions through a combination of hardware and software.
         As mentioned earlier, some recent processors have solved this problem by intro-
         ducing two modes of execution: a fast, but possibly imprecise mode and a slower,
         precise mode. The slower precise mode is implemented either with a mode switch
         or by insertion of explicit instructions that test for FP exceptions. In either case, the
         amount of overlap and reordering permitted in the FP pipeline is significantly
         restricted so that effectively only one FP instruction is active at a time. This solu-
         tion was used in the DEC Alpha 21064 and 21164, in the IBM Power1 and Power2,
         and in the MIPS R8000.
              A second approach is to buffer the results of an operation until all the operations
         that were issued earlier are complete. Some processors actually use this solution,
         but it becomes expensive when the difference in running times among operations
         is large, because the number of results to buffer can become large. Furthermore,
C-54   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         results from the queue must be bypassed to continue issuing instructions while wait-
                         ing for the longer instruction. This requires a large number of comparators and a
                         very large multiplexer.
                             There are two viable variations on this basic approach. The first is a history file,
                         used in the CYBER 180/990. The history file keeps track of the original values of
                         registers. When an exception occurs and the state must be rolled back earlier than
                         some instruction that completed out of order, the original value of the register can
                         be restored from the history file. A similar technique is used for autoincrement and
                         autodecrement addressing on processors such as VAXes. Another approach, the
                         future file, proposed by Smith and Pleszkun (1988), keeps the newer value of a
                         register; when all earlier instructions have completed, the main register file is
                         updated from the future file. On an exception, the main register file has the precise
                         values for the interrupted state. In Chapter 3, we will see another approach that is
                         needed to support speculation, a method of executing instructions before we know
                         the outcome of previous branches.
                             A third technique in use is to allow the exceptions to become somewhat impre-
                         cise, but to keep enough information so that the trap-handling routines can create a
                         precise sequence for the exception. This means knowing what operations were in
                         the pipeline and their PCs. Then, after handling the exception, the software finishes
                         any instructions that precede the latest instruction completed, and the sequence can
                         restart. Consider the following worst-case code sequence:

                          Instruction1—A long-running instruction that eventually interrupts execution.
                          Instruction2, … , Instructionn?1—A series of instructions that are not completed.
                          Instructionn—An instruction that is finished.

                         Given the PCs of all the instructions in the pipeline and the exception return PC, the
                         software can find the state of instruction1 and instructionn. Because instructionn has
                         completed, we will want to restart execution at instructionn+1. After handling the
                         exception, the software must simulate the execution of instruction1, … ,
                         instructionn?1. Then we can return from the exception and restart at instructionn+1.
                         The complexity of executing these instructions properly by the handler is the major
                         difficulty of this scheme.
                              There is an important simplification for simple RISC V-like pipelines:
                         If instruction2, … , instructionn are all integer instructions, we know that if
                         instructionn has completed then all of instruction2, … , instructionn?1 have also
                         completed. Thus, only FP operations need to be handled. To make this scheme
                         tractable, the number of floating-point instructions that can be overlapped in
                         execution can be limited. For example, if we only overlap two instructions,
                         then only the interrupting instruction need be completed by software. This
                         restriction may reduce the potential throughput if the FP pipelines are deep or
                         if there are a significant number of FP functional units. This approach is used
                         in some SPARC implementations to allow overlap of floating-point and integer
                         operations.
                   C.6    Putting It All Together: The MIPS R4000 Pipeline           ■   C-55

          The final technique is a hybrid scheme that allows the instruction issue to con-
      tinue only if it is certain that all the instructions before the issuing instruction will
      complete without causing an exception. This guarantees that when an exception
      occurs, no instructions after the interrupting one will be completed and all of
      the instructions before the interrupting one can be completed. This sometimes
      means stalling the processor to maintain precise exceptions. To make this scheme
      work, the floating-point functional units must determine if an exception is possible
      early in the EX stage (in the first 3 clock cycles in the RISC V pipeline), so as
      to prevent further instructions from completing. This scheme is used in the
      MIPS R2000/3000, the R4000, and the Intel Pentium. It is discussed further in
      Appendix J.

      Performance of a Simple RISC V FP Pipeline
      The RISC V FP pipeline of Figure C.30 on page C.48 can generate both structural
      stalls for the divide unit and stalls for RAW hazards (it also can have WAW haz-
      ards, but this rarely occurs in practice). Figure C.34 shows the number of stall
      cycles for each type of floating-point operation on a per-instance basis (i.e., the
      first bar for each FP benchmark shows the number of FP result stalls for each
      FP add, subtract, or convert). As we might expect, the stall cycles per operation
      track the latency of the FP operations, varying from 46% to 59% of the latency
      of the functional unit.
           Figure C.35 gives the complete breakdown of integer and FP stalls for five
      SPECfp benchmarks. There are four classes of stalls shown: FP result stalls, FP
      compare stalls, load and branch delays, and FP structural delays. Branch delay
      stalls, which would be small with a one cycle delay and even a modest branch
      predictor, are not included. The total number of stalls per instruction varies from
      0.65 to 1.21.

C.6   Putting It All Together: The MIPS R4000 Pipeline
      In this section, we look at the pipeline structure and performance of the MIPS
      R4000 processor family, which includes the 4400. The MIPS architecture and
      RISC V are very similar, differing only in a few instructions, including a delayed
      branch in the MIPS ISA. The R4000 implements MIPS64 but uses a deeper pipe-
      line than that of our five-stage design both for integer and FP programs. This dee-
      per pipeline allows it to achieve higher clock rates by decomposing the five-stage
      integer pipeline into eight stages. Because cache access is particularly time critical,
      the extra pipeline stages come from decomposing the memory access. This type of
      deeper pipelining is sometimes called superpipelining.
          Figure C.36 shows the eight-stage pipeline structure using an abstracted version
      of the data path. Figure C.37 shows the overlap of successive instructions in the
      pipeline. Notice that, although the instruction and data memory occupy multiple
      cycles, they are fully pipelined, so that a new instruction can start on every clock.
C-56   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                                                                1.7                                          Add/subtract/convert
                                                                1.7                                          Compares
                                               doduc                      3.7                                Multiply
                                                                                                     15.4    Divide
                                                                    2.0
                                                                                                             Divide structural
                                                               1.6
                                                                2.0
                                                  ear             2.5
                                                                                              12.4
                                                          0.0
                         FP SPEC benchmarks

                                                                    2.3
                                                                     2.5
                                              hydro2d                 3.2
                                                          0.4
                                                          0.0

                                                                 2.1
                                               mdljdp          1.2
                                                                   2.9
                                                                                                                           24.5
                                                          0.0

                                                              0.7
                                                                1.5
                                               su2cor           1.6
                                                                                                            18.6
                                                              0.6

                                                        0.0                     5.0   10.0         15.0     20.0         25.0
                                                                                       Number of stalls

                         Figure C.34 Stalls per FP operation for each major type of FP operation for the
                         SPEC89 FP benchmarks. Except for the divide structural hazards, these data do not
                         depend on the frequency of an operation, only on its latency and the number of cycles
                         before the result is used. The number of stalls from RAW hazards roughly tracks the
                         latency of the FP unit. For example, the average number of stalls per FP add, subtract,
                         or convert is 1.7 cycles, or 56% of the latency (three cycles). Likewise, the average num-
                         ber of stalls for multiplies and divides are 2.8 and 14.2, respectively, or 46% and 59% of
                         the corresponding latency. Structural hazards for divides are rare, because the divide
                         frequency is low.

                         In fact, the pipeline uses the data before the cache hit detection is complete; Chapter 3
                         discusses how this can be done in more detail.
                             The function of each stage is as follows:

                         ■                    IF—First half of instruction fetch; PC selection actually happens here, together
                                              with initiation of instruction cache access.
                         ■                    IS—Second half of instruction fetch, complete instruction cache access.
                         ■                    RF—Instruction decode and register fetch, hazard checking, and instruction
                                              cache hit detection.
                                                                  C.6      Putting It All Together: The MIPS R4000 Pipeline                 ■       C-57

                                                                                                                                                    0.98
                                                                   0.07
                                                       doduc       0.08
                                                                   0.08                                                         FP result stalls
                                                                                                                                FP compare stalls
                                                                                                          0.52
                                                                                                                                Branch/load stalls
                                                                   0.09
                                                            ear                                                                 FP structural
                                                                   0.07

                                 FP SPEC benchmarks
                                                                   0.00

                                                                                                             0.54
                                                                   0.22
                                                      hydro2d
                                                                     0.04
                                                                  0.00

                                                                                                                                         0.88
                                                       mdljdp     0.10
                                                                    0.03
                                                                  0.00

                                                                                                                    0.61
                                                                    0.02
                                                       su2cor
                                                                   0.01
                                                                   0.01

                                                              0.00      0.10      0.20   0.30   0.40 0.50 0.60         0.70     0.80   0.90        1.00
                                                                                                 Number of stalls

                                Figure C.35 The stalls occurring for the a simple RISC V FP pipeline for five of the
                                SPEC89 FP benchmarks. The total number of stalls per instruction ranges from 0.65
                                for su2cor to 1.21 for doduc, with an average of 0.87. FP result stalls dominate in all
                                cases, with an average of 0.71 stalls per instruction, or 82% of the stalled cycles. Com-
                                pares generate an average of 0.1 stalls per instruction and are the second largest source.
                                The divide structural hazard is only significant for doduc. Branch stalls are not accounted
                                for, but would be small.

      IF             IS                                RF                 EX              DF            DS                 TC             WB
                                                                            ALU

           Instruction memory                            Reg                                      Data memory                             Reg

Figure C.36 The eight-stage pipeline structure of the R4000 uses pipelined instruction and data caches. The pipe
stages are labeled and their detailed function is described in the text. The vertical dashed lines represent the stage
boundaries as well as the location of pipeline latches. The instruction is actually available at the end of IS, but the tag
check is done in RF, while the registers are fetched. Thus, we show the instruction memory as operating through RF.
The TC stage is needed for data memory access, because we cannot write the data into the register until we know
whether the cache access was a hit or not.
C-58      ■      Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

              Time (in clock cycles)

          CC 1          CC 2           CC 3        CC 4         CC 5       CC 6        CC 7        CC 8       CC 9      CC 10   CC 11

                                                     ALU
                Instruction memory         Reg                         Data memory                 Reg

                                                                 ALU
Instruction 1              Instruction memory         Reg                          Data memory                Reg

                                                                             ALU
Instruction 2                              Instruction memory     Reg                          Data memory              Reg

                                                                                         ALU
                                                      Instruction memory     Reg                          Data memory           Reg

Figure C.37 The structure of the R4000 integer pipeline leads to a x1 load delay. A x1 delay is possible because the
data value is available at the end of DS and can be bypassed. If the tag check in TC indicates a miss, the pipeline is
backed up a cycle, when the correct data are available.

                                       ■      EX—Execution, which includes effective address calculation, ALU operation,
                                              and branch-target computation and condition evaluation.
                                       ■      DF—Data fetch, first half of data cache access.
                                       ■      DS—Second half of data fetch, completion of data cache access.
                                       ■      TC—Tag check, to determine whether the data cache access hit.
                                       ■      WB—Write-back for loads and register-register operations.

                                           In addition to substantially increasing the amount of forwarding required, this
                                       longer-latency pipeline increases both the load and branch delays. Figure C.37
                                       shows that load delays are two cycles, because the data value is available at the
                                       end of DS. Figure C.38 shows the shorthand pipeline schedule when a use imme-
                                       diately follows a load. It shows that forwarding is required for the result of a load
                                       instruction to a destination that is three or four cycles later.
                                           Figure C.39 shows that the basic branch delay is three cycles, because the
                                       branch condition is computed during EX. The MIPS architecture has a single-cycle
                                       delayed branch. The R4000 uses a predicted-not-taken strategy for the remaining
                                       two cycles of the branch delay. As Figure C.40 shows, untaken branches are simply
                                       one-cycle delayed branches, while taken branches have a one-cycle delay slot fol-
                                       lowed by two idle cycles. The instruction set provides a branch-likely instruction,
                                       which we described earlier and which helps in filling the branch delay slot.
                                                           C.6       Putting It All Together: The MIPS R4000 Pipeline                      ■   C-59

                                                                                         Clock number
Instruction number                   1          2                3            4             5              6              7          8           9
ld x1,...                            IF         IS               RF           EX            DF             DS             TC         WB
add x2,x1,...                                   IF               IS           RF            Stall          Stall          EX         DF          DS
sub x3,x1,...                                                    IF           IS            Stall          Stall          RF         EX          DF
or x4,x1,...                                                                  IF            Stall          Stall          IS         RF          EX

Figure C.38 A load instruction followed by an immediate use results in a x1 stall. Normal forwarding paths can be
used after two cycles, so the add and sub get the value by forwarding after the stall. The or instruction gets the value
from the register file. Because the two instructions after the load could be independent and hence not stall, the
bypass can be to instructions that are three or four cycles after the load.

           Time (in clock cycles)

         CC 1           CC 2         CC 3         CC 4               CC 5         CC 6          CC 7       CC 8          CC 9      CC 10       CC 11
                                                     ALU

BEQZ            Instruction memory        Reg                               Data memory                    Reg
                                                                      ALU

Instruction 1              Instruction memory         Reg                                 Data memory                    Reg
                                                                                   ALU

Instruction 2                             Instruction memory           Reg                             Data memory                  Reg
                                                                                                 ALU

Instruction 3                                         Instruction memory            Reg                              Data memory               Reg
                                                                                                               ALU

Target                                                                 Instruction memory         Reg                           Data memory

Figure C.39 The basic branch delay is three cycles, because the condition evaluation is performed during EX.

                                         Pipeline interlocks enforce both the x1 branch stall penalty on a taken branch and
                                         any data hazard stall that arises from use of a load result. After the R4000, all
                                         implementations of MIPS processor made use of dynamic branch prediction.
                                             In addition to the increase in stalls for loads and branches, the deeper pipeline
                                         increases the number of levels of forwarding for ALU operations. In our RISC V
                                         five-stage pipeline, forwarding between two register-register ALU instructions
                                         could happen from the ALU/MEM or the MEM/WB registers. In the R4000 pipe-
                                         line, there are four possible sources for an ALU bypass: EX/DF, DF/DS, DS/TC,
                                         and TC/WB.
C-60    ■    Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                                                                       Clock number
Instruction number           1          2         3            4         5          6           7           8            9
Branch instruction           IF         IS        RF           EX        DF         DS          TC          WB
Delay slot                              IF        IS           RF        EX         DF          DS          TC           WB
Stall                                             Stall        Stall     Stall      Stall       Stall       Stall        Stall
Stall                                                          Stall     Stall      Stall       Stall       Stall        Stall
Branch target                                                            IF         IS          RF          EX           DF

Branch instruction           IF         IS        RF           EX        DF         DS          TC          WB
Delay slot                              IF        IS           RF        EX         DF          DS          TC           WB
Branch instruction + 2                            IF           IS        RF         EX          DF          DS           TC
Branch instruction + 3                                         IF        IS         RF          EX          DF           DS

Figure C.40 A taken branch, shown in the top portion of the figure, has a one-cycle delay slot followed by a x1
stall, while an untaken branch, shown in the bottom portion, has simply a one-cycle delay slot. The branch instruc-
tion can be an ordinary delayed branch or a branch-likely, which cancels the effect of the instruction in the delay slot if
the branch is untaken.

                                 The Floating-Point Pipeline
                                 The R4000 floating-point unit consists of three functional units: a floating-point
                                 divider, a floating-point multiplier, and a floating-point adder. The adder logic
                                 is used on the final step of a multiply or divide. Double-precision FP operations
                                 can take from 2 cycles (for a negate) up to 112 cycles (for a square root). In addi-
                                 tion, the various units have different initiation rates. The FP functional unit can be
                                 thought of as having eight different stages, listed in Figure C.41; these stages are
                                 combined in different orders to execute various FP operations.
                                     There is a single copy of each of these stages, and various instructions may use a
                                 stage zero or more times and in different orders. Figure C.42 shows the latency, initiation
                                 rate, and pipeline stages used by the most common double-precision FP operations.

Stage                                        Functional unit                                     Description
A                                            FP adder                                            Mantissa add stage
D                                            FP divider                                          Divide pipeline stage
E                                            FP multiplier                                       Exception test stage
M                                            FP multiplier                                       First stage of multiplier
N                                            FP multiplier                                       Second stage of multiplier
R                                            FP adder                                            Rounding stage
S                                            FP adder                                            Operand shift stage
U                                                                                                Unpack FP numbers

Figure C.41 The eight stages used in the R4000 floating-point pipelines.
                                          C.6    Putting It All Together: The MIPS R4000 Pipeline          ■   C-61

FP instruction          Latency            Initiation interval         Pipe stages
Add, subtract                4                       3                 U, S + A, A + R, R + S
Multiply                     8                       4                 U, E + M, M, M, M, N, N + A, R
Divide                      36                     35                  U, A, R, D28, D + A, D + R, D + A, D + R, A, R
Square root                112                    111                  U, E, (A + R)108, A, R
Negate                       2                       1                 U, S
Absolute value               2                       1                 U, S
FP compare                   3                       2                 U, A, R

Figure C.42 The latencies and initiation intervals for the FP operations initiation intervals for the FP operations
both depend on the FP unit stages that a given operation must use. The latency values assume that the destination
instruction is an FP operation; the latencies are one cycle less when the destination is a store. The pipe stages are
shown in the order in which they are used for any operation. The notation S + A indicates a clock cycle in which both
the S and A stages are used. The notation D28 indicates that the D stage is used 28 times in a row.

                                 From the information in Figure C.42, we can determine whether a sequence of
                             different, independent FP operations can issue without stalling. If the timing of the
                             sequence is such that a conflict occurs for a shared pipeline stage, then a stall will
                             be needed. Figures C.43–C.46 show four common possible two-instruction
                             sequences: a multiply followed by an add, an add followed by a multiply, a divide
                             followed by an add, and an add followed by a divide. The figures show all the inter-
                             esting starting positions for the second instruction and whether that second instruc-
                             tion will issue or stall for each position. Of course, there could be three instructions
                             active, in which case the possibilities for stalls are much higher and the figures
                             more complex.

                             Performance of the R4000 Pipeline
                             In this section, we examine the stalls that occur for the SPEC92 benchmarks when
                             running on the R4000 pipeline structure. There are four major causes of pipeline
                             stalls or losses:

                             1. Load stalls—Delays arising from the use of a load result one or two cycles after
                                the load
                             2. Branch stalls—Two-cycle stalls on every taken branch plus unfilled or canceled
                                branch delay slots. The version of the MIPS instruction set implemented in the
                                R4000 supports instructions that predict a branch at compile time and cause the
                                instruction in the branch delay slot to be canceled when the branch behavior
                                differs from the prediction. This makes it easier to fill branch delay slots.
                             3. FP result stalls—Stalls because of RAW hazards for an FP operand
                             4. FP structural stalls—Delays because of issue restrictions arising from conflicts
                                for functional units in the FP pipeline
C-62       ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                                                                          Clock cycle
Operation      Issue/stall 0          1       2       3         4     5         6       7         8       9       10    11 12
Multiply       Issue          U       E+M M           M         M     N         N+A     R
Add            Issue                  U       S+A     A+R       R+S
               Issue                          U       S+A       A+R R+S
               Issue                                  U         S+A   A+R R+S
               Stall                                            U     S+A       A+R     R+S
               Stall                                                  U         S+A     A+R       R+S
               Issue                                                            U       S+A       A+R     R+S
               Issue                                                                    U         S+A     A+R R+S

Figure C.43 An FP multiply issued at clock 0 is followed by a single FP add issued between clocks 1 and 7. The
second column indicates whether an instruction of the specified type stalls when it is issued n cycles later, where n is
the clock cycle number in which the U stage of the second instruction occurs. The stage or stages that cause a stall are
in bold. Note that this table deals with only the interaction between the multiply and one add issued between clocks 1
and 7. In this case, the add will stall if it is issued four or five cycles after the multiply; otherwise, it issues without
stalling. Notice that the add will be stalled for two cycles if it issues in cycle 4 because on the next clock cycle it will
still conflict with the multiply; if, however, the add issues in cycle 5, it will stall for only 1 clock cycle, because that will
eliminate the conflicts.

                                                                            Clock cycle
Operation       Issue/stall       0       1       2         3         4     5       6       7         8       9    10   11    12
Add             Issue             U       S+A     A+R       R+S
Multiply        Issue                     U       E+M       M         M     M       N       N+A       R
                Issue                             U         M         M     M       M       N         N+A     R

Figure C.44 A multiply issuing after an add can always proceed without stalling, because the shorter instruction
clears the shared pipeline stages before the longer instruction reaches them.

                                  Figure C.47 shows the pipeline CPI breakdown for the R4000 pipeline for the 10
                                  SPEC92 benchmarks. Figure C.48 shows the same data but in tabular form.
                                      From the data in Figures C.47 and C.48, we can see the penalty of the deeper
                                  pipelining. The R4000’s pipeline has much longer branch delays than the classic
                                  five-stage pipeline. The longer branch delay substantially increases the cycles
                                  spent on branches, especially for the integer programs with a higher branch
                                  frequency. This is the reason that almost all subsequent processors with moderate
                                  to deep pipelines (8–16 stages are typical today) employ dynamic branch
                                  predictors.
                                              C.6   Putting It All Together: The MIPS R4000 Pipeline                ■    C-63

                                                                       Clock cycle
Operation    Issue/stall       25    26   27        28    29      30         31       32       33    34        35        36
Divide       Issued in         D     D    D         D     D       D+A        D+R      D+A      D+R   A         R
             cycle 0…
Add          Issue                   U    S+A       A+R   R+S
             Issue                        U         S+A   A+R     R+S
             Stall                                  U     S+A     A+R        R+S
             Stall                                        U       S+A        A+R      R+S
             Stall                                                U          S+A      A+R      R+S
             Stall                                                           U        S+A      A+R   R+S
             Stall                                                                    U        S+A   A+R       R+S
             Stall                                                                             U     S+A       A+R       R+S
             Issue                                                                                   U         S+A       A+R
             Issue                                                                                             U         S+A
             Issue                                                                                                       U

Figure C.45 An FP divide can cause a stall for an add that starts near the end of the divide. The divide starts at cycle
0 and completes at cycle 35; the last 10 cycles of the divide are shown. Because the divide makes heavy use of the
rounding hardware needed by the add, it stalls an add that starts in any of cycles 28–33. Notice that the add starting in
cycle 28 will be stalled until cycle 36. If the add started right after the divide, it would not conflict, because the add
could complete before the divide needed the shared stages, just as we saw in Figure C.44 for a multiply and add. As in
the earlier figure, this example assumes exactly one add that reaches the U stage between clock cycles 26 and 35.

                                                                       Clock cycle
Operation      Issue/stall    0      1         2          3       4      5        6        7   8     9    10        11        12
Add            Issue          U      S+A       A+R        R+S
Divide         Stall                 U         A          R       D      D        D        D   D     D    D         D         D
               Issue                           U          A       R      D        D        D   D     D    D         D         D
               Issue                                      U       A      R        D        D   D     D    D         D         D

Figure C.46 A double-precision add is followed by a double-precision divide. If the divide starts one cycle after the
add, the divide stalls, but after that there is no conflict.

                                  An interesting effect observed in the FP programs is that the latency of the FP
                              functional units leads to more result stalls than the structural hazards, which arise
                              both from the initiation interval limitations and from conflicts for functional units
                              from different FP instructions. Thus, reducing the latency of FP operations should
                              be the first target, rather than more pipelining or replication of the functional units.
                              Of course, reducing the latency would probably increase the structural stalls,
                              because many potential structural stalls are hidden behind data hazards.
C-64      ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                                                  3.00

                                                  2.50

                                                  2.00

                                   Pipeline CPI
                                                  1.50

                                                  1.00                                                             Base
                                                                                                                   Load stalls
                                                                                                                   Branch stalls
                                                  0.50
                                                                                                                   FP result stalls
                                                                                                                   FP structural stalls
                                                  0.00
                                                         s

                                                                 pr t
                                                                      so

                                                                            c

                                                                                 do i
                                                                                      c

                                                                                                   r

                                                                                                   d

                                                                                           su p
                                                                                                 or
                                                                                      l
                                                               ot

                                                                                               ea
                                                         es

                                                                           gc

                                                                                   du

                                                                                              o2

                                                                                                jd
                                                                                             2c
                                                                   es
                                                              nt

                                                                                             dl
                                                       pr

                                                                                            dr
                                                          eq

                                                                                           m
                                                   m

                                                                                           hy
                                                               es
                                                  co

                                                                            SPEC92 benchmark

                             Figure C.47 The pipeline CPI for 10 of the SPEC92 benchmarks, assuming a
                             perfect cache. The pipeline CPI varies from 1.2 to 2.8. The left-most five programs
                             are integer programs, and branch delays are the major CPI contributor for these. The
                             right-most five programs are FP, and FP result stalls are the major contributor for these.
                             Figure C.48 shows the numbers used to construct this plot.

Benchmark             Pipeline CPI                  Load stalls            Branch stalls        FP result stalls   FP structural stalls
Compress                  1.20                            0.14                  0.06                 0.00                     0.00
Eqntott                   1.88                            0.27                  0.61                 0.00                     0.00
Espresso                  1.42                            0.07                  0.35                 0.00                     0.00
Gcc                       1.56                            0.13                  0.43                 0.00                     0.00
Li                        1.64                            0.18                  0.46                 0.00                     0.00
Integer average           1.54                            0.16                  0.38                 0.00                     0.00
Doduc                     2.84                            0.01                  0.22                 1.39                     0.22
Mdljdp2                   2.66                            0.01                  0.31                 1.20                     0.15
Ear                       2.17                            0.00                  0.46                 0.59                     0.12
Hydro2d                   2.53                            0.00                  0.62                 0.75                     0.17
Su2cor                    2.18                            0.02                  0.07                 0.84                     0.26
FP average                2.48                            0.01                  0.33                 0.95                     0.18
Overall average           2.00                            0.10                  0.36                 0.46                     0.09

Figure C.48 The total pipeline CPI and the contributions of the four major sources of stalls are shown. The major
contributors are FP result stalls (both for branches and for FP inputs) and branch stalls, with loads and FP structural
stalls adding less.
                                                   C.7    Cross-Cutting Issues     ■   C-65

C.7   Cross-Cutting Issues
      RISC Instruction Sets and Efficiency of Pipelining
      We have already discussed the advantages of instruction set simplicity in building
      pipelines. Simple instruction sets offer another advantage: they make it easier to
      schedule code to achieve efficiency of execution in a pipeline. To see this, con-
      sider a simple example: suppose we need to add two values in memory and store
      the result back to memory. In some sophisticated instruction sets this will take
      only a single instruction; in others, it will take two or three. A typical RISC archi-
      tecture would require four instructions (two loads, an add, and a store). These
      instructions cannot be scheduled sequentially in most pipelines without interven-
      ing stalls.
          With a RISC instruction set, the individual operations are separate instructions
      and may be individually scheduled either by the compiler (using the techniques we
      discussed earlier and more powerful techniques discussed in Chapter 3) or using
      dynamic hardware scheduling techniques (which we discuss next and in further
      detail in Chapter 3). These efficiency advantages, coupled with the greater ease
      of implementation, appear to be so significant that almost all recent pipelined
      implementations of complex instruction sets actually translate their complex
      instructions into simple RISC-like operations, and then schedule and pipeline those
      operations. All recent Intel processors use this approach, and it is also used in ARM
      processors for some of the more complex instructions.

      Dynamically Scheduled Pipelines
      Simple pipelines fetch an instruction and issue it, unless there is a data dependence
      between an instruction already in the pipeline and the fetched instruction that can-
      not be hidden with bypassing or forwarding. Forwarding logic reduces the effec-
      tive pipeline latency so that certain dependences do not result in hazards. If there is
      an unavoidable hazard, then the hazard detection hardware stalls the pipeline (start-
      ing with the instruction that uses the result). No new instructions are fetched or
      issued until the dependence is cleared. To overcome these performance losses,
      the compiler can attempt to schedule instructions to avoid the hazard; this approach
      is called compiler or static scheduling.
          Several early processors used another approach, called dynamic scheduling,
      whereby the hardware rearranges the instruction execution to reduce the stalls. This
      section offers a simpler introduction to dynamic scheduling by explaining the scor-
      eboarding technique of the CDC 6600. Some readers will find it easier to read this
      material before plunging into the more complicated Tomasulo scheme, and the
      speculation approaches that extend it, both of which are covered in Chapter 3.
          All the techniques discussed in this appendix so far use in-order instruction
      issue, which means that if an instruction is stalled in the pipeline, no later instruc-
      tions can proceed. With in-order issue, if two instructions have a hazard between
C-66   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         them, the pipeline will stall, even if there are later instructions that are independent
                         and would not stall.
                             In the RISC V pipeline developed earlier, both structural and data hazards were
                         checked during instruction decode (ID): when an instruction could execute properly,
                         it was issued from ID. To allow an instruction to begin execution as soon as its oper-
                         ands are available, even if a predecessor is stalled, we must separate the issue process
                         into two parts: checking the structural hazards and waiting for the absence of a data
                         hazard. We decode and issue instructions in order; however, we want the instructions
                         to begin execution as soon as their data operands are available. Thus, the pipeline will
                         do out-of-order execution, which implies out-of-order completion. To implement
                         out-of-order execution, we must split the ID pipe stage into two stages:

                         1. Issue—Decode instructions, check for structural hazards.
                         2. Read operands—Wait until no data hazards, then read operands.

                             The IF stage proceeds the issue stage, and the EX stage follows the read oper-
                         ands stage, just as in the RISC V pipeline. As in the RISC V floating-point pipeline,
                         execution may take multiple cycles, depending on the operation. Thus, we may
                         need to distinguish when an instruction begins execution and when it completes
                         execution; between the two times, the instruction is in execution. This allows mul-
                         tiple instructions to be in execution at the same time. In addition to these changes to
                         the pipeline structure, we will also change the functional unit design by varying the
                         number of units, the latency of operations, and the functional unit pipelining so as
                         to better explore these more advanced pipelining techniques.

                         Dynamic Scheduling With a Scoreboard
                         In a dynamically scheduled pipeline, all instructions pass through the issue stage in
                         order (in-order issue); however, they can be stalled or bypass each other in the sec-
                         ond stage (read operands) and thus enter execution out of order. Scoreboarding is a
                         technique for allowing instructions to execute out of order when there are sufficient
                         resources and no data dependences; it is named after the CDC 6600 scoreboard,
                         which developed this capability.
                             Before we see how scoreboarding could be used in the RISC V pipeline, it
                         is important to observe that WAR hazards, which did not exist in the RISC V
                         floating-point or integer pipelines, may arise when instructions execute out of
                         order. For example, consider the following code sequence:
                             fdiv.d           f0,f2,f4
                             fadd.d           f10,f0,f8
                             fsub.d           f8,f8,f14
                         There is an potential WAR hazard between the fadd.d and the fsub.d: If
                         the pipeline executes the fsub.d before the fadd.d, it will violate yield incor-
                         rect execution. Likewise, the pipeline must avoid WAW hazards (e.g.,as would
                                              C.7   Cross-Cutting Issues      ■   C-67

occur if the destination of the fsub.d were f10). As we will see, both these haz-
ards are avoided in a scoreboard by stalling the later instruction involved in
the hazard.
     The goal of a scoreboard is to maintain an execution rate of one instruction per
clock cycle (when there are no structural hazards) by executing an instruction as
early as possible. Thus, when the next instruction to execute is stalled, other
instructions can be issued and executed if they do not depend on any active or
stalled instruction. The scoreboard takes full responsibility for instruction issue
and execution, including all hazard detection. Taking advantage of out-of-order
execution requires multiple instructions to be in their EX stage simultaneously.
This can be achieved with multiple functional units, with pipelined functional
units, or with both. Because these two capabilities—pipelined functional units
and multiple functional units—are essentially equivalent for the purposes of pipe-
line control, we will assume the processor has multiple functional units.
     The CDC 6600 had 16 separate functional units, including 4 floating-point units,
5 units for memory references, and 7 units for integer operations. On a processor for
the RISC V architecture, scoreboards make sense primarily on the floating-point unit
because the latency of the other functional units is very small. Let’s assume that there
are two multipliers, one adder, one divide unit, and a single integer unit for all mem-
ory references, branches, and integer operations. Although this example is simpler
than the CDC 6600, it is sufficiently powerful to demonstrate the principles without
having a mass of detail or needing very long examples. Because both RISC V and the
CDC 6600 are load-store architectures, the techniques are nearly identical for the two
processors. Figure C.49 shows what the processor looks like.
     Every instruction goes through the scoreboard, where a record of the data
dependences is constructed; this step corresponds to instruction issue and replaces
part of the ID step in the RISC V pipeline. The scoreboard then determines when
the instruction can read its operands and begin execution. If the scoreboard decides
the instruction cannot execute immediately, it monitors every change in the hard-
ware and decides when the instruction can execute. The scoreboard also controls
when an instruction can write its result into the destination register. Thus, all hazard
detection and resolution are centralized in the scoreboard. We will see a picture of
the scoreboard later (Figure C.49 on page C.68), but first we need to understand the
steps in the issue and execution segment of the pipeline.
     Each instruction undergoes four steps in executing. (Because we are concen-
trating on the FP operations, we will not consider a step for memory access.) Let’s
first examine the steps informally and then look in detail at how the scoreboard
keeps the necessary information that determines when to progress from one step
to the next. The four steps, which replace the ID, EX, and WB steps in the standard
RISC V pipeline, are as follows:

1. Issue—If a functional unit for the instruction is free and no other active instruc-
   tion has the same destination register, the scoreboard issues the instruction to
   the functional unit and updates its internal data structure. This step replaces a
   portion of the ID step in the RISC V pipeline. By ensuring that no other active
C-68   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                               Registers                             Data buses

                                                                                              FP mult
                                                                                              FP mult

                                                                                              FP divide

                                                                                               FP add

                                                                                             Integer unit

                                                         Scoreboard
                                           Control/                               Control/
                                            status                                status

                         Figure C.49 The basic structure of a RISC V processor with a scoreboard. The score-
                         board’s function is to control instruction execution (vertical control lines). All of the data
                         flow between the register file and the functional units over the buses (the horizontal
                         lines, called trunks in the CDC 6600). There are two FP multipliers, an FP divider, an
                         FP adder, and an integer unit. One set of buses (two inputs and one output) serves a
                         group of functional units. We will explore scoreboarding and its extensions in more
                         detail in Chapter 3.

                            functional unit wants to write its result into the destination register, we guaran-
                            tee that WAW hazards cannot be present. If a structural or WAW hazard exists,
                            then the instruction issue stalls, and no further instructions will issue until these
                            hazards are cleared. When the issue stage stalls, it causes the buffer between
                            instruction fetch and issue to fill; if the buffer is a single entry, instruction fetch
                            stalls immediately. If the buffer is a queue with multiple instructions, it stalls
                            when the queue fills.
                         2. Read operands—The scoreboard monitors the availability of the source oper-
                            ands. A source operand is available if no earlier issued active instruction is
                            going to write it. When the source operands are available, the scoreboard tells
                                              C.7   Cross-Cutting Issues      ■   C-69

    the functional unit to proceed to read the operands from the registers and begin
    execution. The scoreboard resolves RAW hazards dynamically in this step, and
    instructions may be sent into execution out of order. This step, together with
    issue, completes the function of the ID step in the simple RISC V pipeline.
3. Execution—The functional unit begins execution upon receiving operands.
   When the result is ready, it notifies the scoreboard that it has completed execu-
   tion. This step replaces the EX step in the RISC V pipeline and takes multiple
   cycles in the RISC V FP pipeline.
4. Write result—Once the scoreboard is aware that the functional unit has
   completed execution, the scoreboard checks for WAR hazards and stalls the
   completing instruction, if necessary.

A WAR hazard exists if there is a code sequence like our earlier example with
fadd.d and fsub.d that both use f8. In that example, we had the code
    fdiv.d           f0,f2,f4
    fadd.d           f10,f0,f8
    fsub.d           f8,f8,f14
fadd.d has a source operand f8, which is the same register as the destination of
fsub.d. But fadd.d actually depends on an earlier instruction. The scoreboard
will still stall the fsub.d in its write result stage until fadd.d reads its operands.
In general, then, a completing instruction cannot be allowed to write its results
when:

■   There is an instruction that has not read its operands that precedes (i.e., in order
    of issue) the completing instruction, and
■   One of the operands is the same register as the result of the completing
    instruction.

If this WAR hazard does not exist, or when it clears, the scoreboard tells the func-
tional unit to store its result to the destination register. This step replaces the WB
step in the simple RISC V pipeline.
     At first glance, it might appear that the scoreboard will have difficulty separat-
ing RAW and WAR hazards.
     Because the operands for an instruction are read only when both operands are
available in the register file, this scoreboard does not take advantage of forwarding.
Instead, registers are only read when they are both available. This is not as large a
penalty as you might initially think. Unlike our simple pipeline of earlier, instruc-
tions will write their result into the register file as soon as they complete execution
(assuming no WAR hazards), rather than wait for a statically assigned write slot
that may be several cycles away. The effect reduces the pipeline latency and the
benefits of forwarding. There is still one additional cycle of latency that arises
because the write result and read operand stages cannot overlap. We would need
additional buffering to eliminate this overhead.
C-70   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                              Based on its own data structure, the scoreboard controls the instruction pro-
                          gression from one step to the next by communicating with the functional units.
                          There is a small complication, however. There are only a limited number of
                          source operand buses and result buses to the register file, which represents
                          a structural hazard. The scoreboard must guarantee that the number of func-
                          tional units allowed to proceed into steps 2 and 4 does not exceed the number
                          of buses available. We will not go into further detail on this, other than to men-
                          tion that the CDC 6600 solved this problem by grouping the 16 functional
                          units together into four groups and supplying a set of buses, called data trunks,
                          for each group. Only one unit in a group could read its operands or write its
                          result during a clock.

               C.8        Fallacies and Pitfalls

                Pitfall   Unexpected execution sequences may cause unexpected hazards.
                          At first glance, WAW hazards look like they should never occur in a code sequence
                          because no compiler would ever generate two writes to the same register without an
                          intervening read, but they can occur when the sequence is unexpected. For exam-
                          ple, consider a long running floating point divide that causes a trap. If the trap rou-
                          tine writes the same register as the divide early on, it may cause a WAW hazard, if
                          it writes the register before the divide completes. Hardware or software must avoid
                          this possibility.
                Pitfall   Extensive pipelining can impact other aspects of a design, leading to overall worse
                          cost-performance.
                          The best example of this phenomenon comes from two implementations of the
                          VAX, the 8600 and the 8700. When the 8600 was initially delivered, it had a cycle
                          time of 80 ns. Subsequently, a redesigned version, called the 8650, with a 55 ns
                          clock was introduced. The 8700 has a much simpler pipeline that operates at
                          the microinstruction level, yielding a smaller processor with a faster clock cycle
                          of 45 ns. The overall outcome is that the 8650 has a CPI advantage of about
                          20%, but the 8700 has a clock rate that is about 20% faster. Thus, the 8700
                          achieved the same performance with much less hardware.
                Pitfall   Evaluating dynamic or static scheduling on the basis of unoptimized code.
                          Unoptimized code—containing redundant loads, stores, and other operations that
                          might be eliminated by an optimizer—is much easier to schedule than “tight”
                          optimized code. This holds for scheduling both control delays (with delayed
                          branches) and delays arising from RAW hazards. In gcc running on an
                          R3000, which has a pipeline almost identical to that of Section C.1, the fre-
                          quency of idle clock cycles increases by 18% from the unoptimized and sched-
                          uled code to the optimized and scheduled code. Of course, the optimized
                          program is much faster, because it has fewer instructions. To fairly evaluate a
                          compile-time scheduler or runtime dynamic scheduling, you must use optimized
                                          Updated Exercises by Diana Franklin       ■   C-71

         code, because in the real system you will derive good performance from other
         optimizations in addition to scheduling.

C.9      Concluding Remarks
         At the beginning of the 1980s, pipelining was a technique reserved primarily for
         supercomputers and large multimillion-dollar mainframes. By the mid-1980s, the
         first pipelined microprocessors appeared and helped transform the world of com-
         puting, allowing microprocessors to bypass minicomputers in performance and
         eventually to take on and outperform mainframes. By the early 1990s, high-end
         embedded microprocessors embraced pipelining, and desktops were headed
         toward the use of the sophisticated dynamically scheduled, multiple-issue
         approaches discussed in Chapter 3. The material in this appendix, which was con-
         sidered reasonably advanced for graduate students when this text first appeared in
         1990, is now considered basic undergraduate material and can be found in proces-
         sors that cost less than $1!

C.10     Historical Perspective and References
         Section M.5 (available online) features a discussion on the development of
         pipelining and instruction-level parallelism covering both this appendix and the
         material in Chapter 3. We provide numerous references for further reading and
         exploration of these topics.

         Updated Exercises by Diana Franklin
   C.1   [15/15/15/15/25/10/15] < A.2 > Use the following code fragment:
            Loop:      ld         x1,0(x2)          ;load x1 from address 0+x2
                       addi       x1,x1,1           ;x1=x1+1
                       sd         x1,0,(x2)         ;store x1 at address 0+x2
                       addi       x2,x2,4           ;x2=x2+4
                       sub        x4,x3,x2          ;x4=x3-x2
                       bnez       x4,Loop           ;branch to Loop if x4! = 0

         Assume that the initial value of x3 is x2 + 396.
         a. [15] < C.2 > Data hazards are caused by data dependences in the code. Whether
            a dependency causes a hazard depends on the machine implementation (i.e.,
            number of pipeline stages). List all of the data dependences in the code above.
            Record the register, source instruction, and destination instruction; for example,
            there is a data dependency for register x1 from the ld to the addi.
         b. [15] < C.2 > Show the timing of this instruction sequence for the 5-stage RISC
            pipeline without any forwarding or bypassing hardware but assuming that a reg-
            ister read and a write in the same clock cycle “forwards” through the register
C-72   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                            file, as between the add and or shown in Figure C.5. Use a pipeline timing
                            chart like that in Figure C.8. Assume that the branch is handled by flushing
                            the pipeline. If all memory references take 1 cycle, how many cycles does this
                            loop take to execute?
                         c. [15] < C.2 > Show the timing of this instruction sequence for the 5-stage RISC
                            pipeline with full forwarding and bypassing hardware. Use a pipeline timing
                            chart like that shown in Figure C.8. Assume that the branch is handled by pre-
                            dicting it as not taken. If all memory references take 1 cycle, how many cycles
                            does this loop take to execute?
                         d. [15] < C.2 > Show the timing of this instruction sequence for the 5-stage RISC
                            pipeline with full forwarding and bypassing hardware, as shown in Figure C.6.
                            Use a pipeline timing chart like that shown in Figure C.8. Assume that the
                            branch is handled by predicting it as taken. If all memory references take 1
                            cycle, how many cycles does this loop take to execute?
                         e. [25] < C.2 > High-performance processors have very deep pipelines—more
                            than 15 stages. Imagine that you have a 10-stage pipeline in which every stage
                            of the 5-stage pipeline has been split in two. The only catch is that, for data for-
                            warding, data are forwarded from the end of a pair of stages to the beginning of
                            the two stages where they are needed. For example, data are forwarded from the
                            output of the second execute stage to the input of the first execute stage, still
                            causing a 1-cycle delay. Show the timing of this instruction sequence for the
                            10-stage RISC pipeline with full forwarding and bypassing hardware. Use a
                            pipeline timing chart like that shown in Figure C.8 (but with stages labeled
                            IF1, IF2, ID1, etc.). Assume that the branch is handled by predicting it as taken.
                            If all memory references take 1 cycle, how many cycles does this loop take to
                            execute?
                         f. [10] < C.2 > Assume that in the 5-stage pipeline, the longest stage requires
                            0.8 ns, and the pipeline register delay is 0.1 ns. What is the clock cycle time
                            of the 5-stage pipeline? If the 10-stage pipeline splits all stages in half, what
                            is the cycle time of the 10-stage machine?
                         g. [15] < C.2 > Using your answers from parts (d) and (e), determine the cycles per
                            instruction (CPI) for the loop on a 5-stage pipeline and a 10-stage pipeline.
                            Make sure you count only from when the first instruction reaches the write-back
                            stage to the end. Do not count the start-up of the first instruction. Using the clock
                            cycle time calculated in part (f), calculate the average instruction execute time
                            for each machine.
                   C.2   [15/15] < C.2 > Suppose the branch frequencies (as percentages of all instructions)
                         are as follows:

                                   Conditional branches                                  15%
                                   Jumps and calls                                       1%
                                   Taken conditional branches                            60% are taken
                                        Updated Exercises by Diana Franklin        ■   C-73

      a. [15] < C.2 > We are examining a four-stage pipeline where the branch is
         resolved at the end of the second cycle for unconditional branches and at the
         end of the third cycle for conditional branches. Assuming that only the first pipe
         stage can always be completed independent of whether the branch is taken and
         ignoring other pipeline stalls, how much faster would the machine be without
         any branch hazards?
      b. [15] < C.2 > Now assume a high-performance processor in which we have a 15-
         deep pipeline where the branch is resolved at the end of the fifth cycle for
         unconditional branches and at the end of the tenth cycle for conditional
         branches. Assuming that only the first pipe stage can always be completed inde-
         pendent of whether the branch is taken and ignoring other pipeline stalls, how
         much faster would the machine be without any branch hazards?
C.3   [5/15/10/10] < C.2 > We begin with a computer implemented in single-cycle
      implementation. When the stages are split by functionality, the stages do not
      require exactly the same amount of time. The original machine had a clock
      cycle time of 7 ns. After the stages were split, the measured times were IF,
      1 ns; ID, 1.5 ns; EX, 1 ns; MEM, 2 ns; and WB, 1.5 ns. The pipeline register delay
      is 0.1 ns.
      a. [5] < C.2 > What is the clock cycle time of the 5-stage pipelined machine?
      b. [15] < C.2 > If there is a stall every four instructions, what is the CPI of the new
         machine?
      c. [10] < C.2 > What is the speedup of the pipelined machine over the single-cycle
         machine?
      d. [10] < C.2 > If the pipelined machine had an infinite number of stages, what
         would its speedup be over the single-cycle machine?
C.4   [15] < C.1, C.2 > A reduced hardware implementation of the classic five-stage
      RISC pipeline might use the EX stage hardware to perform a branch instruction
      comparison and then not actually deliver the branch target PC to the IF stage until
      the clock cycle in which the branch instruction reaches the MEM stage. Control
      hazard stalls can be reduced by resolving branch instructions in ID, but improving
      performance in one respect may reduce performance in other circumstances. Write
      a small snippet of code in which calculating the branch in the ID stage causes a data
      hazard, even with data forwarding.
C.5   [12/13/20/20/15/15] < C.2, C.3 > For these problems, we will explore a pipeline
      for a register-memory architecture. The architecture has two instruction formats:
      a register-register format and a register-memory format. There is a single-memory
      addressing mode (offset + base register). There is a set of ALU operations with the
      format:
           ALUop Rdest, Rsrc1, Rsrc2
      or
           ALUop Rdest, Rsrc1, MEM
C-74   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         where the ALUop is one of the following: add, subtract, AND, OR, load (Rsrc1
                         ignored), or store. Rsrc or Rdest are registers. MEM is a base register and offset
                         pair. Branches use a full compare of two registers and are PC relative. Assume that
                         this machine is pipelined so that a new instruction is started every clock cycle. The
                         pipeline structure, similar to that used in the VAX 8700 micropipeline (Clark,
                         1987), is

                         IF   RF    ALU1     MEM      ALU2     WB
                              IF    RF       ALU1     MEM      ALU2     WB
                                    IF       RF       ALU1     MEM      ALU2     WB
                                             IF       RF       ALU1     MEM      ALU2     WB
                                                      IF       RF       ALU1     MEM      ALU2     WB
                                                               IF       RF       ALU1     MEM      ALU2    WB

                         The first ALU stage is used for effective address calculation for memory references
                         and branches. The second ALU cycle is used for operations and branch compa-
                         rison. RF is both a decode and register-fetch cycle. Assume that when a register
                         read and a register write of the same register occur in the same clock, the write data
                         are forwarded.
                         a. [12] < C.2 > Find the number of adders needed, counting any adder or incre-
                            menter; show a combination of instructions and pipe stages that justify this
                            answer. You need only give one combination that maximizes the adder count.
                         b. [13] < C.2 > Find the number of register read and write ports and memory read
                            and write ports required. Show that your answer is correct by showing a com-
                            bination of instructions and pipeline stage indicating the instruction and the
                            number of read ports and write ports required for that instruction.
                         c. [20] < C.3 > Determine any data forwarding for any ALUs that will be needed.
                            Assume that there are separate ALUs for the ALU1 and ALU2 pipe stages. Put
                            in all forwarding among ALUs necessary to avoid or reduce stalls. Show the
                            relationship between the two instructions involved in forwarding using the for-
                            mat of the table in Figure C.23 but ignoring the last two columns. Be careful to
                            consider forwarding across an intervening instruction—for example,
                                   add           x1, ...
                                   any instruction
                                   add           ..., x1, ...

                         d. [20] < C.3 > Show all of the data forwarding requirements necessary to avoid or
                            reduce stalls when either the source or destination unit is not an ALU. Use the
                            same format as in Figure C.23, again ignoring the last two columns. Remember
                            to forward to and from memory references.
                                       Updated Exercises by Diana Franklin        ■   C-75

      e. [15] < C.3 > Show all the remaining hazards that involve at least one unit other
         than an ALU as the source or destination unit. Use a table like that shown in
         Figure C.25, but replace the last column with the lengths of the hazards.
      f. [15] < C.2 > Show all control hazards by example and state the length of the
         stall. Use a format like that shown in Figure C.11, labeling each example.
C.6   [12/13/13/15/15] < C.1, C.2, C.3 > We will now add support for register-memory
      ALU operations to the classic five-stage RISC pipeline. To offset this increase in
      complexity, all memory addressing will be restricted to register indirect (i.e., all
      addresses are simply a value held in a register; no offset or displacement may
      be added to the register value). For example, the register-memory instruction
      add x4, x5, (x1) means add the contents of register x5 to the contents of
      the memory location with address equal to the value in register x1 and put the
      sum in register x4. Register-register ALU operations are unchanged. The following
      items apply to the integer RISC pipeline:
      a. [12] < C.1 > List a rearranged order of the five traditional stages of the RISC
         pipeline that will support register-memory operations implemented exclusively
         by register indirect addressing.
      b. [13] < C.2, C.3 > Describe what new forwarding paths are needed for the rear-
         ranged pipeline by stating the source, destination, and information transferred
         on each needed new path.
      c. [13] < C.2, C.3 > For the reordered stages of the RISC pipeline, what new data
         hazards are created by this addressing mode? Give an instruction sequence illus-
         trating each new hazard.
      d. [15] < C.3 > List all of the ways that the RISC pipeline with register-memory
         ALU operations can have a different instruction count for a given program than
         the original RISC pipeline. Give a pair of specific instruction sequences, one for
         the original pipeline and one for the rearranged pipeline, to illustrate each way.
      e. [15] < C.3 > Assume that all instructions take 1 clock cycle per stage. List all of
         the ways that the register-memory RISC V can have a different CPI for a given
         program as compared to the original RISC V pipeline.
C.7   [10/10] < C.3 > In this problem, we will explore how deepening the pipeline
      affects performance in two ways: faster clock cycle and increased stalls due to data
      and control hazards. Assume that the original machine is a 5-stage pipeline with a
      1 ns clock cycle. The second machine is a 12-stage pipeline with a 0.6 ns clock
      cycle. The 5-stage pipeline experiences a stall due to a data hazard every five
      instructions, whereas the 12-stage pipeline experiences three stalls every eight
      instructions. In addition, branches constitute 20% of the instructions, and the mis-
      prediction rate for both machines is 5%.
      a. [10] < C.3 > What is the speedup of the 12-stage pipeline over the 5-stage pipe-
         line, taking into account only data hazards?
C-76   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         b. [10] < C.3 > If the branch mispredict penalty for the first machine is 2 cycles but
                            the second machine is 5 cycles, what are the CPIs of each, taking into account
                            the stalls due to branch mispredictions?
                   C.8   [15] < C.5 > Construct a table like that shown in Figure C.21 to check for WAW
                         stalls in the RISC V FP pipeline of Figure C.30. Do not consider FP divides.
                   C.9   [20/22/22] < C.4, C.6 > In this exercise, we will look at how a common vector
                         loop runs on statically and dynamically scheduled versions of the RISC V pipe-
                         line. The loop is the so-called DAXPY loop (discussed extensively in Appendix
                         G) and the central operation in Gaussian elimination. The loop implements the
                         vector operation Y = a*X + Y for a vector of length 100. Here is the MIPS code
                         for the loop:
                            foo:        fld            f2, 0(x1)    ; load X(i)
                                        fmul.d         f4, f2, f0   ; multiply a*X(i)
                                        fld            f6, 0(x2)    ; load Y(i)
                                        fadd.d         f6, f4, f6   ; add a*X(i) + Y(i)
                                        fsd            0(x2), f6    ; store Y(i)
                                        addi           x1, x1, 8    ; increment X index
                                        addi           x2, x2, 8    ; increment Y index
                                        sltiu          x3, x1, done ; test if done
                                        bnez           x3, foo      ; loop if not done
                         For parts (a) to (c), assume that integer operations issue and complete in 1 clock
                         cycle (including loads) and that their results are fully bypassed. You will use the FP
                         latencies (only) shown in Figure C.29, but assume that the FP unit is fully pipe-
                         lined. For scoreboards below, assume that an instruction waiting for a result from
                         another function unit can pass through read operands at the same time the result is
                         written. Also assume that an instruction in WB completing will allow a currently
                         active instruction that is waiting on the same functional unit to issue in the same
                         clock cycle in which the first instruction completes WB.
                         a. [20] < C.5 > For this problem, use the RISC V pipeline of Section C.5 with the
                            pipeline latencies from Figure C.29, but a fully pipelined FP unit, so the initi-
                            ation interval is 1. Draw a timing diagram, similar to Figure C.32, showing the
                            timing of each instruction's execution. How many clock cycles does each loop
                            iteration take, counting from when the first instruction enters the WB stage to
                            when the last instruction enters the WB stage?
                         b. [20] < C.8 > Perform static instruction reordering to reorder the instructions to
                            minimize the stalls for this loop, renaming registers where necessary. Use all the
                            same assumptions as in (a). Draw a timing diagram, similar to Figure C.32,
                            showing the timing of each instruction's execution. How many clock cycles
                            does each loop iteration take, counting from when the first instruction enters
                            the WB stage to when the last instruction enters the WB stage?
                                         Updated Exercises by Diana Franklin         ■   C-77

       c. [20] < C.8 > Using the original code above, consider how the instructions
          would have executed using scoreboarding, a form of dynamic scheduling.
          Draw a timing diagram, similar to Figure C.32, showing the timing of
          the instructions through stages IF, IS (issue), RO (read operands), EX (exe-
          cution), and WR (write result). How many clock cycles does each loop iter-
          ation take, counting from when the first instruction enters the WB stage to
          when the last instruction enters the WB stage?
C.10   [25] < C.8 > It is critical that the scoreboard be able to distinguish RAW and WAR
       hazards, because a WAR hazard requires stalling the instruction doing the writing
       until the instruction reading an operand initiates execution, but a RAW hazard
       requires delaying the reading instruction until the writing instruction finishes—just
       the opposite. For example, consider the sequence:
           fmul.d         f0,f6,f4
           fsub.d         f8,f0,f2
           fadd.d         f2,f10,f2
       The fsub.d depends on the fmul.d (a RAW hazard), thus the fmul.d must be
       allowed to complete before the fsub.d. If the fmul.d were stalled for the
       fsub.d due to the inability to distinguish between RAW and WAR hazards,
       the processor will deadlock. This sequence contains a WAR hazard between the
       fadd.d and the fsub.d, and the fadd.d cannot be allowed to complete until
       the fsub.d begins execution. The difficulty lies in distinguishing the RAW haz-
       ard between fmul.d and fsub.d, and the WAR hazard between the fsub.d and
       fadd.d. To see just why the three-instruction scenario is important, trace the han-
       dling of each instruction stage by stage through issue, read operands, execute, and
       write result. Assume that each scoreboard stage other than execute takes 1 clock
       cycle. Assume that the fmul.d instruction requires 3 clock cycles to execute and
       that the fsub.d and fadd.d instructions each take 1 cycle to execute. Finally,
       assume that the processor has two multiply function units and two add function
       units. Present the trace as follows.
       1. Make a table with the column headings Instruction, Issue, Read Operands, Exe-
          cute, Write Result, and Comment. In the first column, list the instructions in
          program order (be generous with space between instructions; larger table cells
          will better hold the results of your analysis). Start the table by writing a 1 in the
          Issue column of the fmul.d instruction row to show that fmul.d completes
          the issue stage in clock cycle 1. Now, fill in the stage columns of the table
          through the cycle at which the scoreboard first stalls an instruction.
       2. For a stalled instruction write the words “waiting at clock cycle X,” where X is
          the number of the current clock cycle, in the appropriate table column to show
          that the scoreboard is resolving an RAW or WAR hazard by stalling that stage.
          In the Comment column, state what type of hazard and what dependent instruc-
          tion is causing the wait.
C-78   ■   Appendix C Pipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts

                         3. Adding the words “completes with clock cycle Y” to a “waiting” table entry, fill
                            in the rest of the table through the time when all instructions are complete. For
                            an instruction that stalled, add a description in the Comments column telling
                            why the wait ended when it did and how deadlock was avoided (Hint: Think
                            about how WAW hazards are prevented and what this implies about active
                            instruction sequences.). Note the completion order of the three instructions
                            as compared to their program order.
                  C.11   [10/10/10] < C.5 > For this problem, you will create a series of small snippets that
                         illustrate the issues that arise when using functional units with different latencies.
                         For each one, draw a timing diagram similar to Figure C.32 that illustrates each
                         concept, and clearly indicate the problem.
                         a. [10] < C.5 > Demonstrate, using code different from that used in Figure C.32,
                            the structural hazard of having the hardware for only one MEM and WB stage.
                         b. [10] < C.5 > Demonstrate a WAW hazard requiring a stall.
