B
    Review of Memory Hierarchy

    Cache: a safe place for hiding or storing things.
                             Webster’s New World Dictionary of
                                       the American Language,
                                  Second College Edition (1976)
B-2   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

               B.1      Introduction
                        This appendix is a quick refresher of the memory hierarchy, including the basics of
                        cache and virtual memory, performance equations, and simple optimizations. This
                        first section reviews the following 36 terms:

                        cache                               fully associative           write allocate
                        virtual memory                      dirty bit                   unified cache
                        memory stall cycles                 block offset                misses per instruction
                        direct mapped                       write back                  block
                        valid bit                           data cache                  locality
                        block address                       hit time                    address trace
                        write through                       cache miss                  set
                        instruction cache                   page fault                  random replacement
                        average memory access time          miss rate                   index field
                        cache hit                           n-way set associative       no-write allocate
                        page                                least recently used         write buffer
                        miss penalty                        tag field                   write stall

                        If this review goes too quickly, you might want to look at Chapter 7 in Computer
                        Organization and Design, which we wrote for readers with less experience.
                             Cache is the name given to the highest or first level of the memory hierarchy
                        encountered once the address leaves the processor. Because the principle of local-
                        ity applies at many levels, and taking advantage of locality to improve performance
                        is popular, the term cache is now applied whenever buffering is employed to reuse
                        commonly occurring items. Examples include file caches, name caches, and so on.
                             When the processor finds a requested data item in the cache, it is called a cache
                        hit. When the processor does not find a data item it needs in the cache, a cache miss
                        occurs. A fixed-size collection of data containing the requested word, called a
                        block or line run, is retrieved from the main memory and placed into the cache.
                        Temporal locality tells us that we are likely to need this word again in the near
                        future, so it is useful to place it in the cache where it can be accessed quickly.
                        Because of spatial locality, there is a high probability that the other data in the
                        block will be needed soon.
                             The time required for the cache miss depends on both the latency and band-
                        width of the memory. Latency determines the time to retrieve the first word of
                        the block, and bandwidth determines the time to retrieve the rest of this block.
                        A cache miss is handled by hardware and causes processors using in-order execu-
                        tion to pause, or stall, until the data are available. With out-of-order execution, an
                        instruction using the result must still wait, but other instructions may proceed dur-
                        ing the miss.
                             Similarly, not all objects referenced by a program need to reside in main mem-
                        ory. Virtual memory means some objects may reside on disk. The address space is
                                                                                       B.1    Introduction    ■     B-3

Level                         1                            2                      3                     4
Name                          Registers                    Cache                  Main memory           Disk storage
Typical size                  <4 KiB                       32 KiB to 8 MiB        <1 TB                 >1 TB
Implementation technology     Custom memory with           On-chip CMOS           CMOS DRAM             Magnetic disk
                              multiple ports, CMOS         SRAM                                         or FLASH
Access time (ns)              0.1–0.2                      0.5–10                 30–150                5,000,000
Bandwidth (MiB/sec)           1,000,000–10,000,000         20,000–50,000          10,000–30,000         100–1000
Managed by                    Compiler                     Hardware               Operating system      Operating
                                                                                                        system
Backed by                     Cache                        Main memory            Disk or FLASH         Other disks
                                                                                                        and DVD

Figure B.1 The typical levels in the hierarchy slow down and get larger as we move away from the processor for a
large workstation or small server. Embedded computers might have no disk storage and much smaller memories
and caches. Increasingly, FLASH is replacing magnetic disks, at least for first level file storage. The access times
increase as we move to lower levels of the hierarchy, which makes it feasible to manage the transfer less responsively.
The implementation technology shows the typical technology used for these functions. The access time is given in
nanoseconds for typical values in 2017; these times will decrease over time. Bandwidth is given in megabytes per
second between levels in the memory hierarchy. Bandwidth for disk/FLASH storage includes both the media and the
buffered interfaces.

                             usually broken into fixed-size blocks, called pages. At any time, each page resides
                             either in main memory or on disk. When the processor references an item within a
                             page that is not present in the cache or main memory, a palt occurs, and the entire
                             page is moved from the disk to main memory. Because page faults take so long,
                             they are handled in software and the processor is not stalled. The processor usually
                             switches to some other task while the disk access occurs. From a high-level per-
                             spective, the reliance on locality of references and the relative relationships in size
                             and relative cost per bit of cache versus main memory are similar to those of main
                             memory versus disk.
                                 Figure B.1 shows the range of sizes and access times of each level in the mem-
                             ory hierarchy for computers ranging from high-end desktops to low-end servers.

                             Cache Performance Review
                             Because of locality and the higher speed of smaller memories, a memory hierarchy
                             can substantially improve performance. One method to evaluate cache perfor-
                             mance is to expand our processor execution time equation from Chapter 1. We
                             now account for the number of cycles during which the processor is stalled waiting
                             for a memory access, which we call the memory stall cycles. The performance is
                             then the product of the clock cycle time and the sum of the processor cycles and the
                             memory stall cycles:
                                  CPU execution time ¼ ðCPU clock cycles + Memory stall cyclesÞ ? Clock cycle time
B-4   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                         This equation assumes that the CPU clock cycles include the time to handle a cache
                         hit and that the processor is stalled during a cache miss. Section B.2 reexamines
                         this simplifying assumption.
                             The number of memory stall cycles depends on both the number of misses and
                         the cost per miss, which is called the miss penalty:

                                   Memory stall cycles ¼ Number of misses ? Miss penalty
                                                                Misses
                                                       ¼ IC ?             ? Miss penalty
                                                              Instruction
                                                              Memory accesses
                                                       ¼ IC ?                  ? Miss rate ? Miss penalty
                                                                 Instruction
                         The advantage of the last form is that the components can be easily measured. We
                         already know how to measure instruction count (IC). (For speculative processors,
                         we only count instructions that commit.) Measuring the number of memory refer-
                         ences per instruction can be done in the same fashion; every instruction requires an
                         instruction access, and it is easy to decide if it also requires a data access.
                               Note that we calculated miss penalty as an average, but we will use it herein as
                         if it were a constant. The memory behind the cache may be busy at the time of the
                         miss because of prior memory requests or memory refresh. The number of clock
                         cycles also varies at interfaces between different clocks of the processor, bus, and
                         memory. Thus, please remember that using a single number for miss penalty is a
                         simplification.
                               The component miss rate is simply the fraction of cache accesses that result in a
                         miss (i.e., number of accesses that miss divided by number of accesses). Miss rates
                         can be measured with cache simulators that take an address trace of the instruction
                         and data references, simulate the cache behavior to determine which references hit
                         and which miss, and then report the hit and miss totals. Many microprocessors
                         today provide hardware to count the number of misses and memory references,
                         which is a much easier and faster way to measure miss rate.
                               The preceding formula is an approximation because the miss rates and miss
                         penalties are often different for reads and writes. Memory stall clock cycles could
                         then be defined in terms of the number of memory accesses per instruction, miss
                         penalty (in clock cycles) for reads and writes, and miss rate for reads and writes:

                     Memory stall clock cycles ¼ IC ? Reads per instruction ? Read miss rate ? Read miss penalty
                                                 + IC ? Writes per instruction ? Write miss rate ? Write miss penalty

                         We usually simplify the complete formula by combining the reads and writes and
                         finding the average miss rates and miss penalty for reads and writes:
                                                                   Memory accesses
                                Memory stall clock cycles ¼ IC ?                   ? Miss rate ? Miss penalty
                                                                     Instruction
                             The miss rate is one of the most important measures of cache design, but, as we
                         will see in later sections, not the only measure.
                                                                  B.1    Introduction      ■   B-5

Example   Assume we have a computer where the cycles per instruction (CPI) is 1.0 when all
          memory accesses hit in the cache. The only data accesses are loads and stores, and
          these total 50% of the instructions. If the miss penalty is 50 clock cycles and the
          miss rate is 1%, how much faster would the computer be if all instructions were
          cache hits?

 Answer   First compute the performance for the computer that always hits:

               CPU execution time ¼ ðCPU clock cycles + Memory stall cyclesÞ ? Clock cycle
                                  ¼ ðIC ? CPI + 0Þ ? Clock cycle
                                  ¼ IC ? 1:0 ? Clock cycle

          Now for the computer with the real cache, first we compute memory stall cycles:
                                            Memory accesses
                  Memory stall cycles ¼ IC ?                  ? Miss rate ? Miss penalty
                                               Instruction
                                     ¼ IC ? ð1 + 0:5Þ ? 0:01 ? 50
                                     ¼ IC ? 0:75

          where the middle term (1 + 0.5) represents one instruction access and 0.5 data
          accesses per instruction. The total performance is thus

                      CPU execution timecache ¼ ðIC ? 1:0 + IC ? 0:75Þ ? Clock cycle
                                              ¼ 1:75 ? IC ? Clock cycle

          The performance ratio is the inverse of the execution times:
                            CPU execution timecache 1:75 ? IC ? Clock cycle
                                                   ¼
                             CPU execution time      1:0 ? IC ? Clock cycle
                                                   ¼ 1:75

          The computer with no cache misses is 1.75 times faster.

             Some designers prefer measuring miss rate as misses per instruction rather than
          misses per memory reference. These two are related:
                   Misses      Miss rate ? Memory accesses               Memory accesses
                             ¼                             ¼ Miss rate ?
                 Instruction         Instruction count                     Instruction
              The latter formula is useful when you know the average number of memory
          accesses per instruction because it allows you to convert miss rate into misses
          per instruction, and vice versa. For example, we can turn the miss rate per memory
          reference in the previous example into misses per instruction:
                       Misses                  Memory accesses
                                 ¼ Miss rate ?                 ¼ 0:02 ? ð1:5Þ ¼ 0:030
                     Instruction                 Instruction
B-6   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                            By the way, misses per instruction are often reported as misses per 1000
                        instructions to show integers instead of fractions. Thus, the preceding answer could
                        also be expressed as 30 misses per 1000 instructions.
                            The advantage of misses per instruction is that it is independent of the hardware
                        implementation. For example, speculative processors fetch about twice as many
                        instructions as are actually committed, which can artificially reduce the miss rate
                        if measured as misses per memory reference rather than per instruction. The draw-
                        back is that misses per instruction is architecture dependent; for example, the aver-
                        age number of memory accesses per instruction may be very different for an 80x86
                        versus RISC V. Thus, misses per instruction are most popular with architects work-
                        ing with a single computer family, although the similarity of RISC architectures
                        allows one to give insights into others.

             Example    To show equivalency between the two miss rate equations, let’s redo the preceding
                        example, this time assuming a miss rate per 1000 instructions of 30. What is
                        memory stall time in terms of instruction count?

               Answer   Recomputing the memory stall cycles:

                                   Memory stall cycles ¼ Number of misses ? Miss penalty
                                                                Misses
                                                       ¼ IC ?             ? Miss penalty
                                                              Instruction
                                                                          Misses
                                                       ¼ IC=1000 ?                    ? Miss penalty
                                                                    Intruction ? 1000
                                                       ¼ IC=1000 ? 30 ? 25
                                                      ¼ IC=1000 ? 750
                                                      ¼ IC ? 0:75

                        We get the same answer as on page B-5, showing equivalence of the two equations.

                        Four Memory Hierarchy Questions
                        We continue our introduction to caches by answering the four common questions
                        for the first level of the memory hierarchy:

                           Q1: Where can a block be placed in the upper level? (block placement)
                           Q2: How is a block found if it is in the upper level? (block identification)
                           Q3: Which block should be replaced on a miss? (block replacement)
                           Q4: What happens on a write? (write strategy)

                        The answers to these questions help us understand the different trade-offs of mem-
                        ories at different levels of a hierarchy; hence, we ask these four questions on every
                        example.
                                                             B.1    Introduction   ■   B-7

Q1: Where Can a Block be Placed in a Cache?
Figure B.2 shows that the restrictions on where a block is placed create three cat-
egories of cache organization:

■   If each block has only one place it can appear in the cache, the cache is said to
    be direct mapped. The mapping is usually
                 (Block address) MOD (Number of blocks in cache)
■   If a block can be placed anywhere in the cache, the cache is said to be fully
    associative.

           Fully associative:            Direct mapped:                  Set associative:
           block 12 can go               block 12 can go                 block 12 can go
           anywhere                      only into block 4               anywhere in set 0
                                         (12 MOD 8)                      (12 MOD 4)

    Block 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7       Block    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7           Block 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
       no.                         no.                                no.

Cache

                                                                         Set Set Set Set
                                                                          0 1 2 3
           Block frame address
    Block                      1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3
       no. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1

Memory

Figure B.2 This example cache has eight block frames and memory has 32 blocks.
The three options for caches are shown left to right. In fully associative, block 12 from
the lower level can go into any of the eight block frames of the cache. With direct
mapped, block 12 can only be placed into block frame 4 (12 modulo 8). Set associative,
which has some of both features, allows the block to be placed anywhere in set 0 (12
modulo 4). With two blocks per set, this means block 12 can be placed either in block
0 or in block 1 of the cache. Real caches contain thousands of block frames, and real
memories contain millions of blocks. The set associative organization has four sets with
two blocks per set, called two-way set associative. Assume that there is nothing in the
cache and that the block address in question identifies lower-level block 12.
B-8   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        ■   If a block can be placed in a restricted set of places in the cache, the cache is set
                            associative. A set is a group of blocks in the cache. A block is first mapped onto
                            a set, and then the block can be placed anywhere within that set. The set is usu-
                            ally chosen by bit selection; that is,
                                           (Block address) MOD (Number of sets in cache)
                            If there are n blocks in a set, the cache placement is called n-way set
                            associative.
                        The range of caches from direct mapped to fully associative is really a continuum
                        of levels of set associativity. Direct mapped is simply one-way set associative, and
                        a fully associative cache with m blocks could be called “m-way set associative.”
                        Equivalently, direct mapped can be thought of as having m sets, and fully associa-
                        tive as having one set.
                            The vast majority of processor caches today are direct mapped, two-way set
                        associative, or four-way set associative, for reasons we will see shortly.

                        Q2: How Is a Block Found If It Is in the Cache?
                        Caches have an address tag on each block frame that gives the block address. The
                        tag of every cache block that might contain the desired information is checked to
                        see if it matches the block address from the processor. As a rule, all possible tags
                        are searched in parallel because speed is critical.
                            There must be a way to know that a cache block does not have valid informa-
                        tion. The most common procedure is to add a valid bit to the tag to say whether or
                        not this entry contains a valid address. If the bit is not set, there cannot be a match
                        on this address.
                            Before proceeding to the next question, let’s explore the relationship of a pro-
                        cessor address to the cache. Figure B.3 shows how an address is divided. The first
                        division is between the block address and the block offset. The block frame address
                        can be further divided into the tag field and the index field. The block offset field
                        selects the desired data from the block, the index field selects the set, and the tag
                        field is compared against it for a hit. Although the comparison could be made on
                        more of the address than the tag, there is no need because of the following:

                        ■   The offset should not be used in the comparison, because the entire block is
                            present or not, and hence all block offsets result in a match by definition.

                                                          Block address                       Block
                                                    Tag                       Index           offset

                        Figure B.3 The three portions of an address in a set associative or direct-
                        mapped cache. The tag is used to check all the blocks in the set, and the index is used
                        to select the set. The block offset is the address of the desired data within the block. Fully
                        associative caches have no index field.
                                                        B.1    Introduction   ■   B-9

■   Checking the index is redundant, because it was used to select the set to be
    checked. An address stored in set 0, for example, must have 0 in the index field
    or it couldn’t be stored in set 0; set 1 must have an index value of 1; and so on.
    This optimization saves hardware and power by reducing the width of memory
    size for the cache tag.

If the total cache size is kept the same, increasing associativity increases the num-
ber of blocks per set, thereby decreasing the size of the index and increasing the
size of the tag. That is, the tag-index boundary in Figure B.3 moves to the right with
increasing associativity, with the end point of fully associative caches having no
index field.

Q3: Which Block Should be Replaced on a Cache Miss?
When a miss occurs, the cache controller must select a block to be replaced with the
desired data. A benefit of direct-mapped placement is that hardware decisions are
simplified—in fact, so simple that there is no choice: only one block frame is
checked for a hit, and only that block can be replaced. With fully associative or
set associative placement, there are many blocks to choose from on a miss. There
are three primary strategies employed for selecting which block to replace:

■   Random—To spread allocation uniformly, candidate blocks are randomly
    selected. Some systems generate pseudorandom block numbers to get repro-
    ducible behavior, which is particularly useful when debugging hardware.
■   Least recently used (LRU)—To reduce the chance of throwing out information
    that will be needed soon, accesses to blocks are recorded. Relying on the past to
    predict the future, the block replaced is the one that has been unused for the
    longest time. LRU relies on a corollary of locality: if recently used blocks
    are likely to be used again, then a good candidate for disposal is the least
    recently used block.
■   First in, first out (FIFO)—Because LRU can be complicated to calculate, this
    approximates LRU by determining the oldest block rather than the LRU.

A virtue of random replacement is that it is simple to build in hardware. As the
number of blocks to keep track of increases, LRU becomes increasingly expensive
and is usually only approximated. A common approximation (often called pseudo-
LRU) has a set of bits for each set in the cache with each bit corresponding to a
single way (a way is bank in a set associative cache; there are four ways in
four-way set associative cache) in the cache. When a set is accessed, the bit corre-
sponding to the way containing the desired block is turned on; if all the bits asso-
ciated with a set are turned on, they are reset with the exception of the most recently
turned on bit. When a block must be replaced, the processor chooses a block
from the way whose bit is turned off, often randomly if more than one choice is
available. This approximates LRU, because the block that is replaced will not have
B-10      ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                                                          Associativity
                        Two-way                            Four-way                            Eight-way
Size           LRU      Random         FIFO       LRU       Random        FIFO        LRU       Random        FIFO
 16 KiB        114.1      117.3       115.5      111.7        115.1       113.3      109.0        111.8       110.4
 64 KiB        103.4      104.3       103.9      102.4        102.3       103.1       99.7        100.5       100.3
256 KiB         92.2       92.1        92.5       92.1         92.1        92.5       92.1         92.1        92.5

Figure B.4 Data cache misses per 1000 instructions comparing least recently used, random, and first in, first out
replacement for several sizes and associativities. There is little difference between LRU and random for the largest
size cache, with LRU outperforming the others for smaller caches. FIFO generally outperforms random in the smaller
cache sizes. These data were collected for a block size of 64 bytes for the Alpha architecture using 10 SPEC2000
benchmarks. Five are from SPECint2000 (gap, gcc, gzip, mcf, and perl) and five are from SPECfp2000 (applu, art,
equake, lucas, and swim). We will use this computer and these benchmarks in most figures in this appendix.

                             been accessed since the last time that all the blocks in the set were accessed.
                             Figure B.4 shows the difference in miss rates between LRU, random, and FIFO
                             replacement.

                             Q4: What Happens on a Write?
                             Reads dominate processor cache accesses. All instruction accesses are reads, and
                             most instructions don’t write to memory. Figures A.32 and A.33 in Appendix A
                             suggest a mix of 10% stores and 26% loads for RISC V programs, making writes
                             10%/(100% + 26% + 10%) or about 7% of the overall memory traffic. Of the data
                             cache traffic, writes are 10%/(26% + 10%) or about 28%. Making the common case
                             fast means optimizing caches for reads, especially because processors traditionally
                             wait for reads to complete but need not wait for writes. Amdahl’s Law (Section 1.9)
                             reminds us, however, that high-performance designs cannot neglect the speed of
                             writes.
                                 Fortunately, the common case is also the easy case to make fast. The block can
                             be read from the cache at the same time that the tag is read and compared, so the
                             block read begins as soon as the block address is available. If the read is a hit, the
                             requested part of the block is passed on to the processor immediately. If it is a miss,
                             there is no benefit—but also no harm except more power in desktop and server
                             computers; just ignore the value read.
                                 Such optimism is not allowed for writes. Modifying a block cannot begin until
                             the tag is checked to see if the address is a hit. Because tag checking cannot occur in
                             parallel, writes usually take longer than reads. Another complexity is that the pro-
                             cessor also specifies the size of the write, usually between 1 and 8 bytes; only that
                             portion of a block can be changed. In contrast, reads can access more bytes than
                             necessary without fear.
                                 The write policies often distinguish cache designs. There are two basic options
                             when writing to the cache:
                                                       B.1    Introduction    ■   B-11

■   Write through—The information is written to both the block in the cache and to
    the block in the lower-level memory.
■   Write back—The information is written only to the block in the cache. The
    modified cache block is written to main memory only when it is replaced.

    To reduce the frequency of writing back blocks on replacement, a feature called
the dirty bit is commonly used. This status bit indicates whether the block is dirty
(modified while in the cache) or clean (not modified). If it is clean, the block is not
written back on a miss, because identical information to the cache is found in lower
levels.
    Both write back and write through have their advantages. With write back,
writes occur at the speed of the cache memory, and multiple writes within a block
require only one write to the lower-level memory. Because some writes don’t go to
memory, write back uses less memory bandwidth, making write back attractive in
multiprocessors. Since write back uses the rest of the memory hierarchy and mem-
ory interconnect less than write through, it also saves power, making it attractive
for embedded applications.
    Write through is easier to implement than write back. The cache is always
clean, so unlike write back read misses never result in writes to the lower level.
Write through also has the advantage that the next lower level has the most current
copy of the data, which simplifies data coherency. Data coherency is important for
multiprocessors and for I/O, which we examine in Chapter 4 and Appendix D.
Multilevel caches make write through more viable for the upper-level caches, as
the writes need only propagate to the next lower level rather than all the way to
main memory.
    As we will see, I/O and multiprocessors are fickle: they want write back for
processor caches to reduce the memory traffic and write through to keep the cache
consistent with lower levels of the memory hierarchy.
    When the processor must wait for writes to complete during write through, the
processor is said to write stall. A common optimization to reduce write stalls is a
write buffer, which allows the processor to continue as soon as the data are written
to the buffer, thereby overlapping processor execution with memory updating. As
we will see shortly, write stalls can occur even with write buffers.
    Because the data are not needed on a write, there are two options on a write
miss:

■   Write allocate—The block is allocated on a write miss, followed by the pre-
    ceding write hit actions. In this natural option, write misses act like read misses.
■   No-write allocate—This apparently unusual alternative is write misses do not
    affect the cache. Instead, the block is modified only in the lower-level memory.

Thus, blocks stay out of the cache in no-write allocate until the program tries to
read the blocks, but even blocks that are only written will still be in the cache with
write allocate. Let’s look at an example.
B-12   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

             Example    Assume a fully associative write-back cache with many cache entries that starts
                        empty. Following is a sequence of five memory operations (the address is in square
                        brackets):
                           Write Mem[100];
                           Write Mem[100];
                           Read Mem[200];
                           Write Mem[200];
                           Write Mem[100].
                        What are the number of hits and misses when using no-write allocate versus write
                        allocate?

               Answer   For no-write allocate, the address 100 is not in the cache, and there is no allocation
                        on write, so the first two writes will result in misses. Address 200 is also not in the
                        cache, so the read is also a miss. The subsequent write to address 200 is a hit. The
                        last write to 100 is still a miss. The result for no-write allocate is four misses and
                        one hit.
                           For write allocate, the first accesses to 100 and 200 are misses, and the rest are
                        hits because 100 and 200 are both found in the cache. Thus, the result for write
                        allocate is two misses and three hits.

                           Either write miss policy could be used with write through or write back.
                        Usually, write-back caches use write allocate, hoping that subsequent writes to that
                        block will be captured by the cache. Write-through caches often use no-write allo-
                        cate. The reasoning is that even if there are subsequent writes to that block, the
                        writes must still go to the lower-level memory, so what’s to be gained?

                        An Example: The Opteron Data Cache
                        To give substance to these ideas, Figure B.5 shows the organization of the data
                        cache in the AMD Opteron microprocessor. The cache contains 65,536 (64 K)
                        bytes of data in 64-byte blocks with two-way set associative placement, least-
                        recently used replacement, write back, and write allocate on a write miss.
                            Let’s trace a cache hit through the steps of a hit as labeled in Figure B.5. (The
                        four steps are shown as circled numbers.) As described in Section B.5, the Opteron
                        presents a 48-bit virtual address to the cache for tag comparison, which is simul-
                        taneously translated into a 40-bit physical address.
                            The reason Opteron doesn’t use all 64 bits of virtual address is that its designers
                        don’t think anyone needs that much virtual address space yet, and the smaller size
                        simplifies the Opteron virtual address mapping. The designers plan to grow the
                        virtual address in future microprocessors.
                            The physical address coming into the cache is divided into two fields: the 34-bit
                        block address and the 6-bit block offset (64 ¼ 26 and 34 + 6 ¼ 40). The block
                                                                                          B.1    Introduction   ■   B-13

                                      Block     1
                      Block address offset                                                      CPU
                     <25>        <9> <6>                                                        address
                      Tag       Index                                                           Data Data
                                                                                                in   out

                                       Valid    Tag                Data
                                       <1>      <25>               <64>
                   (512            2
                  blocks)

                                          3
                                                    =?

                                   2
                   (512
                  blocks)

                                          3                               2:1 mux
                                                    =?
                                                                             4
                                                                                                   Victim
                                                                                                   buffer

                                                                                      Lower-level memory

Figure B.5 The organization of the data cache in the Opteron microprocessor. The 64 KiB cache is two-way set
associative with 64-byte blocks. The 9-bit index selects among 512 sets. The four steps of a read hit, shown as circled
numbers in order of occurrence, label this organization. Three bits of the block offset join the index to supply the
RAM address to select the proper 8 bytes. Thus, the cache holds two groups of 4096 64-bit words, with each group
containing half of the 512 sets. Although not exercised in this example, the line from lower-level memory to the
cache is used on a miss to load the cache. The size of address leaving the processor is 40 bits because it is a physical
address and not a virtual address. Figure B.24 on page B-47 explains how the Opteron maps from virtual to physical
for a cache access.

                              address is further divided into an address tag and cache index. Step 1 shows this
                              division.
                                  The cache index selects the tag to be tested to see if the desired block is in the
                              cache. The size of the index depends on cache size, block size, and set associativity.
                              For the Opteron cache the set associativity is set to two, and we calculate the index
                              as follows:
                                                                   Cache size             65, 536
                                               2Index ¼                                 ¼         ¼ 512 ¼ 29
                                                          Block size ? Set associativity 64 ? 2
B-14   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        Hence, the index is 9 bits wide, and the tag is 34 ? 9 or 25 bits wide. Although that
                        is the index needed to select the proper block, 64 bytes is much more than the pro-
                        cessor wants to consume at once. Hence, it makes more sense to organize the data
                        portion of the cache memory 8 bytes wide, which is the natural data word of the 64-
                        bit Opteron processor. Thus, in addition to 9 bits to index the proper cache block, 3
                        more bits from the block offset are used to index the proper 8 bytes. Index selection
                        is step 2 in Figure B.5.
                             After reading the two tags from the cache, they are compared with the tag por-
                        tion of the block address from the processor. This comparison is step 3 in the figure.
                        To be sure the tag contains valid information, the valid bit must be set or else the
                        results of the comparison are ignored.
                             Assuming one tag does match, the final step is to signal the processor to
                        load the proper data from the cache by using the winning input from a 2:1 mul-
                        tiplexor. The Opteron allows 2 clock cycles for these four steps, so the instruc-
                        tions in the following 2 clock cycles would wait if they tried to use the result of
                        the load.
                             Handling writes is more complicated than handling reads in the Opteron, as it is
                        in any cache. If the word to be written is in the cache, the first three steps are the
                        same. Because the Opteron executes out of order, only after it signals that the
                        instruction has committed and the cache tag comparison indicates a hit are the data
                        written to the cache.
                             So far we have assumed the common case of a cache hit. What happens on a
                        miss? On a read miss, the cache sends a signal to the processor telling it the data
                        are not yet available, and 64 bytes are read from the next level of the hierarchy.
                        The latency is 7 clock cycles to the first 8 bytes of the block, and then 2 clock
                        cycles per 8 bytes for the rest of the block. Because the data cache is set associa-
                        tive, there is a choice on which block to replace. Opteron uses LRU, which selects
                        the block that was referenced longest ago, so every access must update the LRU
                        bit. Replacing a block means updating the data, the address tag, the valid bit, and
                        the LRU bit.
                             Because the Opteron uses write back, the old data block could have been mod-
                        ified, and hence it cannot simply be discarded. The Opteron keeps 1 dirty bit per
                        block to record if the block was written. If the “victim” was modified, its data and
                        address are sent to the victim buffer. (This structure is similar to a write buffer in
                        other computers.) The Opteron has space for eight victim blocks. In parallel with
                        other cache actions, it writes victim blocks to the next level of the hierarchy. If the
                        victim buffer is full, the cache must wait.
                             A write miss is very similar to a read miss, because the Opteron allocates a
                        block on a read or a write miss.
                             We have seen how it works, but the data cache cannot supply all the memory
                        needs of the processor: the processor also needs instructions. Although a single
                        cache could try to supply both, it can be a bottleneck. For example, when a load
                        or store instruction is executed, the pipelined processor will simultaneously request
                        both a data word and an instruction word. Hence, a single cache would present a
                        structural hazard for loads and stores, leading to stalls. One simple way to conquer
                                                    B.2   Cache Performance      ■    B-15

                                Instruction                                          Unified
      Size (KiB)                   cache                  Data cache                 cache
      8                            8.16                      44.0                     63.0
      16                           3.82                      40.9                     51.0
      32                           1.36                      38.4                     43.3
      64                           0.61                      36.9                     39.4
      128                          0.30                      35.3                     36.2
      256                          0.02                      32.6                     32.9

      Figure B.6 Miss per 1000 instructions for instruction, data, and unified caches of
      different sizes. The percentage of instruction references is about 74%. The data are
      for two-way associative caches with 64-byte blocks for the same computer and bench-
      marks as Figure B.4.

      this problem is to divide it: one cache is dedicated to instructions and another to
      data. Separate caches are found in most recent processors, including the Opteron.
      Hence, it has a 64 KiB instruction cache as well as the 64 KiB data cache.
          The processor knows whether it is issuing an instruction address or a data
      address, so there can be separate ports for both, thereby doubling the bandwidth
      between the memory hierarchy and the processor. Separate caches also offer the
      opportunity of optimizing each cache separately: different capacities, block sizes,
      and associativities may lead to better performance. (In contrast to the instruction
      caches and data caches of the Opteron, the terms unified or mixed are applied to
      caches that can contain either instructions or data.)
          Figure B.6 shows that instruction caches have lower miss rates than data
      caches. Separating instructions and data removes misses due to conflicts between
      instruction blocks and data blocks, but the split also fixes the cache space devoted
      to each type. Which is more important to miss rates? A fair comparison of separate
      instruction and data caches to unified caches requires the total cache size to be the
      same. For example, a separate 16 KiB instruction cache and 16 KiB data cache
      should be compared with a 32 KiB unified cache. Calculating the average miss rate
      with separate instruction and data caches necessitates knowing the percentage of
      memory references to each cache. From the data in Appendix A we find the split is
      100%/(100% + 26% + 10%) or about 74% instruction references to (26% + 10%)/
      (100% + 26% + 10%) or about 26% data references. Splitting affects performance
      beyond what is indicated by the change in miss rates, as we will see shortly.

B.2   Cache Performance
      Because instruction count is independent of the hardware, it is tempting to evaluate
      processor performance using that number. Such indirect performance measures
      have waylaid many a computer designer. The corresponding temptation for eval-
      uating memory hierarchy performance is to concentrate on miss rate because it,
B-16   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        too, is independent of the speed of the hardware. As we will see, miss rate can be
                        just as misleading as instruction count. A better measure of memory hierarchy per-
                        formance is the average memory access time:
                                   Average memory access time ¼ Hit time + Miss rate ? Miss penalty

                        where hit time is the time to hit in the cache; we have seen the other two terms
                        before. The components of average access time can be measured either in absolute
                        time—say, 0.25–1.0 ns on a hit—or in the number of clock cycles that the proces-
                        sor waits for the memory—such as a miss penalty of 150–200 clock cycles.
                        Remember that average memory access time is still an indirect measure of perfor-
                        mance; although it is a better measure than miss rate, it is not a substitute for
                        execution time.
                            This formula can help us decide between split caches and a unified cache.

             Example    Which has the lower miss rate: a 16 KiB instruction cache with a 16 KiB data cache
                        or a 32 KiB unified cache? Use the miss rates in Figure B.6 to help calculate the
                        correct answer, assuming 36% of the instructions are data transfer instructions.
                        Assume a hit takes 1 clock cycle and the miss penalty is 100 clock cycles. A load
                        or store hit takes 1 extra clock cycle on a unified cache if there is only one cache
                        port to satisfy two simultaneous requests. Using the pipelining terminology of
                        Chapter 3, the unified cache leads to a structural hazard. What is the average mem-
                        ory access time in each case? Assume write-through caches with a write buffer and
                        ignore stalls due to the write buffer.

               Answer   First let’s convert misses per 1000 instructions into miss rates. Solving the preced-
                        ing general formula, the miss rate is

                                                                   Misses
                                                                                =1000
                                                  Miss rate ¼ 1000 Instructions
                                                                 Memory accesses
                                                                    Instruction

                        Because every instruction access has exactly one memory access to fetch the
                        instruction, the instruction miss rate is

                                                                             3:82=1000
                                              Miss rate16 KB instruction ¼             ¼ 0:004
                                                                                1:00

                        Because 36% of the instructions are data transfers, the data miss rate is
                                                                         40:9=1000
                                                Miss rate16 KB data ¼              ¼ 0:114
                                                                            0:36
                        The unified miss rate needs to account for instruction and data accesses:
                                                                         43:3=1000
                                              Miss rate32 KB unified ¼               ¼ 0:0318
                                                                         1:00 + 0:36
                                                 B.2   Cache Performance        ■    B-17

As stated herein, about 74% of the memory accesses are instruction references.
Thus, the overall miss rate for the split caches is

                       ð74% ? 0:004Þ + ð26% ? 0:114Þ ¼ 0:0326

Thus, a 32 KiB unified cache has a slightly lower effective miss rate than two
16 KiB caches.
   The average memory access time formula can be divided into instruction and
data accesses:

            Average memory access time
              ¼ % instructions ? ðHit time + Instruction miss rate ? Miss penaltyÞ
                + % data ? ðHit time + Data miss rate ? Miss penaltyÞ

Therefore, the time for each organization is

             Average memory access timesplit
               ¼ 74% ? ð1 + 0:004 ? 200Þ + 26% ? ð1 + 0:114 ? 200Þ
               ¼ ð74% ? 1:80Þ + ð26% ? 23:80Þ ¼ 1:332 + 6:188 ¼ 7:52
             Average memory access timeunified
               ¼ 74% ? ð1 + 0:0318 ? 200Þ + 26% ? ð1 + 1 + 0:0318 ? 200Þ
               ¼ ð74% ? 7:36Þ + ð26% ? 8:36Þ ¼ 5:446 + 2:174 ¼ 7:62

Hence, the split caches in this example—which offer two memory ports per clock
cycle, thereby avoiding the structural hazard—have a better average memory
access time than the single-ported unified cache despite having a worse effective
miss rate.

Average Memory Access Time and Processor Performance
An obvious question is whether average memory access time due to cache misses
predicts processor performance.
     First, there are other reasons for stalls, such as contention due to I/O devices
using memory. Designers often assume that all memory stalls are due to cache mis-
ses, because the memory hierarchy typically dominates other reasons for stalls. We
use this simplifying assumption here, but be sure to account for all memory stalls
when calculating final performance.
     Second, the answer also depends on the processor. If we have an in-order exe-
cution processor (see Chapter 3), then the answer is basically yes. The processor
stalls during misses, and the memory stall time is strongly correlated to average
memory access time. Let’s make that assumption for now, but we’ll return to
out-of-order processors in the next subsection.
B-18   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                             As stated in the previous section, we can model CPU time as:
                          CPU time ¼ ðCPU execution clock cycles + Memory stall clock cyclesÞ ? Clock cycle time
                         This formula raises the question of whether the clock cycles for a cache hit should
                         be considered part of CPU execution clock cycles or part of memory stall clock
                         cycles. Although either convention is defensible, the most widely accepted is to
                         include hit clock cycles in CPU execution clock cycles.
                             We can now explore the impact of caches on performance.

             Example     Let’s use an in-order execution computer for the first example. Assume that the
                         cache miss penalty is 200 clock cycles, and all instructions usually take 1.0 clock
                         cycles (ignoring memory stalls). Assume that the average miss rate is 2%, there is
                         an average of 1.5 memory references per instruction, and the average number of
                         cache misses per 1000 instructions is 30. What is the impact on performance when
                         behavior of the cache is included? Calculate the impact using both misses per
                         instruction and miss rate.
                                                                                        
               Answer                                        Memory stall clock cycles
                              CPU time ¼ IC ? CPIexecution +                             ? Clock cycle time
                                                                  Instruction
                         The performance, including cache misses, is
                                   CPU timewith cache ¼ IC ? ½1:0 + ð30=1000 ? 200Þ? ? Clock cycle time
                                                     ¼ IC ? 7:00 ? Clock cycle time

                         Now calculating performance using miss rate:
                                                                                             
                                                              Memory accesses
                   CPU time ¼ IC ? CPIexecution + Miss rate ?                 ? Miss penalty ? Clock cycle time
                                                                Instruction
                                        CPU timewith cache ¼ IC ? ½1:0 + ð1:5 ? 2% ? 200Þ? ? Clock cycle time
                                                           ¼ IC ? 7:00 ? Clock cycle time

                            The clock cycle time and instruction count are the same, with or without a
                         cache. Thus, CPU time increases sevenfold, with CPI from 1.00 for a “perfect
                         cache” to 7.00 with a cache that can miss. Without any memory hierarchy at all
                         the CPI would increase again to 1.0 + 200 ? 1.5 or 301—a factor of more than
                         40 times longer than a system with a cache!

                            As this example illustrates, cache behavior can have enormous impact on per-
                         formance. Furthermore, cache misses have a double-barreled impact on a proces-
                         sor with a low CPI and a fast clock:

                         1. The lower the CPIexecution, the higher the relative impact of a fixed number of
                            cache miss clock cycles.
                         2. When calculating CPI, the cache miss penalty is measured in processor clock
                            cycles for a miss. Therefore, even if memory hierarchies for two computers are
                                                          B.2    Cache Performance       ■     B-19

             identical, the processor with the higher clock rate has a larger number of clock
             cycles per miss and hence a higher memory portion of CPI.

          The importance of the cache for processors with low CPI and high clock rates is
          thus greater, and, consequently, greater is the danger of neglecting cache behavior
          in assessing performance of such computers. Amdahl’s Law strikes again!
              Although minimizing average memory access time is a reasonable goal—and
          we will use it in much of this appendix—keep in mind that the final goal is to
          reduce processor execution time. The next example shows how these two can
          differ.

Example   What is the impact of two different cache organizations on the performance of a
          processor? Assume that the CPI with a perfect cache is 1.0, the clock cycle time
          is 0.35 ns, there are 1.4 memory references per instruction, the size of both caches
          is 128 KiB, and both have a block size of 64 bytes. One cache is direct mapped and
          the other is two-way set associative. Figure B.5 shows that for set associative
          caches we must add a multiplexor to select between the blocks in the set depending
          on the tag match. Because the speed of the processor can be tied directly to the
          speed of a cache hit, assume the processor clock cycle time must be stretched
          1.35 times to accommodate the selection multiplexor of the set associative cache.
          To the first approximation, the cache miss penalty is 65 ns for either cache orga-
          nization. (In practice, it is normally rounded up or down to an integer number of
          clock cycles.) First, calculate the average memory access time and then processor
          performance. Assume the hit time is 1 clock cycle, the miss rate of a direct-mapped
          128 KiB cache is 2.1%, and the miss rate for a two-way set associative cache of the
          same size is 1.9%.

 Answer   Average memory access time is
                     Average memory access time ¼ Hit time + Miss rate ? Miss penalty

          Thus, the time for each organization is

                   Average memory access time1-way ¼ 0:35 + ð:021 ? 65Þ ¼ 1:72ns
                   Average memory access time2-way ¼ 0:35 ? 1:35 + ð:019 ? 65Þ ¼ 1:71ns

          The average memory access time is better for the two-way set-associative cache.
            The processor performance is
                                                                          
                                                 Misses
              CPU time ¼ IC ? CPIexecution +               ? Miss penalty ? Clock cycle time
                                               Instruction

                       ¼ IC ? ½ðCPIexecution ? Clock cycle timeÞ
                                                                                               
                                        Memory accesses
                         + Miss rate ?                     ? Miss penalty ? Clock cycle time
                                             Instruction
B-20   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        Substituting 65 ns for (Miss penalty ? Clock cycle time), the performance of each
                        cache organization is

                                CPU time1-way ¼ IC ? ½1:0 ? 0:35 + ð0:021 ? 1:4 ? 65Þ? ¼ 2:26 ? IC
                                CPU time2-way ¼ IC ? ½1:0 ? 0:35 ? 1:35 + ð0:019 ? 1:4 ? 65Þ? ¼ 2:20 ? IC

                        and relative performance is
                                             CPU time2-way 2:26 ? Instruction count
                                                          ¼                         ¼ 1:03
                                             CPU time1-way 2:20 ? Instruction count

                        In contrast to the results of average memory access time comparison, the direct-
                        mapped cache leads to slightly better average performance because the clock cycle
                        is stretched for all instructions for the two-way set associative case, even if there
                        are fewer misses. Because CPU time is our bottom-line evaluation and because
                        direct mapped is simpler to build, the preferred cache is direct mapped in this
                        example.

                        Miss Penalty and Out-of-Order Execution Processors
                        For an out-of-order execution processor, how do you define “miss penalty”? Is it
                        the full latency of the miss to memory, or is it just the “exposed” or nonoverlapped
                        latency when the processor must stall? This question does not arise in processors
                        that stall until the data miss completes.
                            Let’s redefine memory stalls to lead to a new definition of miss penalty as non-
                        overlapped latency:
                            Memory stall cycles     Misses
                                                ¼             ? ðTotal miss latency ? Overlapped miss latencyÞ
                               Instruction        Instruction
                        Similarly, as some out-of-order processors stretch the hit time, that portion of the
                        performance equation could be divided by total hit latency less overlapped hit
                        latency. This equation could be further expanded to account for contention for
                        memory resources in an out-of-order processor by dividing total miss latency into
                        latency without contention and latency due to contention. Let’s just concentrate on
                        miss latency.
                            We now have to decide the following:

                        ■   Length of memory latency—What to consider as the start and the end of a mem-
                            ory operation in an out-of-order processor.
                        ■   Length of latency overlap—What is the start of overlap with the processor
                            (or, equivalently, when do we say a memory operation is stalling the
                            processor)?
                                                          B.2    Cache Performance        ■   B-21

          Given the complexity of out-of-order execution processors, there is no single cor-
          rect definition.
               Because only committed operations are seen at the retirement pipeline stage,
          we say a processor is stalled in a clock cycle if it does not retire the maximum pos-
          sible number of instructions in that cycle. We attribute that stall to the first instruc-
          tion that could not be retired. This definition is by no means foolproof. For
          example, applying an optimization to improve a certain stall time may not always
          improve execution time because another type of stall—hidden behind the targeted
          stall—may now be exposed.
               For latency, we could start measuring from the time the memory instruction is
          queued in the instruction window, or when the address is generated, or when the
          instruction is actually sent to the memory system. Any option works as long as it is
          used in a consistent fashion.

Example   Let’s redo the preceding example, but this time we assume the processor with the
          longer clock cycle time supports out-of-order execution yet still has a direct-
          mapped cache. Assume 30% of the 65 ns miss penalty can be overlapped; that
          is, the average CPU memory stall time is now 45.5 ns.

 Answer   Average memory access time for the out-of-order (OOO) computer is

               Average memory access time1-way, OOO ¼ 0:35 ? 1:35 + ð0:021 ? 45:5Þ ¼ 1:43ns

          The performance of the OOO cache is

               CUP time1-way, OOO ¼ IC ? ½1:6 ? 0:35 ? 1:35 + ð0:021 ? 1:4 ? 45:5Þ? ¼ 2:09 ? IC

          Hence, despite a much slower clock cycle time and the higher miss rate of a direct-
          mapped cache, the out-of-order computer can be slightly faster if it can hide 30% of
          the miss penalty.

          In summary, although the state of the art in defining and measuring memory stalls
          for out-of-order processors is complex, be aware of the issues because they signif-
          icantly affect performance. The complexity arises because out-of-order processors
          tolerate some latency due to cache misses without hurting performance. Conse-
          quently, designers usually use simulators of the out-of-order processor and mem-
          ory when evaluating trade-offs in the memory hierarchy to be sure that an
          improvement that helps the average memory latency actually helps program
          performance.
              To help summarize this section and to act as a handy reference, Figure B.7 lists
          the cache equations in this appendix.
B-22    ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                                         Cache size
                        2index ¼
                               Block size ? Set associativity
         CPU execution time ¼ ðCPU clock cycles + Memory stall cyclesÞ ? Clock cycle time
         Memory stall cycles ¼ Number of misses ? Miss penalty
                                      Misses
         Memory stall cycles ¼ IC ?             ? Miss penalty
                                    Instruction
                   Misses                  Memory accesses
                             ¼ Miss rate ?
                 Instruction                  Instruction
 Average memory access time ¼ Hit time + Miss rate ? Miss penalty
                                                                                 
                                                    Memory stall clock cycles
         CPU execution time ¼ IC ? CPIexecution +                                 ? Clock cycle time
                                                            Instruction
                                                                                 
                                                      Misses
         CPU execution time ¼ IC ? CPIexecution +               ? Miss penalty ? Clock cycle time
                                                    Instruction
                                                                                                   
                                                                Memory accesses
         CPU execution time ¼ IC ? CPIexecution + Miss rate ?                      ? Miss penalty ? Clock cycle time
                                                                    Instruction
         Memory stall cycles     Misses
                             ¼             ? ðTotal miss latency ? Overlapped miss latencyÞ
            Instruction        Instruction
 Average memory access time ¼ Hit timeL1 + Miss rateL1 ? ðHit timeL2 + Miss rateL2 ? Miss penaltyL2 Þ
         Memory stall cycles MissesL1                      MissesL2
                             ¼             ? Hit timeL2 +             ? Miss penaltyL2
            Instruction        Instruction                Instruction

Figure B.7 Summary of performance equations in this appendix. The first equation calculates the cache index size,
and the rest help evaluate performance. The final two equations deal with multilevel caches, which are explained
early in the next section. They are included here to help make the figure a useful reference.

                 B.3        Six Basic Cache Optimizations
                            The average memory access time formula gave us a framework to present cache
                            optimizations for improving cache performance:
                                          Average memory access time ¼ Hit time + Miss rate ? Miss penalty
                            Hence, we organize six cache optimizations into three categories:

                            ■      Reducing the miss rate—larger block size, larger cache size, and higher
                                   associativity
                            ■      Reducing the miss penalty—multilevel caches and giving reads priority over
                                   writes
                            ■      Reducing the time to hit in the cache—avoiding address translation when
                                   indexing the cache

                            Figure B.18 on page B-40 concludes this section with a summary of the implemen-
                            tation complexity and the performance benefits of these six techniques.
                                 B.3    Six Basic Cache Optimizations      ■   B-23

    The classical approach to improving cache behavior is to reduce miss rates, and
we present three techniques to do so. To gain better insights into the causes of mis-
ses, we first start with a model that sorts all misses into three simple categories:

■   Compulsory—The very first access to a block cannot be in the cache, so the
    block must be brought into the cache. These are also called cold-start misses
    or first-reference misses.
■   Capacity—If the cache cannot contain all the blocks needed during execution
    of a program, capacity misses (in addition to compulsory misses) will occur
    because of blocks being discarded and later retrieved.
■   Conflict—If the block placement strategy is set associative or direct mapped,
    conflict misses (in addition to compulsory and capacity misses) will occur
    because a block may be discarded and later retrieved if too many blocks
    map to its set. These misses are also called collision misses. The idea is that
    hits in a fully associative cache that become misses in an n-way set-associative
    cache are due to more than n requests on some popular sets.

(Chapter 5 adds a fourth C, for coherency misses due to cache flushes to keep mul-
tiple caches coherent in a multiprocessor; we won’t consider those here.)
    Figure B.8 shows the relative frequency of cache misses, broken down by the
three C’s. Compulsory misses are those that occur in an infinite cache. Capacity
misses are those that occur in a fully associative cache. Conflict misses are those
that occur going from fully associative to eight-way associative, four-way associa-
tive, and so on. Figure B.9 presents the same data graphically. The top graph shows
absolute miss rates; the bottom graph plots the percentage of all the misses by type
of miss as a function of cache size.
    To show the benefit of associativity, conflict misses are divided into misses
caused by each decrease in associativity. Here are the four divisions of conflict
misses and how they are calculated:

■   Eight-way—Conflict misses due to going from fully associative (no conflicts)
    to eight-way associative
■   Four-way—Conflict misses due to going from eight-way associative to four-
    way associative
■   Two-way—Conflict misses due to going from four-way associative to two-way
    associative
■   One-way—Conflict misses due to going from two-way associative to one-way
    associative (direct mapped)

   As we can see from the figures, the compulsory miss rate of the SPEC2000
programs is very small, as it is for many long-running programs.
   Having identified the three C’s, what can a computer designer do about them?
Conceptually, conflicts are the easiest: Fully associative placement avoids all
B-24    ■    Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                                                                  Miss rate components (relative percent)
                                                                      (sum 5 100% of total miss rate)
                        Degree          Total miss
Cache size (KiB)      associative          rate            Compulsory               Capacity              Conflict
       4                 1-way            0.098         0.0001       0.1%       0.070       72%        0.027      28%
       4                 2-way            0.076         0.0001       0.1%       0.070       93%        0.005         7%
       4                 4-way            0.071         0.0001       0.1%       0.070       99%        0.001         1%
       4                 8-way            0.071         0.0001       0.1%       0.070      100%        0.000         0%
       8                 1-way            0.068         0.0001       0.1%       0.044       65%        0.024      35%
       8                 2-way            0.049         0.0001       0.1%       0.044       90%        0.005      10%
       8                 4-way            0.044         0.0001       0.1%       0.044       99%        0.000         1%
       8                 8-way            0.044         0.0001       0.1%       0.044      100%        0.000         0%
       16                1-way            0.049         0.0001       0.1%       0.040       82%        0.009      17%
       16                2-way            0.041         0.0001       0.2%       0.040       98%        0.001         2%
       16                4-way            0.041         0.0001       0.2%       0.040       99%        0.000         0%
       16                8-way            0.041         0.0001       0.2%       0.040      100%        0.000         0%
       32                1-way            0.042         0.0001       0.2%       0.037       89%        0.005      11%
       32                2-way            0.038         0.0001       0.2%       0.037       99%        0.000         0%
       32                4-way            0.037         0.0001       0.2%       0.037      100%        0.000         0%
       32                8-way            0.037         0.0001       0.2%       0.037      100%        0.000         0%
       64                1-way            0.037         0.0001       0.2%       0.028       77%        0.008      23%
       64                2-way            0.031         0.0001       0.2%       0.028       91%        0.003         9%
       64                4-way            0.030         0.0001       0.2%       0.028       95%        0.001         4%
       64                8-way            0.029         0.0001       0.2%       0.028       97%        0.001         2%
       128               1-way            0.021         0.0001       0.3%       0.019       91%        0.002         8%
       128               2-way            0.019         0.0001       0.3%       0.019      100%        0.000         0%
       128               4-way            0.019         0.0001       0.3%       0.019      100%        0.000         0%
       128               8-way            0.019         0.0001       0.3%       0.019      100%        0.000         0%
       256               1-way            0.013         0.0001       0.5%       0.012       94%        0.001         6%
       256               2-way            0.012         0.0001       0.5%       0.012       99%        0.000         0%
       256               4-way            0.012         0.0001       0.5%       0.012       99%        0.000         0%
       256               8-way            0.012         0.0001       0.5%       0.012       99%        0.000         0%
       512               1-way            0.008         0.0001       0.8%       0.005       66%        0.003      33%
       512               2-way            0.007         0.0001       0.9%       0.005       71%        0.002      28%
       512               4-way            0.006         0.0001       1.1%       0.005       91%        0.000         8%
       512               8-way            0.006         0.0001       1.1%       0.005       95%        0.000         4%

Figure B.8 Total miss rate for each size cache and percentage of each according to the three C’s. Compulsory
misses are independent of cache size, while capacity misses decrease as capacity increases, and conflict misses
decrease as associativity increases. Figure B.9 shows the same information graphically. Note that a direct-mapped
cache of size N has about the same miss rate as a two-way set-associative cache of size N/2 up through 128 K. Caches
larger than 128 KiB do not prove that rule. Note that the Capacity column is also the fully associative miss rate. Data
were collected as in Figure B.4 using LRU replacement.
                                                 B.3    Six Basic Cache Optimizations       ■   B-25

                             0.10

                             0.09
                             0.08
                             0.07                                           1-way

        Miss rate per type
                                                                            2-way
                             0.06                                           4-way
                                                                            8-way
                             0.05                                           Capacity
                                                                            Compulsory
                             0.04
                             0.03
                             0.02
                             0.01

                             0.00
                                    4   8   16         32    64     128   256    512     1024
                                                        Cache size (KB)
                             100%

                             80%
        Miss rate per type

                             60%

                                                                          1-way
                             40%                                          2-way
                                                                          4-way
                                                                          8-way
                             20%                                          Capacity
                                                                          Compulsory

                              0%
                                    4   8   16         32    64     128   256    512     1024
                                                        Cache size (KB)

Figure B.9 Total miss rate (top) and distribution of miss rate (bottom) for each size
cache according to the three C’s for the data in Figure B.8. The top diagram shows the
actual data cache miss rates, while the bottom diagram shows the percentage in each
category. (Space allows the graphs to show one extra cache size than can fit in
Figure B.8.)

conflict misses. Full associativity is expensive in hardware, however, and may
slow the processor clock rate (see the example on page B-29), leading to lower
overall performance.
    There is little to be done about capacity except to enlarge the cache. If the
upper-level memory is much smaller than what is needed for a program, and a sig-
nificant percentage of the time is spent moving data between two levels in the
B-26   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        hierarchy, the memory hierarchy is said to thrash. Because so many replacements
                        are required, thrashing means the computer runs close to the speed of the lower-
                        level memory, or maybe even slower because of the miss overhead.
                            Another approach to improving the three C’s is to make blocks larger to reduce
                        the number of compulsory misses, but, as we will see shortly, large blocks can
                        increase other kinds of misses.
                            The three C’s give insight into the cause of misses, but this simple model has its
                        limits; it gives you insight into average behavior but may not explain an individual
                        miss. For example, changing cache size changes conflict misses as well as capacity
                        misses, because a larger cache spreads out references to more blocks. Thus, a miss
                        might move from a capacity miss to a conflict miss as cache size changes. Simi-
                        larly, changing the block size can sometimes reduce capacity misses (in addition to
                        the expected reduction in compusolory misses), as Gupta et al. (2013) show.
                            Note also that the three C’s also ignore replacement policy, because it is dif-
                        ficult to model and because, in general, it is less significant. In specific circum-
                        stances the replacement policy can actually lead to anomalous behavior, such as
                        poorer miss rates for larger associativity, which contradicts the three C’s model.
                        (Some have proposed using an address trace to determine optimal placement in
                        memory to avoid placement misses from the three C’s model; we’ve not followed
                        that advice here.)
                            Alas, many of the techniques that reduce miss rates also increase hit time or
                        miss penalty. The desirability of reducing miss rates using the three optimizations
                        must be balanced against the goal of making the whole system fast. This first exam-
                        ple shows the importance of a balanced perspective.

                        First Optimization: Larger Block Size to Reduce Miss Rate
                        The simplest way to reduce miss rate is to increase the block size. Figure B.10
                        shows the trade-off of block size versus miss rate for a set of programs and cache
                        sizes. Larger block sizes will reduce also compulsory misses. This reduction occurs
                        because the principle of locality has two components: temporal locality and spatial
                        locality. Larger blocks take advantage of spatial locality.
                            At the same time, larger blocks increase the miss penalty. Because they reduce
                        the number of blocks in the cache, larger blocks may increase conflict misses and
                        even capacity misses if the cache is small. Clearly, there is little reason to increase
                        the block size to such a size that it increases the miss rate. There is also no benefit to
                        reducing miss rate if it increases the average memory access time. The increase in
                        miss penalty may outweigh the decrease in miss rate.

             Example    Figure B.11 shows the actual miss rates plotted in Figure B.10. Assume the mem-
                        ory system takes 80 clock cycles of overhead and then delivers 16 bytes every 2
                        clock cycles. Thus, it can supply 16 bytes in 82 clock cycles, 32 bytes in 84 clock
                        cycles, and so on. Which block size has the smallest average memory access time
                        for each cache size in Figure B.11?
                                                     B.3    Six Basic Cache Optimizations         ■     B-27

                        10%
                                                                                                      4K

            Miss rate
                        5%

                                                                                                      16K

                                                                                                      64K
                                                                                                      256K
                        0%
                              16              32               64              128                256
                                                           Block size

         Figure B.10 Miss rate versus block size for five different-sized caches. Note that miss
         rate actually goes up if the block size is too large relative to the cache size. Each line
         represents a cache of different size. Figure B.11 shows the data used to plot these lines.
         Unfortunately, SPEC2000 traces would take too long if block size were included, so these
         data are based on SPEC92 on a DECstation 5000 (Gee et al. 1993).

Answer   Average memory access time is
                               Average memory access time ¼ Hit time + Miss rate ? Miss penalty
         If we assume the hit time is 1 clock cycle independent of block size, then the access
         time for a 16-byte block in a 4 KiB cache is
                          Average memory access time ¼ 1 + ð8:57% ? 82Þ ¼ 8:027 clock cycles
         and for a 256-byte block in a 256 KiB cache the average memory access time is
                          Average memory access time ¼ 1 + ð0:49% ? 112Þ ¼ 1:549 clock cycles

                                                                     Cache size
         Block size                         4K                 16K                64K                   256K
                   16                     8.57%              3.94%                2.04%                 1.09%
                   32                     7.24%              2.87%                1.35%                 0.70%
                   64                     7.00%              2.64%                1.06%                 0.51%
            128                           7.78%              2.77%                1.02%                 0.49%
            256                           9.51%              3.29%                1.15%                 0.49%

         Figure B.11 Actual miss rate versus block size for the five different-sized caches in
         Figure B.10. Note that for a 4 KiB cache, 256-byte blocks have a higher miss rate than 32-
         byte blocks. In this example, the cache would have to be 256 KiB in order for a 256-byte
         block to decrease misses.
B-28   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                                                                                Cache size
                        Block size       Miss penalty           4K           16K           64K         256K
                            16                 82              8.027         4.231        2.673        1.894
                            32                 84              7.082         3.411        2.134        1.588
                            64                 88              7.160         3.323        1.933        1.449
                           128                 96              8.469         3.659        1.979        1.470
                           256                112             11.651         4.685        2.288        1.549

                        Figure B.12 Average memory access time versus block size for five different-sized
                        caches in Figure B.10. Block sizes of 32 and 64 bytes dominate. The smallest average
                        time per cache size is boldfaced.

                        Figure B.12 shows the average memory access time for all block and cache sizes
                        between those two extremes. The boldfaced entries show the fastest block size for a
                        given cache size: 32 bytes for 4 KiB and 64 bytes for the larger caches. These sizes
                        are, in fact, popular block sizes for processor caches today.

                            As in all of these techniques, the cache designer is trying to minimize both the
                        miss rate and the miss penalty. The selection of block size depends on both the
                        latency and bandwidth of the lower-level memory. High latency and high bandwidth
                        encourage large block size because the cache gets many more bytes per miss for a
                        small increase in miss penalty. Conversely, low latency and low bandwidth encour-
                        age smaller block sizes because there is little time saved from a larger block. For
                        example, twice the miss penalty of a small block may be close to the penalty of a
                        block twice the size. The larger number of small blocks may also reduce conflict mis-
                        ses. Note that Figures B.10 and B.12 show the difference between selecting a block
                        size based on minimizing miss rate versus minimizing average memory access time.
                            After seeing the positive and negative impact of larger block size on compul-
                        sory and capacity misses, the next two subsections look at the potential of higher
                        capacity and higher associativity.

                        Second Optimization: Larger Caches to Reduce Miss Rate
                        The obvious way to reduce capacity misses in Figures B.8 and B.9 is to increase
                        capacity of the cache. The obvious drawback is potentially longer hit time and higher
                        cost and power. This technique has been especially popular in off-chip caches.

                        Third Optimization: Higher Associativity to Reduce Miss Rate
                        Figures B.8 and B.9 show how miss rates improve with higher associativity. There
                        are two general rules of thumb that can be gleaned from these figures. The first is
                                             B.3    Six Basic Cache Optimizations         ■   B-29

          that eight-way set associative is for practical purposes as effective in reducing mis-
          ses for these sized caches as fully associative. You can see the difference by com-
          paring the eight-way entries to the capacity miss column in Figure B.8, because
          capacity misses are calculated using fully associative caches.
              The second observation, called the 2:1 cache rule of thumb, is that a direct-
          mapped cache of size N has about the same miss rate as a two-way set associative
          cache of size N/2. This held in three C’s figures for cache sizes less than 128 KiB.
              Like many of these examples, improving one aspect of the average memory
          access time comes at the expense of another. Increasing block size reduces miss
          rate while increasing miss penalty, and greater associativity can come at the cost
          of increased hit time. Hence, the pressure of a fast processor clock cycle encour-
          ages simple cache designs, but the increasing miss penalty rewards associativity, as
          the following example suggests.

Example   Assume that higher associativity would increase the clock cycle time as listed as
          follows:
                             Clock cycle time2-way ¼ 1:36 ? Clock cycle time1-way
                             Clock cycle time4-way ¼ 1:44 ? Clock cycle time1-way
                             Clock cycle time8-way ¼ 1:52 ? Clock cycle time1-way
          Assume that the hit time is 1 clock cycle, that the miss penalty for the direct-
          mapped case is 25 clock cycles to a level 2 cache (see next subsection) that never
          misses, and that the miss penalty need not be rounded to an integral number of
          clock cycles. Using Figure B.8 for miss rates, for which cache sizes are each of
          these three statements true?
                    Average memory access time8-way < Average memory access time4-way
                    Average memory access time4-way < Average memory access time2-way
                    Average memory access time2-way < Average memory access time1-way

 Answer   Average memory access time for each associativity is
             Average memory access time8-way ¼ Hit time8-way + Miss rate8-way ? Miss penalty8-way
                                             ¼ 1:52 + Miss rate8-way ? 25
             Average memory access time4-way ¼ 1:44 + Miss rate4-way ? 25
             Average memory access time2-way ¼ 1:36 + Miss rate2-way ? 25
             Average memory access time1-way ¼ 1:00 + Miss rate1-way ? 25
          The miss penalty is the same time in each case, so we leave it as 25 clock cycles.
          For example, the average memory access time for a 4 KiB direct-mapped cache is
                       Average memory access time1-way ¼ 1:00 + ð0:098 ? 25Þ ¼ 3:44
          and the time for a 512 KiB, eight-way set associative cache is
                       Average memory access time8-way ¼ 1:52 + ð0:006 ? 25Þ ¼ 1:66
          Using these formulas and the miss rates from Figure B.8, Figure B.13 shows the
          average memory access time for each cache and associativity. The figure shows
B-30   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                                                                            Associativity
                        Cache size (KiB)           1-way            2-way               4-way         8-way
                               4                    3.44             3.25                   3.22       3.28
                               8                    2.69             2.58                   2.55       2.62
                              16                    2.23             2.40                   2.46       2.53
                              32                    2.06             2.30                   2.37       2.45
                              64                    1.92             2.14                   2.18       2.25
                              128                   1.52             1.84                   1.92       2.00
                              256                   1.32             1.66                   1.74       1.82
                              512                   1.20             1.55                   1.59       1.66

                        Figure B.13 Average memory access time using miss rates in Figure B.8 for param-
                        eters in the example. Boldface type means that this time is higher than the number to
                        the left, that is, higher associativity increases average memory access time.

                        that the formulas in this example hold for caches less than or equal to 8 KiB for up
                        to four-way associativity. Starting with 16 KiB, the greater hit time of larger asso-
                        ciativity outweighs the time saved due to the reduction in misses.
                            Note that we did not account for the slower clock rate on the rest of the program
                        in this example, thereby understating the advantage of direct-mapped cache.

                        Fourth Optimization: Multilevel Caches to Reduce
                        Miss Penalty
                        Reducing cache misses had been the traditional focus of cache research, but the
                        cache performance formula assures us that improvements in miss penalty can
                        be just as beneficial as improvements in miss rate. Moreover, Figure 2.2 on page 80
                        shows that technology trends have improved the speed of processors faster than
                        DRAMs, making the relative cost of miss penalties increase over time.
                            This performance gap between processors and memory leads the architect to
                        this question: Should I make the cache faster to keep pace with the speed of pro-
                        cessors, or make the cache larger to overcome the widening gap between the pro-
                        cessor and main memory?
                            One answer is, do both. Adding another level of cache between the original
                        cache and memory simplifies the decision. The first-level cache can be small
                        enough to match the clock cycle time of the fast processor. Yet, the second-level
                        cache can be large enough to capture many accesses that would go to main mem-
                        ory, thereby lessening the effective miss penalty.
                            Although the concept of adding another level in the hierarchy is straightfor-
                        ward, it complicates performance analysis. Definitions for a second level of cache
                        are not always straightforward. Let’s start with the definition of average memory
                        access time for a two-level cache. Using the subscripts L1 and L2 to refer, respec-
                        tively, to a first-level and a second-level cache, the original formula is
                                                 B.3    Six Basic Cache Optimizations         ■    B-31

                       Average memory access time ¼ Hit timeL1 + Miss rateL1 ? Miss penaltyL1
            and
                              Miss penaltyL1 ¼ Hit timeL2 + Miss rateL2 ? Miss penaltyL2
            so
                     Average memory access time ¼ Hit timeL1 + Miss rateL1
                                                    ðHit timeL2 + Miss rateL2 ? Miss penaltyL2 Þ
            In this formula, the second-level miss rate is measured on the leftovers from the
            first-level cache. To avoid ambiguity, these terms are adopted here for a two-level
            cache system:

            ■     Local miss rate—This rate is simply the number of misses in a cache divided
                  by the total number of memory accesses to this cache. As you would expect, for
                  the first-level cache it is equal to Miss rateL1, and for the second-level cache it is
                  Miss rateL2.
            ■     Global miss rate—The number of misses in the cache divided by the total num-
                  ber of memory accesses generated by the processor. Using the terms above, the
                  global miss rate for the first-level cache is still just Miss rateL1, but for the
                  second-level cache it is Miss rateL1 ? Miss rateL2.

                 This local miss rate is large for second-level caches because the first-level
            cache skims the cream of the memory accesses. This is why the global miss rate
            is the more useful measure: It indicates what fraction of the memory accesses that
            leave the processor go all the way to memory.
                 Here is a place where the misses per instruction metric shines. Instead of con-
            fusion about local or global miss rates, we just expand memory stalls per instruc-
            tion to add the impact of a second-level cache.
                 Average memory stalls per instruction ¼ Misses per instructionL1 ? Hit timeL2
                                                         + Misses per instructionL2 ? Miss penaltyL2

Example     Suppose that in 1000 memory references there are 40 misses in the first-level cache
            and 20 misses in the second-level cache. What are the various miss rates? Assume
            the miss penalty from the L2 cache to memory is 200 clock cycles, the hit time of
            the L2 cache is 10 clock cycles, the hit time of L1 is 1 clock cycle, and there are 1.5
            memory references per instruction. What is the average memory access time and
            average stall cycles per instruction? Ignore the impact of writes.

 Answer     The miss rate (either local or global) for the first-level cache is 40/1000 or 4%. The
            local miss rate for the second-level cache is 20/40 or 50%. The global miss rate of
            the second-level cache is 20/1000 or 2%. Then
  Average memory access time ¼ Hit timeL1 + Miss rateL1 ? ðHit timeL2 + Miss rateL2 ? Miss penaltyL2 Þ
                               ¼ 1 + 4% ? ð10 + 50% ? 200Þ ¼ 1 + 4% ? 110 ¼ 5:4 clock cycles
B-32   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                           To see how many misses we get per instruction, we divide 1000 memory refer-
                           ences by 1.5 memory references per instruction, which yields 667 instructions.
                           Thus, we need to multiply the misses by 1.5 to get the number of misses per
                           1000 instructions. We have 40 ? 1.5 or 60 L1 misses, and 20 ? 1.5 or 30 L2 mis-
                           ses, per 1000 instructions. For average memory stalls per instruction, assuming the
                           misses are distributed uniformly between instructions and data:
               Average memory stalls per instruction ¼ Misses per instructionL1 ? Hit timeL2 + Misses per instructionL2
                                                        Miss penaltyL2
                                                     ¼ ð60=1000Þ ? 10 + ð30=1000Þ ? 200
                                                     ¼ 0:060 ? 10 + 0:030 ? 200 ¼ 6:6 clock cycles
                           If we subtract the L1 hit time from the average memory access time (AMAT) and
                           then multiply by the average number of memory references per instruction, we get
                           the same average memory stalls per instruction:
                                                 ð5:4 ? 1:0Þ ? 1:5 ¼ 4:4 ? 1:5 ¼ 6:6 clock cycles
                           As this example shows, there may be less confusion with multilevel caches when
                           calculating using misses per instruction versus miss rates.

                                Note that these formulas are for combined reads and writes, assuming a write-
                           back first-level cache. Obviously, a write-through first-level cache will send all
                           writes to the second level, not just the misses, and a write buffer might be used.
                                Figures B.14 and B.15 show how miss rates and relative execution time change
                           with the size of a second-level cache for one design. From these figures we can gain
                           two insights. The first is that the global cache miss rate is very similar to the single
                           cache miss rate of the second-level cache, provided that the second-level cache is
                           much larger than the first-level cache. Hence, our intuition and knowledge about
                           the first-level caches apply. The second insight is that the local cache miss rate is
                           not a good measure of secondary caches; it is a function of the miss rate of the first-
                           level cache, and hence can vary by changing the first-level cache. Thus, the global
                           cache miss rate should be used when evaluating second-level caches.
                                With these definitions in place, we can consider the parameters of second-level
                           caches. The foremost difference between the two levels is that the speed of the first-
                           level cache affects the clock rate of the processor, while the speed of the second-
                           level cache only affects the miss penalty of the first-level cache. Thus, we can con-
                           sider many alternatives in the second-level cache that would be ill chosen for the
                           first-level cache. There are two major questions for the design of the second-level
                           cache: Will it lower the average memory access time portion of the CPI, and how
                           much does it cost?
                                The initial decision is the size of a second-level cache. Since everything in the
                           first-level cache is likely to be in the second-level cache, the second-level cache
                           should be much bigger than the first. If second-level caches are just a little bigger,
                           the local miss rate will be high. This observation inspires the design of huge
                           second-level caches—the size of main memory in older computers!
                                                         B.3   Six Basic Cache Optimizations        ■     B-33

                      100%
                                99% 99%            98%
                      90%                                96%                           Local miss rate
                                                            88%                        Global miss rate
                      80%
                                                                                       Single cache miss rate
                      70%
                                                                  67%
                      60%

          Miss rate
                      50%                                                55%
                                                                                 51%
                      40%                                                              46%
                                                                                              39%
                      30%                                                                                34%
                      20%

                      10%       6%        5%       4%    4%   4%    3%     2%    2%    2%     1%         1%
                       0%            4%       4%           3%    3%
                                 4        8        16    32   64    128 256      512   1024 2048 4096
                                                               Cache size (KB)

          Figure B.14 Miss rates versus cache size for multilevel caches. Second-level caches
          smaller than the sum of the two 64 KiB first-level caches make little sense, as reflected
          in the high miss rates. After 256 KiB the single cache is within 10% of the global miss
          rates. The miss rate of a single-level cache versus size is plotted against the local miss
          rate and global miss rate of a second-level cache using a 32 KiB first-level cache. The L2
          caches (unified) were two-way set associative with replacement. Each had split L1
          instruction and data caches that were 64 KiB two-way set associative with LRU replace-
          ment. The block size for both L1 and L2 caches was 64 bytes. Data were collected as in
          Figure B.4.

             One question is whether set associativity makes more sense for second-level
          caches.

Example   Given the following data, what is the impact of second-level cache associativity on
          its miss penalty?

          ■           Hit timeL2 for direct mapped ¼ 10 clock cycles.
          ■           Two-way set associativity increases hit time by 0.1 clock cycle to 10.1 clock
                      cycles.
          ■           Local miss rateL2 for direct mapped ¼ 25%.
          ■           Local miss rateL2 for two-way set associative ¼ 20%.
          ■           Miss penaltyL2 ¼ 200 clock cycles.

 Answer   For a direct-mapped second-level cache, the first-level cache miss penalty is
                                 Miss penalty1-way L2 ¼ 10 + 25% ? 200 ¼ 60:0 clock cycles
B-34   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                                                                                                       L2 hit = 8 clock cycles
                                                                         1.02
                                                                  8192                                 L2 hit = 16 clock cycles
                                                                            1.06

                                                                            1.10

                                   Second-level cache size (KB)
                                                                  4096
                                                                             1.14

                                                                                             1.60
                                                                  2048
                                                                                              1.65

                                                                                                     1.76
                                                                  1024
                                                                                                      1.82

                                                                                                             1.94
                                                                   512
                                                                                                              1.99

                                                                                                                             2.34
                                                                   256
                                                                                                                              2.39

                                                                     1.00      1.25    1.50      1.75     2.00       2.25         2.50
                                                                                       Relative execution time

                        Figure B.15 Relative execution time by second-level cache size. The two bars are for
                        different clock cycles for an L2 cache hit. The reference execution time of 1.00 is for an
                        8192 KiB second-level cache with a 1-clock-cycle latency on a second-level hit. These
                        data were collected the same way as in Figure B.14, using a simulator to imitate the
                        Alpha 21264.

                        Adding the cost of associativity increases the hit cost only 0.1 clock cycle, making
                        the new first-level cache miss penalty:
                                                                  Miss penalty2-way L2 ¼ 10:1 + 20% ? 200 ¼ 50:1 clock cycles
                        In reality, second-level caches are almost always synchronized with the first-level
                        cache and processor. Accordingly, the second-level hit time must be an integral
                        number of clock cycles. If we are lucky, we shave the second-level hit time to
                        10 cycles; if not, we round up to 11 cycles. Either choice is an improvement over
                        the direct-mapped second-level cache:
                                                                   Miss penalty2-way L2 ¼ 10 + 20% ? 200 ¼ 50:0 clock cycles
                                                                   Miss penalty2-way L2 ¼ 11 + 20% ? 200 ¼ 51:0 clock cycles

                        Now we can reduce the miss penalty by reducing the miss rate of the second-level
                        caches.
                            Another consideration concerns whether data in the first-level cache are in the
                        second-level cache. Multilevel inclusion is the natural policy for memory hierar-
                        chies: L1 data are always present in L2. Inclusion is desirable because consistency
                        between I/O and caches (or among caches in a multiprocessor) can be determined
                        just by checking the second-level cache.
                                            B.3    Six Basic Cache Optimizations       ■   B-35

               One drawback to inclusion is that measurements can suggest smaller blocks for
          the smaller first-level cache and larger blocks for the larger second-level cache. For
          example, the Pentium 4 has 64-byte blocks in its L1 caches and 128-byte blocks in
          its L2 cache. Inclusion can still be maintained with more work on a second-level
          miss. The second-level cache must invalidate all first-level blocks that map onto
          the second-level block to be replaced, causing a slightly higher first-level miss rate.
          To avoid such problems, many cache designers keep the block size the same in all
          levels of caches.
               However, what if the designer can only afford an L2 cache that is slightly big-
          ger than the L1 cache? Should a significant portion of its space be used as a redun-
          dant copy of the L1 cache? In such cases a sensible opposite policy is multilevel
          exclusion: L1 data are never found in an L2 cache. Typically, with exclusion a
          cache miss in L1 results in a swap of blocks between L1 and L2 instead of a
          replacement of an L1 block with an L2 block. This policy prevents wasting space
          in the L2 cache. For example, the AMD Opteron chip obeys the exclusion property
          using two 64 KiB L1 caches and 1 MiB L2 cache.
               As these issues illustrate, although a novice might design the first- and second-
          level caches independently, the designer of the first-level cache has a simpler job
          given a compatible second-level cache. It is less of a gamble to use a write through,
          for example, if there is a write-back cache at the next level to act as a backstop for
          repeated writes and it uses multilevel inclusion.
               The essence of all cache designs is balancing fast hits and few misses. For
          second-level caches, there are far fewer hits than in the first-level cache, so the
          emphasis shifts to fewer misses. This insight leads to much larger caches and tech-
          niques to lower the miss rate, such as higher associativity and larger blocks.

          Fifth Optimization: Giving Priority to Read Misses over Writes to
          Reduce Miss Penalty
          This optimization serves reads before writes have been completed. We start with
          looking at the complexities of a write buffer.
              With a write-through cache the most important improvement is a write buffer
          of the proper size. Write buffers, however, do complicate memory accesses
          because they might hold the updated value of a location needed on a read miss.

Example   Look at this code sequence:
             sd x3, 512(x0);M[512] ¬ R3 (cache index 0)
             ld x1, 1024(x0);x1 ¬ M[1024](cache index 0)
             ld x2, 512(x0);x2 ¬ M[512] (cache index 0)
          Assume a direct-mapped, write-through cache that maps 512 and 1024 to the same
          block, and a four-word write buffer that is not checked on a read miss. Will the
          value in x2 always be equal to the value in x3?
B-36   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

               Answer   Using the terminology from Chapter 2, this is a read-after-write data hazard in
                        memory. Let’s follow a cache access to see the danger. The data in x3 are placed
                        into the write buffer after the store. The following load uses the same cache index
                        and is therefore a miss. The second load instruction tries to put the value in location
                        512 into register x2; this also results in a miss. If the write buffer hasn’t completed
                        writing to location 512 in memory, the read of location 512 will put the old, wrong
                        value into the cache block, and then into x2. Without proper precautions, x3x1
                        would not be equal to x2!

                             The simplest way out of this dilemma is for the read miss to wait until the write
                        buffer is empty. The alternative is to check the contents of the write buffer on a read
                        miss, and if there are no conflicts and the memory system is available, let the read
                        miss continue. Virtually all desktop and server processors use the latter approach,
                        giving reads priority over writes.
                             The cost of writes by the processor in a write-back cache can also be reduced.
                        Suppose a read miss will replace a dirty memory block. Instead of writing the dirty
                        block to memory, and then reading memory, we could copy the dirty block to a
                        buffer, then read memory, and then write memory. This way the processor read,
                        for which the processor is probably waiting, will finish sooner. Similar to the pre-
                        vious situation, if a read miss occurs, the processor can either stall until the buffer is
                        empty or check the addresses of the words in the buffer for conflicts.
                             Now that we have five optimizations that reduce cache miss penalties or miss
                        rates, it is time to look at reducing the final component of average memory access
                        time. Hit time is critical because it can affect the clock rate of the processor; in
                        many processors today the cache access time limits the clock cycle rate, even
                        for processors that take multiple clock cycles to access the cache. Hence, a fast
                        hit time is multiplied in importance beyond the average memory access time for-
                        mula because it helps everything.

                        Sixth Optimization: Avoiding Address Translation During
                        Indexing of the Cache to Reduce Hit Time
                        Even a small and simple cache must cope with the translation of a virtual address
                        from the processor to a physical address to access memory. As described in
                        Section B.4, processors treat main memory as just another level of the memory
                        hierarchy, and thus the address of the virtual memory that exists on disk must
                        be mapped onto the main memory.
                            The guideline of making the common case fast suggests that we use virtual
                        addresses for the cache, because hits are much more common than misses. Such
                        caches are termed virtual caches, with physical cache used to identify the tradi-
                        tional cache that uses physical addresses. As we will shortly see, it is important
                        to distinguish two tasks: indexing the cache and comparing addresses. Thus, the
                        issues are whether a virtual or physical address is used to index the cache and
                                                      B.3   Six Basic Cache Optimizations     ■     B-37

whether a virtual or physical address is used in the tag comparison. Full virtual
addressing for both indices and tags eliminates address translation time from a
cache hit. Then why doesn’t everyone build virtually addressed caches?
    One reason is protection. Page-level protection is checked as part of the virtual
to physical address translation, and it must be enforced no matter what. One solu-
tion is to copy the protection information from the TLB on a miss, add a field to
hold it, and check it on every access to the virtually addressed cache.
    Another reason is that every time a process is switched, the virtual addresses
refer to different physical addresses, requiring the cache to be flushed. Figure B.16
shows the impact on miss rates of this flushing. One solution is to increase the
width of the cache address tag with a process-identifier tag (PID). If the operating
system assigns these tags to processes, it only need flush the cache when a PID is

            20%
                       0.6%
                       0.4%
            18%

            16%
                                                                      Purge
                                   1.1%
            14%                                                       PIDs
                                   0.5%                               Uniprocess

            12%
Miss rate

                                               1.8%
            10%
                   18.8%                       0.6%
            8%
                               13.0%
            6%                                          2.7%
                                                               3.4%
                                               8.7%     0.6%
            4%
                                                                       3.9%
                                                               0.4%            4.1%   4.3%   4.3%   4.3%
            2%                                          3.9%
                                                               2.7%    0.4%
                                                                       0.9%    0.3%   0.3%   0.3%   0.3%
                                                                               0.4%   0.3%   0.3%   0.3%
            0%
                  2K          4K          8K          16K   32K    64K     128K    256K   512K 1024K
                                                             Cache size

Figure B.16 Miss rate versus virtually addressed cache size of a program measured
three ways: without process switches (uniprocess), with process switches using a
process-identifier tag (PID), and with process switches but without PIDs (purge). PIDs
increase the uniprocess absolute miss rate by 0.3%–0.6% and save 0.6%–4.3% over
purging. Agarwal (1987) collected these statistics for the Ultrix operating system run-
ning on a VAX, assuming direct-mapped caches with a block size of 16 bytes. Note that
the miss rate goes up from 128 to 256 K. Such nonintuitive behavior can occur in caches
because changing size changes the mapping of memory blocks onto cache blocks,
which can change the conflict miss rate.
B-38   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        recycled; that is, the PID distinguishes whether or not the data in the cache are for
                        this program. Figure B.16 shows the improvement in miss rates by using PIDs to
                        avoid cache flushes.
                            A third reason why virtual caches are not more popular is that operating sys-
                        tems and user programs may use two different virtual addresses for the same phys-
                        ical address. These duplicate addresses, called synonyms or aliases, could result in
                        two copies of the same data in a virtual cache; if one is modified, the other will have
                        the wrong value. With a physical cache this wouldn’t happen, because the accesses
                        would first be translated to the same physical cache block.
                            Hardware solutions to the synonym problem, called antialiasing, guarantee
                        every cache block a unique physical address. For example, the AMD Opteron uses
                        a 64 KiB instruction cache with a 4 KiB page and two-way set associativity; hence,
                        the hardware must handle aliases involved with the three virtual address bits in
                        the set index. It avoids aliases by simply checking all eight possible locations
                        on a miss—two blocks in each of four sets—to be sure that none matches the phys-
                        ical address of the data being fetched. If one is found, it is invalidated, so when
                        the new data are loaded into the cache their physical address is guaranteed to be
                        unique.
                            Software can make this problem much easier by forcing aliases to share some
                        address bits. An older version of UNIX from Sun Microsystems, for example,
                        required all aliases to be identical in the last 18 bits of their addresses; this restric-
                        tion is called page coloring. Note that page coloring is simply set associative map-
                        ping applied to virtual memory: the 4 KiB (212) pages are mapped using 64 (26)
                        sets to ensure that the physical and virtual addresses match in the last 18 bits. This
                        restriction means a direct-mapped cache that is 218 (256 K) bytes or smaller can
                        never have duplicate physical addresses for blocks. From the perspective of the
                        cache, page coloring effectively increases the page offset, as software guarantees
                        that the last few bits of the virtual and physical page address are identical.
                            The final area of concern with virtual addresses is I/O. I/O typically uses phys-
                        ical addresses and thus would require mapping to virtual addresses to interact with
                        a virtual cache. (The impact of I/O on caches is further discussed in Appendix D.)
                            One alternative to get the best of both virtual and physical caches is to use part
                        of the page offset—the part that is identical in both virtual and physical
                        addresses—to index the cache. At the same time as the cache is being read using
                        that index, the virtual part of the address is translated, and the tag match uses phys-
                        ical addresses.
                            This alternative allows the cache read to begin immediately, and yet the tag
                        comparison is still with physical addresses. The limitation of this virtually indexed,
                        physically tagged alternative is that a direct-mapped cache can be no bigger than
                        the page size. For example, in the data cache in Figure B.5 on page B-13, the index
                        is 9 bits and the cache block offset is 6 bits. To use this trick, the virtual page size
                        would have to be at least 2(9+6) bytes or 32 KiB. If not, a portion of the index must
                        be translated from virtual to physical address. Figure B.17 shows the organization
                        of the caches, translation lookaside buffers (TLBs), and virtual memory when this
                        technique is used.
                                                                    B.3     Six Basic Cache Optimizations        ■    B-39

                              Virtual address <64>

             Virtual page number <50>                   Page offset <14>

TLB tag compare address <43> TLB index <7> L1 cache index <8> Block offset <6>

                                                                                                                 To CPU

          TLB tag <43>          TLB data <26>                              L1 cache tag <26>         L1 data <512>

                         L1 tag compare address <26>
                                                                                                                 To CPU
        =?                                                                    =?

                                                 Physical address <40>

                           L2 tag compare address <21> L2 cache index <14> Block offset <6>

                                                                                                                     To CPU

                                                                            L2 cache tag <21>         L2 data <512>

                                                                 =?
                                                                                                        To L1 cache or CPU

Figure B.17 The overall picture of a hypothetical memory hierarchy going from virtual address to L2 cache
access. The page size is 16 KiB. The TLB is two-way set associative with 256 entries. The L1 cache is a direct-mapped
16 KiB, and the L2 cache is a four-way set associative with a total of 4 MiB. Both use 64-byte blocks. The virtual address
is 64 bits and the physical address is 40 bits.

                                 Associativity can keep the index in the physical part of the address and yet still
                              support a large cache. Recall that the size of the index is controlled by this formula:
                                                                             Cache size
                                                         2Index ¼
                                                                    Block size ? Set associativity
                              For example, doubling associativity and doubling the cache size does not change
                              the size of the index. The IBM 3033 cache, as an extreme example, is 16-way set
                              associative, even though studies show there is little benefit to miss rates above
B-40    ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                                        Hit     Miss      Miss      Hardware
Technique                              time    penalty    rate     complexity     Comment
Larger block size                                 –         +           0         Trivial; Pentium 4L2 uses 128 bytes
Larger cache size                       –                   +           1         Widely used, especially for L2
                                                                                  caches
Higher associativity                    –                   +           1         Widely used
Multilevel caches                                 +                     2         Costly hardware; harder if L1 block
                                                                                  size 6¼ L2 block size; widely used
Read priority over writes                         +                     1         Widely used
Avoiding address translation during     +                               1         Widely used
cache indexing

Figure B.18 Summary of basic cache optimizations showing impact on cache performance and complexity for
the techniques in this appendix. Generally a technique helps only one factor. + means that the technique improves
the factor, – means it hurts that factor, and blank means it has no impact. The complexity measure is subjective, with
0 being the easiest and 3 being a challenge.

                             8-way set associativity. This high associativity allows a 64 KiB cache to be
                             addressed with a physical index, despite the handicap of 4 KiB pages in the
                             IBM architecture.

                             Summary of Basic Cache Optimization
                             The techniques in this section to improve miss rate, miss penalty, and hit time gen-
                             erally impact the other components of the average memory access equation as well
                             as the complexity of the memory hierarchy. Figure B.18 summarizes these tech-
                             niques and estimates the impact on complexity, with + meaning that the technique
                             improves the factor, – meaning it hurts that factor, and blank meaning it has no
                             impact. No optimization in this figure helps more than one category.

                    B.4      Virtual Memory
                             … a system has been devised to make the core drum combination appear to
                             the programmer as a single level store, the requisite transfers taking place
                             automatically.
                                                                                        Kilburn et al. (1962)

                             At any instant in time computers are running multiple processes, each with its own
                             address space. (Processes are described in the next section.) It would be too expen-
                             sive to dedicate a full address space worth of memory for each process, especially
                             because many processes use only a small part of their address space. Hence, there
                             must be a means of sharing a smaller amount of physical memory among many
                             processes.
                                                       B.4     Virtual Memory       ■   B-41

     One way to do this, virtual memory, divides physical memory into blocks and
allocates them to different processes. Inherent in such an approach must be a pro-
tection scheme that restricts a process to the blocks belonging only to that process.
Most forms of virtual memory also reduce the time to start a program, because not
all code and data need be in physical memory before a program can begin.
     Although protection provided by virtual memory is essential for current com-
puters, sharing is not the reason that virtual memory was invented. If a program
became too large for physical memory, it was the programmer’s job to make it
fit. Programmers divided programs into pieces, then identified the pieces that were
mutually exclusive, and loaded or unloaded these overlays under user program
control during execution. The programmer ensured that the program never tried
to access more physical main memory than was in the computer, and that the
proper overlay was loaded at the proper time. As you can well imagine, this respon-
sibility eroded programmer productivity.
     Virtual memory was invented to relieve programmers of this burden; it auto-
matically manages the two levels of the memory hierarchy represented by main
memory and secondary storage. Figure B.19 shows the mapping of virtual memory
to physical memory for a program with four pages.
     In addition to sharing protected memory space and automatically managing the
memory hierarchy, virtual memory also simplifies loading the program for execu-
tion. Called relocation, this mechanism allows the same program to run in any
location in physical memory. The program in Figure B.19 can be placed anywhere

         Virtual                           Physical
        address                            address
            0           A                     0
          4K            B                    4K            C
          8K            C                    8K
         12K            D                  12K                         Physical
                                           16K             A           main memory
           Virtual memory
                                           20K
                                           24K             B
                                           28K

                                                                             Disk
                                                          D

Figure B.19 The logical program in its contiguous virtual address space is shown on
the left. It consists of four pages, A, B, C, and D. The actual location of three of the blocks
is in physical main memory and the other is located on the disk.
B-42   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        in physical memory or disk just by changing the mapping between them. (Prior to
                        the popularity of virtual memory, processors would include a relocation register
                        just for that purpose.) An alternative to a hardware solution would be software that
                        changed all addresses in a program each time it was run.
                            Several general memory hierarchy ideas from Chapter 1 about caches are anal-
                        ogous to virtual memory, although many of the terms are different. Page or seg-
                        ment is used for block, and page fault or address fault is used for miss. With virtual
                        memory, the processor produces virtual addresses that are translated by a combi-
                        nation of hardware and software to physical addresses, which access main mem-
                        ory. This process is called memory mapping or address translation. Today, the two
                        memory hierarchy levels controlled by virtual memory are DRAMs and magnetic
                        disks. Figure B.20 shows a typical range of memory hierarchy parameters for vir-
                        tual memory.
                            There are further differences between caches and virtual memory beyond those
                        quantitative ones mentioned in Figure B.20:

                        ■   Replacement on cache misses is primarily controlled by hardware, while vir-
                            tual memory replacement is primarily controlled by the operating system. The
                            longer miss penalty means it’s more important to make a good decision, so
                            the operating system can be involved and take time deciding what to replace.
                        ■   The size of the processor address determines the size of virtual memory, but the
                            cache size is independent of the processor address size.
                        ■   In addition to acting as the lower-level backing store for main memory in
                            the hierarchy, secondary storage is also used for the file system. In fact, the
                            file system occupies most of secondary storage. It is not usually in the
                            address space.

                        Parameter           First-level cache             Virtual memory
                        Block (page) size   16–128 bytes                  4096–65,536 bytes
                        Hit time            1–3 clock cycles              100–200 clock cycles
                        Miss penalty        8–200 clock cycles            1,000,000–10,000,000 clock cycles
                         (access time)       (6–160 clock cycles)           (800,000–8,000,000 clock cycles)
                         (transfer time)     (2–40 clock cycles)            (200,000–2,000,000 clock cycles)
                        Miss rate           0.1%–10%                      0.00001%–0.001%
                        Address mapping     25–45-bit physical address    32–64-bit virtual address to 25–45-bit
                                            to 14–20-bit cache address    physical address

                        Figure B.20 Typical ranges of parameters for caches and virtual memory. Virtual
                        memory parameters represent increases of 10–1,000,000 times over cache parame-
                        ters. Usually, first-level caches contain at most 1 MiB of data, whereas physical memory
                        contains 256 MiB to 1 TB.
                                                        B.4     Virtual Memory       ■   B-43

    Virtual memory also encompasses several related techniques. Virtual memory
systems can be categorized into two classes: those with fixed-size blocks, called
pages, and those with variable-size blocks, called segments. Pages are typically
fixed at 4096–8192 bytes, while segment size varies. The largest segment sup-
ported on any processor ranges from 216 bytes up to 232 bytes; the smallest segment
is 1 byte. Figure B.21 shows how the two approaches might divide code and data.
    The decision to use paged virtual memory versus segmented virtual memory
affects the processor. Paged addressing has a single fixed-size address divided
into page number and offset within a page, analogous to cache addressing. A single
address does not work for segmented addresses; the variable size of segments
requires 1 word for a segment number and 1 word for an offset within a segment,
for a total of 2 words. An unsegmented address space is simpler for the compiler.
    The pros and cons of these two approaches have been well documented in oper-
ating systems textbooks; Figure B.22 summarizes the arguments. Because of the

                                        Code                           Data

                    Paging

            Segmentation

Figure B.21 Example of how paging and segmentation divide a program.

                             Page                             Segment
Words per address            One                              Two (segment and offset)
Programmer visible?          Invisible to application         May be visible to application
                             programmer                       programmer
Replacing a block            Trivial (all blocks are the      Difficult (must find contiguous,
                             same size)                       variable-size, unused portion of
                                                              main memory)
Memory use                   Internal fragmentation           External fragmentation (unused
inefficiency                 (unused portion of page)         pieces of main memory)
Efficient disk traffic       Yes (adjust page size to         Not always (small segments may
                             balance access time and          transfer just a few bytes)
                             transfer time)

Figure B.22 Paging versus segmentation. Both can waste memory, depending on the
block size and how well the segments fit together in main memory. Programming lan-
guages with unrestricted pointers require both the segment and the address to be
passed. A hybrid approach, called paged segments, shoots for the best of both worlds:
segments are composed of pages, so replacing a block is easy, yet a segment may be
treated as a logical unit.
B-44   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        replacement problem (the third line of the figure), few computers today use pure
                        segmentation. Some computers use a hybrid approach, called paged segments, in
                        which a segment is an integral number of pages. This simplifies replacement
                        because memory need not be contiguous, and the full segments need not be in main
                        memory. A more recent hybrid is for a computer to offer multiple page sizes,
                        with the larger sizes being powers of 2 times the smallest page size. The IBM
                        405CR embedded processor, for example, allows 1 KiB, 4 KiB (22 ? 1 KiB),
                        16 KiB (24 ? 1 KiB), 64 KiB (26 ? 1 KiB), 256 KiB (28 ? 1 KiB), 1024 KiB
                        (210 ? 1 KiB), and 4096 KiB (212 ? 1 KiB) to act as a single page.

                        Four Memory Hierarchy Questions Revisited
                        We are now ready to answer the four memory hierarchy questions for virtual
                        memory.

                        Q1: Where Can a Block be Placed in Main Memory?
                        The miss penalty for virtual memory involves access to a rotating magnetic storage
                        device and is therefore quite high. Given the choice of lower miss rates or a simpler
                        placement algorithm, operating systems designers usually pick lower miss rates
                        because of the exorbitant miss penalty. Thus, operating systems allow blocks to
                        be placed anywhere in main memory. According to the terminology in
                        Figure B.2 on page B-8, this strategy would be labeled fully associative.

                        Q2: How Is a Block Found If It Is in Main Memory?
                        Both paging and segmentation rely on a data structure that is indexed by the page or
                        segment number. This data structure contains the physical address of the block. For
                        segmentation, the offset is added to the segment’s physical address to obtain the
                        final physical address. For paging, the offset is simply concatenated to this physical
                        page address (see Figure B.23).
                             This data structure, containing the physical page addresses, usually takes the
                        form of a page table. Indexed by the virtual page number, the size of the table
                        is the number of pages in the virtual address space. Given a 32-bit virtual address,
                        4 KiB pages, and 4 bytes per page table entry (PTE), the size of the page table
                        would be (232/212) ? 22 ¼ 222 or 4 MiB.
                             To reduce the size of this data structure, some computers apply a hashing func-
                        tion to the virtual address. The hash allows the data structure to be the length of the
                        number of physical pages in main memory. This number could be much smaller
                        than the number of virtual pages. Such a structure is called an inverted page table.
                        Using the previous example, a 512 MiB physical memory would only need 1 MiB
                        (8 ? 512 MiB/4 KiB) for an inverted page table; the extra 4 bytes per page table
                        entry are for the virtual address. The HP/Intel IA-64 covers both bases by offering
                                                   B.4    Virtual Memory      ■   B-45

                 Virtual address

      Virtual page number      Page offset

                                                                  Main
                                                                 memory

                       Page
                       table           Physical address

Figure B.23 The mapping of a virtual address to a physical address via a page table.

both traditional pages tables and inverted page tables, leaving the choice of mech-
anism to the operating system programmer.
    To reduce address translation time, computers use a cache dedicated to these
address translations, called a translation lookaside buffer, or simply translation
buffer, described in more detail shortly.

Q3: Which Block Should be Replaced on a Virtual Memory Miss?
As mentioned earlier, the overriding operating system guideline is minimizing
page faults. Consistent with this guideline, almost all operating systems try to
replace the least recently used (LRU) block because if the past predicts the future,
that is the one less likely to be needed.
    To help the operating system estimate LRU, many processors provide a use bit
or reference bit, which is logically set whenever a page is accessed. (To reduce
work, it is actually set only on a translation buffer miss, which is described shortly.)
The operating system periodically clears the use bits and later records them so it
can determine which pages were touched during a particular time period. By keep-
ing track in this way, the operating system can select a page that is among the least
recently referenced.

Q4: What Happens on a Write?
The level below main memory contains rotating magnetic disks that take millions
of clock cycles to access. Because of the great discrepancy in access time, no one
has yet built a virtual memory operating system that writes through main memory
to disk on every store by the processor. (This remark should not be interpreted as an
opportunity to become famous by being the first to build one!) Thus, the write strat-
egy is always write-back.
B-46   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                            Because the cost of an unnecessary access to the next-lower level is so high,
                        virtual memory systems usually include a dirty bit. It allows blocks to be written to
                        disk only if they have been altered since being read from the disk.

                        Techniques for Fast Address Translation
                        Page tables are usually so large that they are stored in main memory and are some-
                        times paged themselves. Paging means that every memory access logically takes at
                        least twice as long, with one memory access to obtain the physical address and a
                        second access to get the data. As mentioned in Chapter 2, we use locality to avoid
                        the extra memory access. By keeping address translations in a special cache, a
                        memory access rarely requires a second access to translate the data. This special
                        address translation cache is referred to as a translation look aside buffer (TLB),
                        also called a translation buffer (TB).
                            A TLB entry is like a cache entry where the tag holds portions of the virtual
                        address and the data portion holds a physical page frame number, protection field,
                        valid bit, and usually a use bit and dirty bit. To change the physical page frame
                        number or protection of an entry in the page table, the operating system must make
                        sure the old entry is not in the TLB; otherwise, the system won’t behave properly.
                        Note that this dirty bit means the corresponding page is dirty, not that the address
                        translation in the TLB is dirty nor that a particular block in the data cache is dirty.
                        The operating system resets these bits by changing the value in the page table and
                        then invalidates the corresponding TLB entry. When the entry is reloaded from the
                        page table, the TLB gets an accurate copy of the bits.
                            Figure B.24 shows the Opteron data TLB organization, with each step of the
                        translation labeled. This TLB uses fully associative placement; thus, the translation
                        begins (steps 1 and 2) by sending the virtual address to all tags. Of course, the tag
                        must be marked valid to allow a match. At the same time, the type of memory
                        access is checked for a violation (also in step 2) against protection information
                        in the TLB.
                            For reasons similar to those in the cache case, there is no need to include the 12
                        bits of the page offset in the TLB. The matching tag sends the corresponding phys-
                        ical address through effectively a 40:1 multiplexor (step 3). The page offset is then
                        combined with the physical page frame to form a full physical address (step 4). The
                        address size is 40 bits.
                            Address translation can easily be on the critical path determining the clock
                        cycle of the processor, so the Opteron uses virtually addressed, physically tagged
                        L1 caches.

                        Selecting a Page Size
                        The most obvious architectural parameter is the page size. Choosing the page is a
                        question of balancing forces that favor a larger page size versus those favoring a
                        smaller size. The following favor a larger size:
                                                    B.4      Virtual Memory           ■   B-47

    Virtual page   Page
      number       offset
        <36>       <12>

                       <1>       <1><1> <36>        <28>
            1      2    V R/W U/S D A Tag      Physical address

                                                                   (Low-order 12 bits
                                                                   of address)
                                                                   <12>
                                                                                       40-bit
                                       3          40:1 mux                        4    physical
                                                                      <28>
                                                                                       address
                                                        (High-order 28 bits of address)

Figure B.24 Operation of the Opteron data TLB during address translation. The four
steps of a TLB hit are shown as circled numbers. This TLB has 40 entries. Section B.5
describes the various protection and access fields of an Opteron page table entry.

■    The size of the page table is inversely proportional to the page size; memory (or
     other resources used for the memory map) can therefore be saved by making
     the pages bigger.
■    As mentioned in Section B.3, a larger page size can allow larger caches with
     fast cache hit times.
■    Transferring larger pages to or from secondary storage, possibly over a net-
     work, is more efficient than transferring smaller pages.
■    The number of TLB entries is restricted, so a larger page size means that more
     memory can be mapped efficiently, thereby reducing the number of TLB
     misses.

It is for this final reason that recent microprocessors have decided to support mul-
tiple page sizes; for some programs, TLB misses can be as significant on CPI as the
cache misses.
     The main motivation for a smaller page size is conserving storage. A small
page size will result in less wasted storage when a contiguous region of virtual
memory is not equal in size to a multiple of the page size. The term for this unused
memory in a page is internal fragmentation. Assuming that each process has three
primary segments (text, heap, and stack), the average wasted storage per process
will be 1.5 times the page size. This amount is negligible for computers with hun-
dreds of megabytes of memory and page sizes of 4–8 KiB. Of course, when the
page sizes become very large (more than 32 KiB), storage (both main and second-
ary) could be wasted, as well as I/O bandwidth. A final concern is process start-up
time; many processes are small, so a large page size would lengthen the time to
invoke a process.
B-48    ■     Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                               Summary of Virtual Memory and Caches
                               With virtual memory, TLBs, first-level caches, and second-level caches all map-
                               ping portions of the virtual and physical address space, it can get confusing what
                               bits go where. Figure B.25 gives a hypothetical example going from a 64-bit virtual
                               address to a 41-bit physical address with two levels of cache. This L1 cache is vir-
                               tually indexed, and physically tagged because both the cache size and the page size
                               are 8 KiB. The L2 cache is 4 MiB. The block size for both is 64 bytes.

                               Virtual address <64>

             Virtual page number <51>                    Page offset <13>

TLB tag compare address <43> TLB index <8> L1 cache index <7> Block offset <6>

                                                                                                                To CPU

            TLB tag <43>        TLB data <28>                            L1 cache tag <43>        L1 data <512>

                           L1 tag compare address <28>
                                                                                                                To CPU
        =?                                                                   =?

                                                 Physical address <41>

                            L2 tag compare address <19> L2 cache index <16> Block offset <6>

                                                                                                                  To CPU

                                                                            L2 cache tag <19>      L2 data <512>

                                                                 =?
                                                                                                      To L1 cache or CPU

Figure B.25 The overall picture of a hypothetical memory hierarchy going from virtual address to L2 cache
access. The page size is 8 KiB. The TLB is direct mapped with 256 entries. The L1 cache is a direct-mapped 8 KiB,
and the L2 cache is a direct-mapped 4 MiB. Both use 64-byte blocks. The virtual address is 64 bits and the physical address
is 41 bits. The primary difference between this simple figure and a real cache is replication of pieces of this figure.
                         B.5    Protection and Examples of Virtual Memory         ■   B-49

           First, the 64-bit virtual address is logically divided into a virtual page number
      and page offset. The former is sent to the TLB to be translated into a physical
      address, and the high bit of the latter is sent to the L1 cache to act as an index.
      If the TLB match is a hit, then the physical page number is sent to the L1 cache
      tag to check for a match. If it matches, it’s an L1 cache hit. The block offset then
      selects the word for the processor.
           If the L1 cache check results in a miss, the physical address is then used to try
      the L2 cache. The middle portion of the physical address is used as an index to the 4
      MiB L2 cache. The resulting L2 cache tag is compared with the upper part of the
      physical address to check for a match. If it matches, we have an L2 cache hit, and
      the data are sent to the processor, which uses the block offset to select the desired
      word. On an L2 miss, the physical address is then used to get the block from
      memory.
           Although this is a simple example, the major difference between this drawing
      and a real cache is replication. First, there is only one L1 cache. When there are
      two L1 caches, the top half of the diagram is duplicated. Note that this would
      lead to two TLBs, which is typical. Hence, one cache and TLB is for instructions,
      driven from the PC, and one cache and TLB is for data, driven from the effective
      address.
           The second simplification is that all the caches and TLBs are direct mapped. If
      any were n-way set associative, then we would replicate each set of tag memory,
      comparators, and data memory n times and connect data memories with an n:1
      multiplexor to select a hit. Of course, if the total cache size remained the same,
      the cache index would also shrink by log 2n bits according to the formula in
      Figure B.7 on page B-22.

B.5   Protection and Examples of Virtual Memory
      The invention of multiprogramming, where a computer would be shared by
      several programs running concurrently, led to new demands for protection and
      sharing among programs. These demands are closely tied to virtual memory in
      computers today, and so we cover the topic here along with two examples of virtual
      memory.
           Multiprogramming leads to the concept of a process. Metaphorically, a process
      is a program’s breathing air and living space—that is, a running program plus any
      state needed to continue running it. Time-sharing is a variation of multiprogram-
      ming that shares the processor and memory with several interactive users at the
      same time, giving the illusion that all users have their own computers. Thus, at
      any instant it must be possible to switch from one process to another. This
      exchange is called a process switch or context switch.
           A process must operate correctly whether it executes continuously from start to
      finish, or it is interrupted repeatedly and switched with other processes. The
      responsibility for maintaining correct process behavior is shared by designers of
      the computer and the operating system. The computer designer must ensure that
B-50   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        the processor portion of the process state can be saved and restored. The operating
                        system designer must guarantee that processes do not interfere with each others’
                        computations.
                            The safest way to protect the state of one process from another would be to
                        copy the current information to disk. However, a process switch would then take
                        seconds—far too long for a time-sharing environment.
                            This problem is solved by operating systems partitioning main memory so that
                        several different processes have their state in memory at the same time. This divi-
                        sion means that the operating system designer needs help from the computer
                        designer to provide protection so that one process cannot modify another. Besides
                        protection, the computers also provide for sharing of code and data between pro-
                        cesses, to allow communication between processes or to save memory by reducing
                        the number of copies of identical information.

                        Protecting Processes
                        Processes can be protected from one another by having their own page tables, each
                        pointing to distinct pages of memory. Obviously, user programs must be prevented
                        from modifying their page tables or protection would be circumvented.
                            Protection can be escalated, depending on the apprehension of the computer
                        designer or the purchaser. Rings added to the processor protection structure expand
                        memory access protection from two levels (user and kernel) to many more. Like a
                        military classification system of top secret, secret, confidential, and unclassified,
                        concentric rings of security levels allow the most trusted to access anything, the
                        second most trusted to access everything except the innermost level, and so on.
                        The “civilian” programs are the least trusted and, hence, have the most limited
                        range of accesses. There may also be restrictions on what pieces of memory can
                        contain code—execute protection—and even on the entrance point between the
                        levels. The Intel 80x86 protection structure, which uses rings, is described later
                        in this section. It is not clear whether rings are an improvement in practice over
                        the simple system of user and kernel modes.
                            As the designer’s apprehension escalates to trepidation, these simple rings may
                        not suffice. Restricting the freedom given a program in the inner sanctum requires a
                        new classification system. Instead of a military model, the analogy of this system is
                        to keys and locks: a program can’t unlock access to the data unless it has the key.
                        For these keys, or capabilities, to be useful, the hardware and operating system
                        must be able to explicitly pass them from one program to another without allowing
                        a program itself to forge them. Such checking requires a great deal of hardware
                        support if time for checking keys is to be kept low.
                            The 80x86 architecture has tried several of these alternatives over the years.
                        Because backward compatibility is one of the guidelines of this architecture, the
                        most recent versions of the architecture include all of its experiments in virtual
                        memory. We’ll go over two of the options here: first the older segmented address
                        space and then the newer flat, 64-bit address space.
                   B.5   Protection and Examples of Virtual Memory          ■    B-51

A Segmented Virtual Memory Example: Protection
in the Intel Pentium
The second system is the most dangerous system a man ever designs… . The
general tendency is to over-design the second system, using all the ideas and
frills that were cautiously sidetracked on the first one.
                                                             F. P. Brooks, Jr.
                                               The Mythical Man-Month (1975)

The original 8086 used segments for addressing, yet it provided nothing for virtual
memory or for protection. Segments had base registers but no bound registers and
no access checks, and before a segment register could be loaded the corresponding
segment had to be in physical memory. Intel’s dedication to virtual memory and
protection is evident in the successors to the 8086, with a few fields extended to
support larger addresses. This protection scheme is elaborate, with many details
carefully designed to try to avoid security loopholes. We’ll refer to it as IA-32.
The next few pages highlight a few of the Intel safeguards; if you find the reading
difficult, imagine the difficulty of implementing them!
    The first enhancement is to double the traditional two-level protection model:
the IA-32 has four levels of protection. The innermost level (0) corresponds to the
traditional kernel mode, and the outermost level (3) is the least privileged mode.
The IA-32 has separate stacks for each level to avoid security breaches between the
levels. There are also data structures analogous to traditional page tables that con-
tain the physical addresses for segments, as well as a list of checks to be made on
translated addresses.
    The Intel designers did not stop there. The IA-32 divides the address space,
allowing both the operating system and the user access to the full space. The
IA-32 user can call an operating system routine in this space and even pass param-
eters to it while retaining full protection. This safe call is not a trivial action,
because the stack for the operating system is different from the user’s stack. More-
over, the IA-32 allows the operating system to maintain the protection level of the
called routine for the parameters that are passed to it. This potential loophole in
protection is prevented by not allowing the user process to ask the operating system
to access something indirectly that it would not have been able to access itself.
(Such security loopholes are called Trojan horses.)
    The Intel designers were guided by the principle of trusting the operating
system as little as possible, while supporting sharing and protection. As an exam-
ple of the use of such protected sharing, suppose a payroll program writes checks
and also updates the year-to-date information on total salary and benefits pay-
ments. Thus, we want to give the program the ability to read the salary and
year-to-date information and modify the year-to-date information but not the sal-
ary. We will see the mechanism to support such features shortly. In the rest of
this subsection, we will look at the big picture of the IA-32 protection and exam-
ine its motivation.
B-52   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        Adding Bounds Checking and Memory Mapping
                        The first step in enhancing the Intel processor was getting the segmented addres-
                        sing to check bounds as well as supply a base. Rather than a base address, the seg-
                        ment registers in the IA-32 contain an index to a virtual memory data structure
                        called a descriptor table. Descriptor tables play the role of traditional page tables.
                        On the IA-32 the equivalent of a page table entry is a segment descriptor. It con-
                        tains fields found in PTEs:
                        ■   Present bit—Equivalent to the PTE valid bit, used to indicate this is a valid
                            translation
                        ■   Base field—Equivalent to a page frame address, containing the physical
                            address of the first byte of the segment
                        ■   Access bit—Like the reference bit or use bit in some architectures that is helpful
                            for replacement algorithms
                        ■   Attributes field—Specifies the valid operations and protection levels for oper-
                            ations that use this segment
                        There is also a limit field, not found in paged systems, which establishes the upper
                        bound of valid offsets for this segment. Figure B.26 shows examples of IA-32 seg-
                        ment descriptors.
                            IA-32 provides an optional paging system in addition to this segmented addres-
                        sing. The upper portion of the 32-bit address selects the segment descriptor, and the
                        middle portion is an index into the page table selected by the descriptor. The fol-
                        lowing section describes the protection system that does not rely on paging.

                        Adding Sharing and Protection
                        To provide for protected sharing, half of the address space is shared by all processes
                        and half is unique to each process, called global address space and local address
                        space, respectively. Each half is given a descriptor table with the appropriate name.
                        A descriptor pointing to a shared segment is placed in the global descriptor table,
                        while a descriptor for a private segment is placed in the local descriptor table.
                            A program loads an IA-32 segment register with an index to the table and a bit
                        saying which table it desires. The operation is checked according to the attributes in
                        the descriptor, the physical address being formed by adding the offset in the pro-
                        cessor to the base in the descriptor, provided the offset is less than the limit field.
                        Every segment descriptor has a separate 2-bit field to give the legal access level of
                        this segment. A violation occurs only if the program tries to use a segment with a
                        lower protection level in the segment descriptor.
                            We can now show how to invoke the payroll program mentioned herein to
                        update the year-to-date information without allowing it to update salaries. The pro-
                        gram could be given a descriptor to the information that has the writable field clear,
                        meaning it can read but not write the data. A trusted program can then be supplied
                        that will only write the year-to-date information. It is given a descriptor with the
                        B.5   Protection and Examples of Virtual Memory               ■   B-53

    8 bits     4 bits                 32 bits                          24 bits

  Attributes    GD                     Base                             Limit

       Code segment

             Present DPL 11              Conforming             Readable         Accessed

       Data segment

             Present DPL 10             Expand down             Writable         Accessed

    8 bits         8 bits               16 bits                       16 bits
  Attributes       Word           Destination selector           Destination offset
                   count

       Call gate

             Present DPL      0                             00100

Figure B.26 The IA-32 segment descriptors are distinguished by bits in the
attributes field. Base, limit, present, readable, and writable are all self-explanatory. D gives
the default addressing size of the instructions: 16 bits or 32 bits. G gives the granularity of
the segment limit: 0 means in bytes and 1 means in 4 KiB pages. G is set to 1 when paging
is turned on to set the size of the page tables. DPL means descriptor privilege level—this is
checked against the code privilege level to see if the access will be allowed. Conforming
says the code takes on the privilege level of the code being called rather than the priv-
ilege level of the caller; it is used for library routines. The expand-down field flips the check
to let the base field be the high-water mark and the limit field be the low-water mark. As
you might expect, this is used for stack segments that grow down. Word count controls
the number of words copied from the current stack to the new stack on a call gate. The
other two fields of the call gate descriptor, destination selector and destination offset,
select the descriptor of the destination of the call and the offset into it, respectively. There
are many more than these three segment descriptors in the IA-32 protection model.

writable field set (Figure B.26). The payroll program invokes the trusted code
using a code segment descriptor with the conforming field set. This setting means
the called program takes on the privilege level of the code being called rather than
the privilege level of the caller. Hence, the payroll program can read the salaries
and call a trusted program to update the year-to-date totals, yet the payroll program
cannot modify the salaries. If a Trojan horse exists in this system, to be effective it
must be located in the trusted code whose only job is to update the year-to-date
information. The argument for this style of protection is that limiting the scope
of the vulnerability enhances security.
B-54   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        Adding Safe Calls from User to OS Gates and Inheriting Protection
                        Level for Parameters
                        Allowing the user to jump into the operating system is a bold step. How, then, can
                        a hardware designer increase the chances of a safe system without trusting the
                        operating system or any other piece of code? The IA-32 approach is to restrict
                        where the user can enter a piece of code, to safely place parameters on the proper
                        stack, and to make sure the user parameters don’t get the protection level of the
                        called code.
                             To restrict entry into others’ code, the IA-32 provides a special segment
                        descriptor, or call gate, identified by a bit in the attributes field. Unlike other
                        descriptors, call gates are full physical addresses of an object in memory; the offset
                        supplied by the processor is ignored. As stated previously, their purpose is to pre-
                        vent the user from randomly jumping anywhere into a protected or more privileged
                        code segment. In our programming example, this means the only place the payroll
                        program can invoke the trusted code is at the proper boundary. This restriction is
                        needed to make conforming segments work as intended.
                             What happens if caller and callee are “mutually suspicious,” so that neither trusts
                        the other? The solution is found in the word count field in the bottom descriptor in
                        Figure B.26. When a call instruction invokes a call gate descriptor, the descriptor cop-
                        ies the number of words specified in the descriptor from the local stack onto the stack
                        corresponding to the level of this segment. This copying allows the user to pass
                        parameters by first pushing them onto the local stack. The hardware then safely trans-
                        fers them onto the correct stack. A return from a call gate will pop the parameters off
                        both stacks and copy any return values to the proper stack. Note that this model is
                        incompatible with the current practice of passing parameters in registers.
                             This scheme still leaves open the potential loophole of having the operating
                        system use the user’s address, passed as parameters, with the operating system’s
                        security level, instead of with the user’s level. The IA-32 solves this problem by
                        dedicating 2 bits in every processor segment register to the requested protection
                        level. When an operating system routine is invoked, it can execute an instruction
                        that sets this 2-bit field in all address parameters with the protection level of the
                        user that called the routine. Thus, when these address parameters are loaded into
                        the segment registers, they will set the requested protection level to the proper
                        value. The IA-32 hardware then uses the requested protection level to prevent
                        any foolishness: no segment can be accessed from the system routine using those
                        parameters if it has a more privileged protection level than requested.

                        A Paged Virtual Memory Example: The 64-Bit
                        Opteron Memory Management
                        AMD engineers found few uses of the elaborate protection model described in the
                        previous section. The popular model is a flat, 32-bit address space, introduced by
                        the 80386, which sets all the base values of the segment registers to zero. Hence,
                                                       B.5     Protection and Examples of Virtual Memory                       ■    B-55

                                  AMD dispensed with the multiple segments in the 64-bit mode. It assumes that the
                                  segment base is zero and ignores the limit field. The page sizes are 4 KiB, 2 MiB,
                                  and 4 MiB.
                                       The 64-bit virtual address of the AMD64 architecture is mapped onto 52-bit
                                  physical addresses, although implementations can implement fewer bits to sim-
                                  plify hardware. The Opteron, for example, uses 48-bit virtual addresses and 40-
                                  bit physical addresses. AMD64 requires that the upper 16 bits of the virtual address
                                  be just the sign extension of the lower 48 bits, which it calls canonical form.
                                       The size of page tables for the 64-bit address space is alarming. Hence, AMD64
                                  uses a multilevel hierarchical page table to map the address space to keep the size
                                  reasonable. The number of levels depends on the size of the virtual address space.
                                  Figure B.27 shows the four-level translation of the 48-bit virtual addresses of the
                                  Opteron.
                                       The offsets for each of these page tables come from four 9-bit fields. Address
                                  translation starts with adding the first offset to the page-map level 4 base register
                                  and then reading memory from this location to get the base of the next-level page
                                  table. The next address offset is in turn added to this newly fetched address, and

                         63            48 47          39 38           30 29            21 20            12 11              0
                          000 . . . 0 or
                                           Page-map L4     Page-dir-ptr   Page-directory       Page-table      Page offset
                          111 . . . 1

  Page-map L4
                              +
  base addr (CR3)

                    Page-map L4 table
                                                  Page-directory
                                                  pointer table
                      Page-mp entry         +                                 Page-directory
                                                                              table
                                                Page-dir-ptr entry    +
                                                                                                            Page table
                                                                            Page-dir entry         +

                                                                                                        Page-table entry

                                                                                                            Physical address

                                                                                           Physical page frame number        Page offset

                                                                                                            Main memory

Figure B.27 The mapping of an Opteron virtual address. The Opteron virtual memory implementation with four
page table levels supports an effective physical address size of 40 bits. Each page table has 512 entries, so each level
field is 9 bits wide. The AMD64 architecture document allows the virtual address size to grow from the current 48 bits
to 64 bits, and the physical address size to grow from the current 40 bits to 52 bits.
B-56   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        memory is accessed again to determine the base of the third page table. It happens
                        again in the same fashion. The last address field is added to this final base address,
                        and memory is read using this sum to (finally) get the physical address of the page
                        being referenced. This address is concatenated with the 12-bit page offset to get the
                        full physical address. Note that the page table in the Opteron architecture fits within
                        a single 4 KiB page.
                             The Opteron uses a 64-bit entry in each of these page tables. The first 12 bits are
                        reserved for future use, the next 52 bits contain the physical page frame number,
                        and the last 12 bits give the protection and use information. Although the fields
                        vary some between the page table levels, here are the basic ones:

                        ■   Presence—Says that page is present in memory.
                        ■   Read/write—Says whether page is read-only or read-write.
                        ■   User/supervisor—Says whether a user can access the page or if it is limited to
                            the upper three privilege levels.
                        ■   Dirty—Says if page has been modified.
                        ■   Accessed—Says if page has been read or written since the bit was last cleared.
                        ■   Page size—Says whether the last level is for 4 KiB pages or 4 MiB pages; if it’s
                            the latter, then the Opteron only uses three instead of four levels of pages.
                        ■   No execute—Not found in the 80386 protection scheme, this bit was added to
                            prevent code from executing in some pages.
                        ■   Page level cache disable—Says whether the page can be cached or not.
                        ■   Page level write through—Says whether the page allows write back or write
                            through for data caches.

                            Because the Opteron usually goes through four levels of tables on a TLB
                        miss, there are three potential places to check protection restrictions. The Opteron
                        obeys only the bottom-level PTE, checking the others only to be sure the valid bit
                        is set.
                            As the entry is 8 bytes long, each page table has 512 entries, and the Opteron
                        has 4 KiB pages, the page tables are exactly one page long. Each of the four level
                        fields are 9 bits long, and the page offset is 12 bits. This derivation leaves
                        64 ? (4 ? 9 + 12) or 16 bits to be sign extended to ensure canonical addresses.
                            Although we have explained translation of legal addresses, what prevents the
                        user from creating illegal address translations and getting into mischief? The page
                        tables themselves are protected from being written by user programs. Thus, the
                        user can try any virtual address, but by controlling the page table entries the oper-
                        ating system controls what physical memory is accessed. Sharing of memory
                        between processes is accomplished by having a page table entry in each address
                        space point to the same physical memory page.
                            The Opteron employs four TLBs to reduce address translation time, two for
                        instruction accesses and two for data accesses. Like multilevel caches, the Opteron
                                                        B.6   Fallacies and Pitfalls   ■   B-57

          Parameter                 Description
          Block size                1 PTE (8 bytes)
          L1 hit time               1 clock cycle
          L2 hit time               7 clock cycles
          L1 TLB size               Same for instruction and data TLBs: 40 PTEs per TLBs, with
                                    32 4 KiB pages and 8 for 2 MiB or 4 MiB pages
          L2 TLB size               Same for instruction and data TLBs: 512 PTEs of 4 KiB pages
          Block selection           LRU
          Write strategy            (Not applicable)
          L1 block placement        Fully associative
          L2 block placement        4-way set associative

          Figure B.28 Memory hierarchy parameters of the Opteron L1 and L2 instruction and
          data TLBs.

          reduces TLB misses by having two larger L2 TLBs: one for instructions and one
          for data. Figure B.28 describes the data TLB.

          Summary: Protection on the 32-Bit Intel Pentium Versus
          the 64-Bit AMD Opteron
          Memory management in the Opteron is typical of most desktop or server com-
          puters today, relying on page-level address translation and correct operation of
          the operating system to provide safety to multiple processes sharing the computer.
          Although presented as alternatives, Intel has followed AMD’s lead and embraced
          the AMD64 architecture. Hence, both AMD and Intel support the 64-bit extension
          of 80x86; yet, for compatibility reasons, both support the elaborate segmented pro-
          tection scheme.
              If the segmented protection model looks harder to build than the AMD64
          model, that’s because it is. This effort must be especially frustrating for the engi-
          neers, because few customers use the elaborate protection mechanism. In addition,
          the fact that the protection model is a mismatch to the simple paging protection of
          UNIX-like systems means it will be used only by someone writing an operating
          system especially for this computer, which hasn’t happened yet.

B.6       Fallacies and Pitfalls
          Even a review of memory hierarchy has fallacies and pitfalls!
Pitfall   Too small an address space.
          Just five years after DEC and Carnegie Mellon University collaborated to design
          the new PDP-11 computer family, it was apparent that their creation had a fatal
B-58   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                          flaw. An architecture announced by IBM six years before the PDP-11 was still
                          thriving, with minor modifications, 25 years later. And the DEC VAX, criticized
                          for including unnecessary functions, sold millions of units after the PDP-11 went
                          out of production. Why?
                              The fatal flaw of the PDP-11 was the size of its addresses (16 bits) as compared
                          with the address sizes of the IBM 360 (24–31 bits) and the VAX (32 bits). Address
                          size limits the program length, because the size of a program and the amount of
                          data needed by the program must be less than 2Address size. The reason the address
                          size is so hard to change is that it determines the minimum width of anything that
                          can contain an address: PC, register, memory word, and effective-address arith-
                          metic. If there is no plan to expand the address from the start, then the chances
                          of successfully changing address size are so slim that it usually means the end
                          of that computer family. Bell and Strecker (1976) put it like this:
                                There is only one mistake that can be made in computer design that is difficult
                                to recover from—not having enough address bits for memory addressing and
                                memory management. The PDP-11 followed the unbroken tradition of nearly
                                every known computer. [p. 2]

                          A partial list of successful computers that eventually starved to death for lack of
                          address bits includes the PDP-8, PDP-10, PDP-11, Intel 8080, Intel 8086, Intel
                          80186, Intel 80286, Motorola 6800, AMI 6502, Zilog Z80, CRAY-1, and CRAY
                          X-MP.
                               The venerable 80x86 line bears the distinction of having been extended twice,
                          first to 32 bits with the Intel 80386 in 1985 and recently to 64 bits with the AMD
                          Opteron.
                Pitfall   Ignoring the impact of the operating system on the performance of the memory
                          hierarchy.
                          Figure B.29 shows the memory stall time due to the operating system spent on
                          three large workloads. About 25% of the stall time is either spent in misses in
                          the operating system or results from misses in the application programs because
                          of interference with the operating system.
                Pitfall   Relying on the operating systems to change the page size over time.
                          The Alpha architects had an elaborate plan to grow the architecture over time by
                          growing its page size, even building it into the size of its virtual address. When it
                          came time to grow page sizes with later Alphas, the operating system designers
                          balked and the virtual memory system was revised to grow the address space while
                          maintaining the 8 KiB page.
                              Architects of other computers noticed very high TLB miss rates, and so added
                          multiple, larger page sizes to the TLB. The hope was that operating systems pro-
                          grammers would allocate an object to the largest page that made sense, thereby
                          preserving TLB entries. After a decade of trying, most operating systems use these
                          “superpages” only for handpicked functions: mapping the display memory or other
                          I/O devices, or using very large pages for the database code.
                                                            B.8   Historical Perspective and References     ■   B-59

                                                                           Time
                                     % Time due to
                 Misses             application misses              % Time due directly to OS misses
                                                                            Data          Data             % Time OS
                         %        Inherent OS conflicts           OS       misses       misses in Rest     misses and
               % in      in      application    with          instruction    for         block    of OS    application
Workload    applications OS        misses    applications       misses    migration    operations misses   conflicts
Pmake           47%       53%       14.1%        4.8%             10.9%      1.0%         6.2%     2.9%      25.8%
Multipgm        53%       47%       21.6%        3.4%              9.2%      4.2%         4.7%     3.4%      24.9%
Oracle          73%       27%       25.7%       10.2%             10.6%      2.6%         0.6%     2.8%      26.8%

Figure B.29 Misses and time spent in misses for applications and operating system. The operating system adds
about 25% to the execution time of the application. Each processor has a 64 KiB instruction cache and a two-level
data cache with 64 KiB in the first level and 256 KiB in the second level; all caches are direct mapped with 16-byte
blocks. Collected on Silicon Graphics POWER station 4D/340, a multiprocessor with four 33 MHz R3000 processors
running three application workloads under a UNIX System V—Pmake, a parallel compile of 56 files; Multipgm,
the parallel numeric program MP3D running concurrently with Pmake and a five-screen edit session; and Oracle,
running a restricted version of the TP-1 benchmark using the Oracle database. Data from Torrellas, J., Gupta, A., Hen-
nessy, J., 1992. Characterizing the caching and synchronization performance of a multiprocessor operating system. In:
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Oper-
ating Systems (ASPLOS), October 12–15, 1992, Boston (SIGPLAN Notices 27:9 (September)), pp. 162–174.

                  B.7         Concluding Remarks
                              The difficulty of building a memory system to keep pace with faster processors is
                              underscored by the fact that the raw material for main memory is the same as that
                              found in the cheapest computer. It is the principle of locality that helps us here—its
                              soundness is demonstrated at all levels of the memory hierarchy in current com-
                              puters, from disks to TLBs.
                                  However, the increasing relative latency to memory, taking hundreds of clock
                              cycles in 2016, means that programmers and compiler writers must be aware of the
                              parameters of the caches and TLBs if they want their programs to perform well.

                  B.8         Historical Perspective and References
                              In Section M.3 (available online) we examine the history of caches, virtual mem-
                              ory, and virtual machines. (The historical section covers both this appendix and
                              Chapter 3.) IBM plays a prominent role in the history of all three. References
                              for further reading are included.
                                  Additional reference: Gupta, S. Xiang, P., Yang, Y., Zhou, H., Locality prin-
                              ciple revisited: a probability-based quantitative approach. J. Parallel Distrib. Com-
                              put. 73 (7), 1011–1027.
B-60   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        Exercises by Amr Zaky
                  B.1   [10/10/10/15] <B.1 > You are trying to appreciate how important the principle of
                        locality is in justifying the use of a cache memory, so you experiment with a com-
                        puter having an L1 data cache and a main memory (you exclusively focus on data
                        accesses). The latencies (in CPU cycles) of the different kinds of accesses are as
                        follows: cache hit, 1 cycle; cache miss, 110 cycles; main memory access with cache
                        disabled, 105 cycles.
                        a. [10] < B.1 > When you run a program with an overall miss rate of 3%, what
                           will the average memory access time (in CPU cycles) be?
                        b. [10] < B.1 > Next, you run a program specifically designed to produce
                           completely random data addresses with no locality. Toward that end, you use an
                           array of size 1 GB (all of which fits in the main memory). Accesses to random
                           elements of this array are continuously made (using a uniform random number
                           generator to generate the elements indices). If your data cache size is 64 KB,
                           what will the average memory access time be?
                        c. [10] <B.1 > If you compare the result obtained in part (b) with the main
                           memory access time when the cache is disabled, what can you conclude about
                           the role of the principle of locality in justifying the use of cache memory?
                        d. [15] < B.1 > You observed that a cache hit produces a gain of 104 cycles
                           (1 cycle vs. 105), but it produces a loss of 5 cycles in the case of a
                           miss (110 cycles vs. 105). In the general case, we can express these two
                           quantities as G (gain) and L (loss). Using these two quantities (G and L),
                           identify the highest miss rate after which the cache use would be disadvanta-
                           geous.
                  B.2   [15/15] <B.1 > For the purpose of this exercise, we assume that we have a 512-
                        byte cache with 64-byte blocks. We will also assume that the main memory is 2 KB
                        large. We can regard the memory as an array of 64-byte blocks: M0, M1, …, M31.
                        Figure B.30 sketches the memory blocks that can reside in different cache blocks if
                        the cache was direct-mapped.
                        a. [15] <B.1 > Show the contents of the table if the cache is organized as a fully-
                           associative cache.
                        b. [15] < B.1 > Repeat part (a) with the cache organized as a four-way set
                           associative cache.
                  B.3   [10/10/10/10/15/10/15/20] < B.1 > Cache organization is often influenced by the
                        desire to reduce the cache's power consumption. For that purpose we assume that
                        the cache is physically distributed into a data array (holding the data), a tag array
                        (holding the tags), and replacement array (holding information needed by replace-
                        ment policy). Furthermore, every one of these arrays is physically distributed into
                        multiple subarrays (one per way) that can be individually accessed; for example, a
                        four-way set associative least recently used (LRU) cache would have four data sub-
                        arrays, four tag subarrays, and four replacement subarrays. We assume that the
                                                 Exercises by Amr Zaky        ■   B-61

Cache block               Set              Way                  Possible memory blocks
     0                     0                0                     M0, M8, M16, M24
     1                     1                0                     M1, M9, M17, M25
     2                     2                0                    M2, M10, M18, M26
     3                     3                0                            ….
     4                     4                0                            ….
     5                     5                0                            ….
     6                     6                0                            ….
     7                     7                0                    M7, M15, M23, M31

Figure B.30 Memory blocks distributed to direct-mapped cache.

                                                Power consumption weight
          Array                                 (per way accessed)
          Data array                            20 units
          Tag                                   Array 5 units
          Miscellaneous array                   1 unit
          Memory access                         200 units

          Figure B.31 Power consumption costs of different operations.

replacement subarrays are accessed once per access when the LRU replacement
policy is used, and once per miss if the first-in, first-out (FIFO) replacement policy
is used. It is not needed when a random replacement policy is used. For a specific
cache, it was determined that the accesses to the different arrays have the following
power consumption weights (Figure B.31):
a. [10] < B.1 > A cache read hit. All arrays are read simultaneously.
b. [10] < B.1 > Repeat part (a) for a cache read miss.
c. [10] < B.1 > Repeat part (a) assuming that the cache access is split across two
   cycles. In the first cycle, all the tag subarrays are accessed. In the second cycle,
   only the subarray whose tag matched will be accessed.
d. [10] < B.1 > Repeat part (c) for a cache read miss (no data array accesses in the
   second cycle).
e. [15] < B.1 > Repeat part (c) assuming that logic is added to predict the cache
   way to be accessed. Only the tag subarray for the predicted way is accessed in
   cycle one. A way hit (address match in predicted way) implies a cache hit. A
   way miss dictates examining all the tag subarrays in the second cycle. In case of
   a way hit, only one data subarray (the one whose tag matched) is accessed in
   cycle two. Assume the way predictor hits.
B-62   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        f. [10] < B.1 > Repeat part (e) assuming that the way predictor misses (the way it
                           choses is wrong). When it fails, the way predictor adds an extra cycle in which it
                           accesses all the tag subarrays. Assume the way predictor miss is followed by a
                           cache read hit.
                        g. [15] < B.1 > Repeat part (f) assuming a cache read miss.
                        h. [20] < B.1 > Use parts (e), (f), and (g) for the general case where the workload
                           has the following statistics: way predictor miss rate = 5% and cache miss
                           rate = 3%. (Consider different replacement policies.)
                        Estimate the memory system (cache + memory) power usage (in power units) for
                        the following configurations. We assume the cache is four-way set associative.
                        Provide answers for the LRU, FIFO, and random replacement policies.
                  B.4   [10/10/15/15/15/20] <B.1 > We compare the write bandwidth requirements of
                        write-through versus write-back caches using a concrete example. Let us assume
                        that we have a 64 KB cache with a line size of 32 bytes. The cache will allocate a
                        line on a write miss. If configured as a write-back cache, it will write back all of the
                        dirty line if it needs to be replaced. We will also assume that the cache is connected
                        to the lower level in the hierarchy through a 64-bit-wide (8-byte-wide) bus. The
                        number of? CPU?cycles for a B-bytes write access on this bus is
                            10 + 5 B8 ? 1 , where the square brackets represent the “ceiling” function. For
                        example, ?an 8-byte? write would take
                            10 + 5 88 ? 1 ¼ 10 cycles, whereas using the same formula a 12-byte write
                        would take 15 cycles.
                            Answer the following questions while referring to the C code snippet below:

                        ...  #define PORTION 1
                            ...
                            base = 8*i;
                            for (unsigned int j = base; j < base + PORTION; j++)
                        //assume j is stored in a register
                                      {
                                                   data[j] = j;
                                      }

                        a. [10] <B.1 > For a write-through cache, how many CPU cycles are spent on
                           write transfers to the memory for all the combined iterations of the j loop?
                        b. [10] < B.1 > If the cache is configured as a write-back cache, how many CPU
                           cycles are spent on writing back a cache line?
                        c. [15] < B.1 > Change PORTION to 8 and repeat part (a).
                        d. [15] < B.1 > What is the minimum number of array updates to the same cache
                           line (before replacing it) that would render the write-back cache superior?
                        e. [15] < B.1 > Think of a scenario where all the words of the cache line will be
                           written (not necessarily using the above code) and a write-through cache will
                           require fewer total CPU cycles than the write-back cache.
                                                      Exercises by Amr Zaky       ■   B-63

B.5   [10/10/10/10/] < B.2 > You are building a system around a processor with in-order
      execution that runs at 1.1 GHz and has a CPI of 1.35 excluding memory accesses.
      The only instructions that read or write data from memory are loads (20% of all
      instructions) and stores (10% of all instructions). The memory system for this com-
      puter is composed of a split L1 cache that imposes no penalty on hits. Both the I-
      cache and D-cache are direct-mapped and hold 32 KB each. The I-cache has a 2%
      miss rate and 32-byte blocks, and the D-cache is write-through with a 5% miss rate
      and 16-byte blocks. There is a write buffer on the D-cache that eliminates stalls for
      95% of all writes. The 512 KB write-back, unified L2 cache has 64-byte blocks and
      an access time of 15 ns. It is connected to the L1 cache by a 128-bit data bus that
      runs at 266 MHz and can transfer one 128-bit word per bus cycle. Of all memory
      references sent to the L2 cache in this system, 80% are satisfied without going to
      main memory. Also, 50% of all blocks replaced are dirty. The 128-bit-wide main
      memory has an access latency of 60 ns, after which any number of bus words may
      be transferred at the rate of one per cycle on the 128-bit-wide 133 MHz main mem-
      ory bus.
      a. [10] <B.2 > What is the average memory access time for instruction accesses?
      b. [10] < B.2 > What is the average memory access time for data reads?
      c. [10] < B.2 > What is the average memory access time for data writes?
      d. [10] < B.2 > What is the overall CPI, including memory accesses?
B.6   [10/15/15] < B.2 > Converting miss rate (misses per reference) into misses per
      instruction relies upon two factors: references per instruction fetched and the frac-
      tion of fetched instructions that actually commits.
      a. [10] < B.2 > The formula for misses per instruction on page B-5 is written first
         in terms of three factors: miss rate, memory accesses, and instruction count.
         Each of these factors represents actual events. What is different about writing
         misses per instruction as miss rate times the factor memory accesses per
         instruction?
      b. [15] < B.2 > Speculative processors will fetch instructions that do not commit.
         The formula for misses per instruction on page B-5 refers to misses per instruc-
         tion on the execution path; that is, only the instructions that must actually be
         executed to carry out the program. Convert the formula for misses per instruc-
         tion on page B-5 into one that uses only miss rate, references per instruction
         fetched, and fraction of fetched instructions that commit. Why rely upon these
         factors rather than those in the formula on page B-5?
      c. [15] < B.2 > The conversion in part (b) could yield an incorrect value to the
         extent that the value of the factor references per instruction fetched is not equal
         to the number of references for any particular instruction. Rewrite the formula
         of part (b) to correct this deficiency.
B.7   [20] < B.1, B.3 > In systems with a write-through L1 cache backed by a write-back
      L2 cache instead of main memory, a merging write buffer can be simplified.
      Explain how this can be done. Are there situations where having a full write buffer
      (instead of the simple version you have just proposed) could be helpful?
B-64   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                  B.8   [5/5/5] < B.3 > We want to observe the following calculation
                                                     di ¼ ai + bi ∗ ci ,   i : ð0 : 511Þ
                        Arrays a, b, c, and d memory layout is displayed below (each has 512 4-byte-wide
                        integer elements).
                            The above calculation employs a for loop that runs through 512 iterations.
                            Assume a 32 Kbyte 4-way set associative cache with a single cycle access time.
                        The miss penalty is 100 CPU cycles/access, and so is the cost of a write-back. The
                        cache is a write-back on hits write-allocate on misses cache (Figure B.32).
                        a. [5] < B3 > How many cycles will an iteration take if all three loads and single
                           store miss in the data cache?
                        b. [5] < B3 > If the cache line size is 16 bytes, what is the average number of
                           cycles an average iteration will take? (Hint: Spatial locality!)
                        c. [5] < B3 > If the cache line size is 64 bytes, what is the average number of
                           cycles an average iteration will take?
                        d. If the cache is direct-mapped and its size is reduced to 2048 bytes, what is the
                           average number of cycles an average iteration will take?
                  B.9   [20] < B.3 > Increasing a cache's associativity (with all other parameters kept con-
                        stant) statistically reduces the miss rate. However, there can be pathological cases
                        where increasing a cache's associativity would increase the miss rate for a partic-
                        ular workload.
                           Consider the case of direct-mapped compared to a two-way set associative
                        cache of equal size. Assume that the set associative cache uses the LRU replace-
                        ment policy. To simplify, assume that the block size is one word. Now, construct a
                        trace of word accesses that would produce more misses in the two-way associative
                        cache.
                            (Hint: Focus on constructing a trace of accesses that are exclusively directed to
                        a single set of the two-way set associative cache, such that the same trace would
                        exclusively access two blocks in the direct-mapped cache.)
                 B.10   [10/10/15] < B.3 > Consider a two-level memory hierarchy made of L1 and L2
                        data caches. Assume that both caches use write-back policy on write hit and both
                        have the same block size. List the actions taken in response to the following events:
                        a. [10] < B.3 > An L1 cache miss when the caches are organized in an inclusive
                           hierarchy.

                                         Mem. address in bytes                             Contents
                                         0–2047                                            Array a
                                         2048–4095                                         Array b
                                         4096–6143                                         Array c
                                         6144–8191                                         Array d

                                         Figure B.32 Arrays layout in memory.
                                                      Exercises by Amr Zaky      ■   B-65

       b. [10] < B.3 > An L1 cache miss when the caches are organized in an exclusive
          hierarchy.
       c. [15] < B.3 > In both parts (a) and (b), consider the possibility that the evicted
          line might be clean or dirty.
B.11   [15/20] < B.2, B.3 > excluding some instructions from entering the cache can
       reduce conflict misses.
       a. [15] < B.3 > Sketch a program hierarchy where parts of the program would be
          better excluded from entering the instruction cache. (Hint: Consider a program
          with code blocks that are placed in deeper loop nests than other blocks.)
       b. [20] < B.2, B.3 > Suggest software or hardware techniques to enforce exclu-
          sion of certain blocks from the instruction cache.
B.12   [5/15] < B.3 > Whereas larger caches have lower miss rates, they also tend to have
       longer hit times.
          Assume a direct-mapped 8 KB cache has 0.22 ns hit time and miss rate m1; also
       assume a 4-way associative 64 KB cache has 0.52 ns hit time and a miss rate m2.
       a. [5] < B.3 > If the miss penalty is 100 ns, when would it be advantageous to use
          the smaller cache to reduce the overall memory access time?
       b. [15] < B.3 > Repeat part (a) for miss penalties of 10 and 1000 cycles. Conclude
          when it might be advantageous to use a smaller cache.
B.13   [15] <B.4 > A program is running on a computer with a four-entry fully associa-
       tive (micro) translation lookaside buffer (TLB) (Figure B.33):
           The following is a trace of virtual page numbers accessed by a program. For
       each access indicate whether it produces a TLB hit/miss and, if it accesses the page
       table, whether it produces a page hit or fault. Put an X under the page table column
       if it is not accessed (Figures B.34 and B.35).
B.14   [15/15/15/15/] < B.4 > Some memory systems handle TLB misses in software (as
       an exception), while others use hardware for TLB misses.
       a. [15] < B.4 > What are the trade-offs between these two methods for handling
          TLB misses?
       b. [15] < B.4 > Will TLB miss handling in software always be slower than TLB
          miss handling in hardware? Explain.

                     VP#                   PP#                   Entry valid
                       5                    30                        1
                       7                     1                        0
                      10                    10                        1
                      15                    25                        1

                     Figure B.33 TLB contents (problem B.12).
B-66   ■   Appendix B Review of Memory Hierarchy

                        Virtual page index                     Physical page #                      Present
                                 0                                      3                               Y
                                 1                                      7                               N
                                 2                                      6                               N
                                 3                                      5                               Y
                                 4                                     14                               Y
                                 5                                     30                               Y
                                 6                                     26                               Y
                                 7                                     11                               Y
                                 8                                     13                               N
                                 9                                     18                               N
                               10                                      10                               Y
                               11                                      56                               Y
                               12                                     110                               Y
                               13                                      33                               Y
                               14                                      12                               N
                               15                                      25                               Y

                        Figure B.34 Page table contents.

                        Virtual page accessed            TLB (hit or miss)          Page table (hit or fault)
                                     1
                                     5
                                     9
                                 14
                                 10
                                     6
                                 15
                                 12
                                     7
                                     2

                        Figure B.35 Page access trace.

                        c. [15] < B.4 > Are there page table structures that would be difficult to handle in
                           hardware but possible in software? Are there any such structures that would be
                           difficult for software to handle but easy for hardware to manage?
                        d. [15] < B.4 > Why are TLB miss rates for floating-point programs generally
                           higher than those for integer programs?
                                                         Exercises by Amr Zaky        ■   B-67

B.15   [20/20] < B.5 > It is possible to provide more flexible protection than that in the
       Intel Pentium architecture by using a protection scheme similar to that used in the
       Hewlett-Packard Precision Architecture (HP/PA). In such a scheme, each page
       table entry contains a “protection ID” (key) along with access rights for the page.
       On each reference, the CPU compares the protection ID in the page table entry with
       those stored in each of four protection ID registers (access to these registers
       requires that the CPU be in supervisor mode). If there is no match for the protection
       ID in the page table entry or if the access is not a permitted access (writing to a read-
       only page, for example), an exception is generated.
       a. [20] < B.5 > Explain how this model could be used to facilitate the construction
          of operating systems from relatively small pieces of code that cannot overwrite
          each other (microkernels). What advantages might such an operating system
          have over a monolithic operating system in which any code in the OS can write
          to any memory location?
       b. [20] < B.5 > A simple design change to this system would allow two protection
          IDs for each page table entry, one for read access and the other for either write or
          execute access (the field is unused if neither the writable nor executable bit is
          set). What advantages might there be from having different protection IDs for
          read and write capabilities? (Hint: Could this make it easier to share data and
          code between processes?)
C.1    Introduction                                                  C-2
C.2    The Major Hurdle of Pipelining—Pipeline Hazards              C-10
C.3    How Is Pipelining Implemented?                               C-26
C.4    What Makes Pipelining Hard to Implement?                     C-37
C.5    Extending the RISC V Integer Pipeline to Handle Multicycle
             Operations                                             C-45
C.6    Putting It All Together: The MIPS R4000 Pipeline             C-55
C.7    Cross-Cutting Issues                                         C-65
C.8    Fallacies and Pitfalls                                       C-70
C.9    Concluding Remarks                                           C-71
C.10   Historical Perspective and References                        C-71
       Updated Exercises by Diana Franklin                          C-71
