F.1    Introduction                                                 F-2
F.2    Interconnecting Two Devices                                  F-6
F.3    Connecting More Than Two Devices                            F-20
F.4    Network Topology                                            F-30
F.5    Network Routing, Arbitration, and Switching                 F-44
F.6    Switch Microarchitecture                                    F-56
F.7    Practical Issues for Commercial Interconnection Networks    F-66
F.8    Examples of Interconnection Networks                        F-73
F.9    Internetworking                                             F-85
F.10   Crosscutting Issues for Interconnection Networks            F-89
F.11   Fallacies and Pitfalls                                      F-92
F.12   Concluding Remarks                                         F-100
F.13   Historical Perspective and References                      F-101
       References                                                 F-109
       Exercises                                                  F-111
F
    Interconnection Networks

    Revised by Timothy M. Pinkston, University of Southern California;
    Jos?e Duato, Universitat Politècnica de València, and Simula

    “The Medium is the Message” because it is the medium that shapes
    and controls the search and form of human associations and actions.
                                                  Marshall McLuhan
                                          Understanding Media (1964)

    The marvels—of film, radio, and television—are marvels of one-
    way communication, which is not communication at all.
                                                     Milton Mayer
                                         On the Remote Possibility of
                                              Communication (1967)

    The interconnection network is the heart of parallel architecture.
                                 Chuan-Lin Wu and Tse-Yun Feng
                                Interconnection Networks for Parallel
                                    and Distributed Processing (1984)

    Indeed, as system complexity and integration continues to
    increase, many designers are finding it more efficient to route
    packets, not wires.
                                                             Bill Dally
                                            Principles and Practices of
                                      Interconnection Networks (2004)
F-2   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                F.1      Introduction
                         Previous chapters and appendices cover the components of a single computer but
                         give little consideration to the interconnection of those components and how mul-
                         tiple computer systems are interconnected. These aspects of computer architecture
                         have gained significant importance in recent years. In this appendix we see how to
                         connect individual devices together into a community of communicating devices,
                         where the term device is generically used to signify anything from a component or
                         set of components within a computer to a single computer to a system of com-
                         puters. Figure F.1 shows the various elements comprising this community: end
                         nodes consisting of devices and their associated hardware and software interfaces,
                         links from end nodes to the interconnection network, and the interconnection net-
                         work. Interconnection networks are also called networks, communication subnets,
                         or communication subsystems. The interconnection of multiple networks is called
                         internetworking. This relies on communication standards to convert information
                         from one kind of network to another, such as with the Internet.
                             There are several reasons why computer architects should devote attention to
                         interconnection networks. In addition to providing external connectivity, networks
                         are commonly used to interconnect the components within a single computer at
                         many levels, including the processor microarchitecture. Networks have long been
                         used in mainframes, but today such designs can be found in personal computers as
                         well, given the high demand on communication bandwidth needed to enable
                         increased computing power and storage capacity. Switched networks are replacing
                         buses as the normal means of communication between computers, between I/O
                         devices, between boards, between chips, and even between modules inside chips.
                         Computer architects must understand interconnect problems and solutions in order
                         to more effectively design and evaluate computer systems.
                             Interconnection networks cover a wide range of application domains, very
                         much like memory hierarchy covers a wide range of speeds and sizes. Networks
                         implemented within processor chips and systems tend to share characteristics
                         much in common with processors and memory, relying more on high-speed hard-
                         ware solutions and less on a flexible software stack. Networks implemented across
                         systems tend to share much in common with storage and I/O, relying more on the
                         operating system and software protocols than high-speed hardware—though we
                         are seeing a convergence these days. Across the domains, performance includes
                         latency and effective bandwidth, and queuing theory is a valuable analytical tool
                         in evaluating performance, along with simulation techniques.
                             This topic is vast—portions of Figure F.1 are the subject of entire books and
                         college courses. The goal of this appendix is to provide for the computer architect
                         an overview of network problems and solutions. This appendix gives introductory
                         explanations of key concepts and ideas, presents architectural implications of inter-
                         connection network technology and techniques, and provides useful references to
                         more detailed descriptions. It also gives a common framework for evaluating all
                         types of interconnection networks, using a single set of terms to describe the basic
                                                                F.1   Introduction    ■   F-3

            End node       End node              End node               End node

             Device          Device                Device                 Device

           SW interface   SW interface          SW interface           SW interface

           HW interface   HW interface          HW interface           HW interface

               Link           Link                  Link                   Link

                                      Interconnection network

Figure F.1 A conceptual illustration of an interconnected community of devices.

alternatives. As we will see, many types of networks have common preferred alter-
natives, but for others the best solutions are quite different. These differences
become very apparent when crossing between the networking domains.

Interconnection Network Domains
Interconnection networks are designed for use at different levels within and across
computer systems to meet the operational demands of various application areas—
high-performance computing, storage I/O, cluster/workgroup/enterprise systems,
internetworking, and so on. Depending on the number of devices to be connected
and their proximity, we can group interconnection networks into four major net-
working domains:

■   On-chip networks (OCNs)—Also referred to as network-on-chip (NoC), this
    type of network is used for interconnecting microarchitecture functional units,
    register files, caches, compute tiles, and processor and IP cores within chips or
    multichip modules. Current and near future OCNs support the connection of a
    few tens to a few hundred of such devices with a maximum interconnection
    distance on the order of centimeters. Most OCNs used in high-performance
    chips are custom designed to mitigate chip-crossing wire delay problems
    caused by increased technology scaling and transistor integration, though some
    proprietary designs are gaining wider use (e.g., IBM’s CoreConnect, ARM’s
    AMBA, and Sonic’s Smart Interconnect). Examples of current OCNs are those
    found in the Intel Teraflops processor chip [Hoskote07], connecting 80 simple
    cores; the Intel Single-Chip Cloud Computer (SCCC) [Howard10], connecting
    48 IA-32 architecture cores; and Tilera’s TILE-Gx line of processors [TILE-
    GX], connecting 100 processing cores in 4Q 2011 using TSMC’s 40 nanome-
    ter process and 200 cores planned for 2013 (code named “Stratton”) using
F-4   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                             TSMC’s 28 nanometer process. The networks peak at 256 GBps for both Intel
                             prototypes and up to 200 Tbps for the TILE-Gx100 processor. More detailed
                             information for OCNs is provided in Flich [2010].
                         ■   System/storage area networks (SANs)—This type of network is used for inter-
                             processor and processor-memory interconnections within multiprocessor and
                             multicomputer systems, and also for the connection of storage and I/O compo-
                             nents within server and data center environments. Typically, several hundreds
                             of such devices can be connected, although some supercomputer SANs support
                             the interconnection of many thousands of devices, like the IBM Blue Gene/L
                             supercomputer. The maximum interconnection distance covers a relatively
                             small area—on the order of a few tens of meters usually—but some SANs have
                             distances spanning a few hundred meters. For example, InfiniBand, a popular
                             SAN standard introduced in late 2000, supports system and storage I/O inter-
                             connects at up to 120 Gbps over a distance of 300 m.
                         ■   Local area networks (LANs)—This type of network is used for intercon-
                             necting autonomous computer systems distributed across a machine room
                             or throughout a building or campus environment. Interconnecting PCs in
                             a cluster is a prime example. Originally, LANs connected only up to a hun-
                             dred devices, but with bridging LANs can now connect up to a few thou-
                             sand devices. The maximum interconnect distance covers an area of a few
                             kilometers usually, but some have distance spans of a few tens of kilome-
                             ters. For instance, the most popular and enduring LAN, Ethernet, has a 10
                             Gbps standard version that supports maximum performance over a distance
                             of 40 km.
                         ■   Wide area networks (WANs)—Also called long-haul networks, WANs con-
                             nect computer systems distributed across the globe, which requires internet-
                             working support. WANs connect many millions of computers over distance
                             scales of many thousands of kilometers. Asynchronous Transfer Mode
                             (ATM) is an example of a WAN.

                              Figure F.2 roughly shows the relationship of these networking domains in
                         terms of the number of devices interconnected and their distance scales. Overlap
                         exists for some of these networks in one or both dimensions, which leads to
                         product competition. Some network solutions have become commercial stan-
                         dards while others remain proprietary. Although the preferred solutions may sig-
                         nificantly differ from one interconnection network domain to another depending
                         on the design requirements, the problems and concepts used to address network
                         problems remain remarkably similar across the domains. No matter the target
                         domain, networks should be designed so as not to be the bottleneck to system
                         performance and cost efficiency. Hence, the ultimate goal of computer architects
                         is to design interconnection networks of the lowest possible cost that are capable
                         of transferring the maximum amount of available information in the shortest
                         possible time.
                                                                             F.1       Introduction   ■   F-5

                             5 × 106

                                                                                       WAN

                             5 × 103

        Distance (meters)
                                                       LAN

                             5 × 100                   SAN

                                            OCN
                            5 × 10–3

                                       1   10         100         1000        10,000      >100,000
                                                Number of devices interconnected

Figure F.2 Relationship of the four interconnection network domains in terms of
number of devices connected and their distance scales: on-chip network (OCN), sys-
tem/storage area network (SAN), local area network (LAN), and wide area
network (WAN). Note that there are overlapping ranges where some of these networks
compete. Some supercomputer systems use proprietary custom networks to intercon-
nect several thousands of computers, while other systems, such as multicomputer clus-
ters, use standard commercial networks.

Approach and Organization of This Appendix
Interconnection networks can be well understood by taking a top-down approach
to unveiling the concepts and complexities involved in designing them. We do this
by viewing the network initially as an opaque “black box” that simply and ideally
performs certain necessary functions. Then we systematically open various layers
of the black box, allowing more complex concepts and nonideal network behavior
to be revealed. We begin this discussion by first considering the interconnection of
just two devices in Section F.2, where the black box network can be viewed as a
simple dedicated link network—that is, wires or collections of wires running bidi-
rectionally between the devices. We then consider the interconnection of more than
two devices in Section F.3, where the black box network can be viewed as a shared
link network or as a switched point-to-point network connecting the devices. We
continue to peel away various other layers of the black box by considering in more
detail the network topology (Section F.4); routing, arbitration, and switching
(Section F.5); and switch microarchitecture (Section F.6). Practical issues for com-
mercial networks are considered in Section F.7, followed by examples illustrating
the trade-offs for each type of network in Section F.8. Internetworking is briefly
discussed in Section F.9, and additional crosscutting issues for interconnection net-
works are presented in Section F.10. Section F.11 gives some common fallacies
F-6   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         and pitfalls related to interconnection networks, and Section F.12 presents some
                         concluding remarks. Finally, we provide a brief historical perspective and some
                         suggested reading in Section F.13.

                F.2      Interconnecting Two Devices
                         This section introduces the basic concepts required to understand how communi-
                         cation between just two networked devices takes place. This includes concepts that
                         deal with situations in which the receiver may not be ready to process incoming
                         data from the sender and situations in which transport errors may occur. To ease
                         understanding, the black box network at this point can be conceptualized as an
                         ideal network that behaves as simple dedicated links between the two devices.
                         Figure F.3 illustrates this, where unidirectional wires run from device A to device
                         B and vice versa, and each end node contains a buffer to hold the data. Regardless
                         of the network complexity, whether dedicated link or not, a connection exists from
                         each end node device to the network to inject and receive information to/from the
                         network. We first describe the basic functions that must be performed at the end
                         nodes to commence and complete communication, and then we discuss network
                         media and the basic functions that must be performed by the network to carry
                         out communication. Later, a simple performance model is given, along with sev-
                         eral examples to highlight implications of key network parameters.

                         Network Interface Functions: Composing and Processing
                         Messages
                         Suppose we want two networked devices to read a word from each other’s mem-
                         ory. The unit of information sent or received is called a message. To acquire the
                         desired data, the two devices must first compose and send a certain type of message
                         in the form of a request containing the address of the data within the other device.
                         The address (i.e., memory or operand location) allows the receiver to identify
                         where to find the information being requested. After processing the request, each
                         device then composes and sends another type of message, a reply, containing the
                         data. The address and data information is typically referred to as the message
                         payload.

                                         Machine A                                  Machine B

                         Figure F.3 A simple dedicated link network bidirectionally interconnecting two
                         devices.
                                              F.2   Interconnecting Two Devices    ■     F-7

    In addition to payload, every message contains some control bits needed by the
network to deliver the message and process it at the receiver. The most typical are
bits to distinguish between different types of messages (e.g., request, reply, request
acknowledge, reply acknowledge) and bits that allow the network to transport the
information properly to the destination. These additional control bits are encoded
in the header and/or trailer portions of the message, depending on their location
relative to the message payload. As an example, Figure F.4 shows the format of a
message for the simple dedicated link network shown in Figure F.3. This example
shows a single-word payload, but messages in some interconnection networks can
include several thousands of words.
    Before message transport over the network occurs, messages have to be com-
posed. Likewise, upon receipt from the network, they must be processed. These
and other functions described below are the role of the network interface (also
referred to as the channel adapter) residing at the end nodes. Together with some
direct memory access (DMA) engine and link drivers to transmit/receive messages
to/from the network, some dedicated memory or register(s) may be used to buffer
outgoing and incoming messages. Depending on the network domain and design
specifications for the network, the network interface hardware may consist of noth-
ing more than the communicating device itself (i.e., for OCNs and some SANs) or
a separate card that integrates several embedded processors and DMA engines with
thousands of megabytes of RAM (i.e., for many SANs and most LANs
and WANs).
    In addition to hardware, network interfaces can include software or firmware to
perform the needed operations. Even the simple example shown in Figure F.3 may
invoke messaging software to translate requests and replies into messages with the
appropriate headers. This way, user applications need not worry about composing
and processing messages as these tasks can be performed automatically at a lower
level. An application program usually cooperates with the operating or runtime

             Header

    Destination port
          Message ID
               Sequence number                                                 Trailer
                     Type                            Payload                 Checksum

                                                      Data

                       00 = Request
                       01 = Reply
                       10 = Request acknowledge
                       11 = Reply acknowledge

Figure F.4 An example packet format with header, payload, and checksum in the
trailer.
F-8   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         system to send and receive messages. As the network is likely to be shared by many
                         processes running on each device, the operating system cannot allow messages
                         intended for one process to be received by another. Thus, the messaging software
                         must include protection mechanisms that distinguish between processes. This dis-
                         tinction could be made by expanding the header with a port number that is known
                         by both the sender and intended receiver processes.
                              In addition to composing and processing messages, additional functions need
                         to be performed by the end nodes to establish communication among the commu-
                         nicating devices. Although hardware support can reduce the amount of work, some
                         can be done by software. For example, most networks specify a maximum amount
                         of information that can be transferred (i.e., maximum transfer unit) so that network
                         buffers can be dimensioned appropriately. Messages longer than the maximum
                         transfer unit are divided into smaller units, called packets (or datagrams), that
                         are transported over the network. Packets are reassembled into messages at the des-
                         tination end node before delivery to the application. Packets belonging to the same
                         message can be distinguished from others by including a message ID field in the
                         packet header. If packets arrive out of order at the destination, they are reordered
                         when reassembled into a message. Another field in the packet header containing a
                         sequence number is usually used for this purpose.
                              The sequence of steps the end node follows to commence and complete com-
                         munication over the network is called a communication protocol. It generally has
                         symmetric but reversed steps between sending and receiving information. Commu-
                         nication protocols are implemented by a combination of software and hardware to
                         accelerate execution. For instance, many network interface cards implement hard-
                         ware timers as well as hardware support to split messages into packets and reas-
                         semble them, compute the cyclic redundancy check (CRC) checksum, handle
                         virtual memory addresses, and so on.
                              Some network interfaces include extra hardware to offload protocol processing
                         from the host computer, such as TCP offload engines for LANs and WANs. But,
                         for interconnection networks such as SANs that have low latency requirements,
                         this may not be enough even when lighter-weight communication protocols are
                         used such as message passing interface (MPI). Communication performance
                         can be further improved by bypassing the operating system (OS). OS bypassing
                         can be implemented by directly allocating message buffers in the network interface
                         memory so that applications directly write into and read from those buffers. This
                         avoids extra memory-to-memory copies. The corresponding protocols are referred
                         to as zero-copy protocols or user-level communication protocols. Protection can
                         still be maintained by calling the OS to allocate those buffers at initialization
                         and preventing unauthorized memory accesses in hardware.
                              In general, some or all of the following are the steps needed to send a message
                         at end node devices over a network:

                         1. The application executes a system call, which copies data to be sent into an
                            operating system or network interface buffer, divides the message into packets
                            (if needed), and composes the header and trailer for packets.
                                      F.2   Interconnecting Two Devices       ■   F-9

2. The checksum is calculated and included in the header or trailer of packets.
3. The timer is started, and the network interface hardware sends the packets.

Message reception is in the reverse order:

3. The network interface hardware receives the packets and puts them into its
   buffer or the operating system buffer.
2. The checksum is calculated for each packet. If the checksum matches the
   sender’s checksum, the receiver sends an acknowledgment back to the packet
   sender. If not, it deletes the packet, assuming that the sender will resend the
   packet when the associated timer expires.
1. Once all packets pass the test, the system reassembles the message, copies the
   data to the user’s address space, and signals the corresponding application.

The sender must still react to packet acknowledgments:

■   When the sender gets an acknowledgment, it releases the copy of the corre-
    sponding packet from the buffer.
■   If the sender reaches the time-out instead of receiving an acknowledgment, it
    resends the packet and restarts the timer.

    Just as a protocol is implemented at network end nodes to support communi-
cation, protocols are also used across the network structure at the physical, data
link, and network layers responsible primarily for packet transport, flow control,
error handling, and other functions described next.

Basic Network Structure and Functions: Media and Form Factor,
Packet Transport, Flow Control, and Error Handling
Once a packet is ready for transmission at its source, it is injected into the network
using some dedicated hardware at the network interface. The hardware includes
some transceiver circuits to drive the physical network media—either electrical
or optical. The type of media and form factor depends largely on the interconnect
distances over which certain signaling rates (e.g., transmission speed) should be
sustainable. For centimeter or less distances on a chip or multichip module, typi-
cally the middle to upper copper metal layers can be used for interconnects at multi-
Gbps signaling rates per line. A dozen or more layers of copper traces or tracks
imprinted on circuit boards, midplanes, and backplanes can be used for Gbps
differential-pair signaling rates at distances of about a meter or so. Category 5E
unshielded twisted-pair copper wiring allows 0.25 Gbps transmission speed over
distances of 100 meters. Coaxial copper cables can deliver 10 Mbps over kilometer
distances. In these conductor lines, distance can usually be traded off for higher
transmission speed, up to a certain point. Optical media enable faster transmission
F-10   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         speeds at distances of kilometers. Multimode fiber supports 100 Mbps transmis-
                         sion rates over a few kilometers, and more expensive single-mode fiber supports
                         Gbps transmission speeds over distances of several kilometers. Wavelength divi-
                         sion multiplexing allows several times more bandwidth to be achieved in fiber (i.e.,
                         by a factor of the number of wavelengths used).
                              The hardware used to drive network links may also include some encoders to
                         encode the signal in a format other than binary that is suitable for the given trans-
                         port distance. Encoding techniques can use multiple voltage levels, redundancy,
                         data and control rotation (e.g., 4b5b encoding), and/or a guaranteed minimum
                         number of signal transitions per unit time to allow for clock recovery at the
                         receiver. The signal is decoded at the receiver end, and the packet is stored in
                         the corresponding buffer. All of these operations are performed at the network
                         physical layer, the details of which are beyond the scope of this appendix. Fortu-
                         nately, we do not need to worry about them. From the perspective of the data link
                         and higher layers, the physical layer can be viewed as a long linear pipeline without
                         staging in which signals propagate as waves through the network transmission
                         medium. All of the above functions are generally referred to as packet transport.
                              Besides packet transport, the network hardware and software are jointly
                         responsible at the data link and network protocol layers for ensuring reliable
                         delivery of packets. These responsibilities include: (1) preventing the sender
                         from sending packets at a faster rate than they can be processed by the receiver,
                         and (2) ensuring that the packet is neither garbled nor lost in transit. The first
                         responsibility is met by either discarding packets at the receiver when its buffer
                         is full and later notifying the sender to retransmit them, or by notifying the sender
                         to stop sending packets when the buffer becomes full and to resume later once it has
                         room for more packets. The latter strategy is generally known as flow control.
                              There are several interesting techniques commonly used to implement flow
                         control beyond simple handshaking between the sender and receiver. The more
                         popular techniques are Xon/Xoff (also referred to as Stop & Go) and credit-based
                         flow control. Xon/Xoff consists of the receiver notifying the sender either to stop or
                         to resume sending packets once high and low buffer occupancy levels are reached,
                         respectively, with some hysteresis to reduce the number of notifications. Notifica-
                         tions are sent as “stop” and “go” signals using additional control wires or encoded
                         in control packets. Credit-based flow control typically uses a credit counter at the
                         sender that initially contains a number of credits equal to the number of buffers at
                         the receiver. Every time a packet is transmitted, the sender decrements the credit
                         counter. When the receiver consumes a packet from its buffer, it returns a credit to
                         the sender in the form of a control packet that notifies the sender to increment its
                         counter upon receipt of the credit. These techniques essentially control the flow of
                         packets into the network by throttling packet injection at the sender when the
                         receiver reaches a low watermark or when the sender runs out of credits.
                              Xon/Xoff usually generates much less control traffic than credit-based flow
                         control because notifications are only sent when the high or low buffer occupancy
                         levels are crossed. On the other hand, credit-based flow control requires less than
                         half the buffer size required by Xon/Xoff. Buffers for Xon/Xoff must be large
                                              F.2   Interconnecting Two Devices           ■   F-11

          enough to prevent overflow before the “stop” control signal reaches the sender.
          Overflow cannot happen when using credit-based flow control because the sender
          will run out of credits, thus stopping transmission. For both schemes, full link
          bandwidth utilization is possible only if buffers are large enough for the distance
          over which communication takes place.
              Let’s compare the buffering requirements of the two flow control techniques in
          a simple example covering the various interconnection network domains.

Example   Suppose we have a dedicated-link network with a raw data bandwidth of 8 Gbps
          for each link in each direction interconnecting two devices. Packets of 100 bytes
          (including the header) are continuously transmitted from one device to the other to
          fully utilize network bandwidth. What is the minimum amount of credits and buffer
          space required by credit-based flow control assuming interconnect distances of
          1 cm, 1 m, 100 m, and 10 km if only link propagation delay is taken into account?
          How does the minimum buffer space compare against Xon/Xoff?

 Answer   At the start, the receiver buffer is initially empty and the sender contains a number
          of credits equal to buffer capacity. The sender will consume a credit every time a
          packet is transmitted. For the sender to continue transmitting packets at network
          speed, the first returned credit must reach the sender before the sender runs out
          of credits. After receiving the first credit, the sender will keep receiving credits
          at the same rate it transmits packets. As we are considering only propagation delay
          over the link and no other sources of delay or overhead, null processing time at the
          sender and receiver are assumed. The time required for the first credit to reach the
          sender since it started transmission of the first packet is equal to the round-trip
          propagation delay for the packet transmitted to the receiver and the return credit
          transmitted back to the sender. This time must be less than or equal to the packet
          transmission time multiplied by the initial credit count:
                                                                      Packet size
              Packet propagation delay + Credit propagation delay ?               ? Credit count
                                                                      Bandwidth
          The speed of light is about 300,000 km/sec. Assume we can achieve 66% of that in
          a conductor. Thus, the minimum number of credits for each distance is given by
                                                 
                                Distance               100 bytes
                                                   2?              ? Credit count
                         2=3 ? 300, 000 km= sec       8 Gbits= sec
          As each credit represents one packet-sized buffer entry, the minimum amount of
          credits (and, likewise, buffer space) needed by each device is one for the 1 cm and
          1 m distances, 10 for the 100 m distance, and 1000 packets for the 10 km distance.
          For Xon/Xoff, this minimum buffer size corresponds to the buffer fragment from
          the high occupancy level to the top of the buffer and from the low occupancy level
          to the bottom of the buffer. With the added hysteresis between both occupancy
          levels to reduce notifications, the minimum buffer space for Xon/Xoff turns out
          to be more than twice that for credit-based flow control.
F-12   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                              Networks that implement flow control do not need to drop packets and are
                         sometimes referred to as lossless networks; networks that drop packets are some-
                         times referred to as lossy networks. This single difference in the way packets are
                         handled by the network drastically constrains the kinds of solutions that can be
                         implemented to address other related network problems, including packet routing,
                         congestion, deadlock, and reliability, as we will see later in this appendix. This
                         difference also affects performance significantly as dropped packets need to be
                         retransmitted, thus consuming more link bandwidth and suffering extra delay.
                         These behavioral and performance differences ultimately restrict the interconnec-
                         tion network domains for which certain solutions are applicable. For instance, most
                         networks delivering packets over relatively short distances (e.g., OCNs and SANs)
                         tend to implement flow control; on the other hand, networks delivering packets
                         over relatively long distances (e.g., LANs and WANs) tend to be designed to drop
                         packets. For the shorter distances, the delay in propagating flow control informa-
                         tion back to the sender can be negligible, but not so for longer distance scales. The
                         kinds of applications that are usually run also influence the choice of lossless ver-
                         sus lossy networks. For instance, dropping packets sent by an Internet client like a
                         Web browser affects only the delay observed by the corresponding user. However,
                         dropping a packet sent by a process from a parallel application may lead to a sig-
                         nificant increase in the overall execution time of the application if that packet’s
                         delay is on the critical path.
                              The second responsibility of ensuring that packets are neither garbled nor lost
                         in transit can be met by implementing some mechanisms to detect and recover from
                         transport errors. Adding a checksum or some other error detection field to the
                         packet format, as shown in Figure F.4, allows the receiver to detect errors. This
                         redundant information is calculated when the packet is sent and checked upon
                         receipt. The receiver then sends an acknowledgment in the form of a control packet
                         if the packet passes the test. Note that this acknowledgment control packet may
                         simultaneously contain flow control information (e.g., a credit or stop signal), thus
                         reducing control packet overhead. As described earlier, the most common way to
                         recover from errors is to have a timer record the time each packet is sent and to
                         presume the packet is lost or erroneously transported if the timer expires before
                         an acknowledgment arrives. The packet is then resent.
                              The communication protocol across the network and network end nodes must
                         handle many more issues other than packet transport, flow control, and reliability.
                         For example, if two devices are from different manufacturers, they might order
                         bytes differently within a word (Big Endian versus Little Endian byte ordering).
                         The protocol must reverse the order of bytes in each word as part of the delivery
                         system. It must also guard against the possibility of duplicate packets if a delayed
                         packet were to become unstuck. Depending on the system requirements, the pro-
                         tocol may have to implement pipelining among operations to improve perfor-
                         mance. Finally, the protocol may need to handle network congestion to prevent
                         performance degradation when more than two devices are connected, as described
                         later in Section F.7.
                                          F.2     Interconnecting Two Devices   ■     F-13

Characterizing Performance: Latency and Effective Bandwidth
Now that we have covered the basic steps for sending and receiving messages
between two devices, we can discuss performance. We start by discussing the
latency when transporting a single packet. Then we discuss the effective bandwidth
(also known as throughput) that can be achieved when the transmission of multiple
packets is pipelined over the network at the packet level.
    Figure F.5 shows the basic components of latency for a single packet. Note that
some latency components will be broken down further in later sections as the inter-
nals of the “black box” network are revealed. The timing parameters in Figure F.5
apply to many interconnection network domains: inside a chip, between chips on a
board, between boards in a chassis, between chassis within a computer, between
computers in a cluster, between clusters, and so on. The values may change, but the
components of latency remain the same.
    The following terms are often used loosely, leading to confusion, so we define
them here more precisely:

■     Bandwidth—Strictly speaking, the bandwidth of a transmission medium refers
      to the range of frequencies for which the attenuation per unit length introduced
      by that medium is below a certain threshold. It must be distinguished from the
      transmission speed, which is the amount of information transmitted over a
      medium per unit time. For example, modems successfully increased transmis-
      sion speed in the late 1990s for a fixed bandwidth (i.e., the 3 KHz bandwidth
      provided by voice channels over telephone lines) by encoding more voltage
      levels and, hence, more bits per signal cycle. However, to be consistent with

                                            Transmission
                    Sender                       time
    Sender         overhead               (bytes/bandwidth)

                                                         Transmission
                                Time of                       time         Receiver
    Receiver                     flight                (bytes/bandwidth)   overhead

                                                 Transport latency

                                                   Total latency

                                                       Time

Figure F.5 Components of packet latency. Depending on whether it is an OCN, SAN,
LAN, or WAN, the relative amounts of sending and receiving overhead, time of flight,
and transmission time are usually quite different from those illustrated here.
F-14   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                             its more widely understood meaning, we use the term band-width to refer to the
                             maximum rate at which information can be transferred, where information
                             includes packet header, payload, and trailer. The units are traditionally bits
                             per second, although bytes per second is sometimes used. The term bandwidth
                             is also used to mean the measured speed of the medium (i.e., network links).
                             Aggregate bandwidth refers to the total data bandwidth supplied by the net-
                             work, and effective bandwidth or throughput is the fraction of aggregate band-
                             width delivered by the network to an application.
                         ■   Time of flight—This is the time for the first bit of the packet to arrive at the
                             receiver, including the propagation delay over the links and delays due to other
                             hardware in the network such as link repeaters and network switches. The unit
                             of measure for time of flight can be in milliseconds for WANs, microseconds
                             for LANs, nanoseconds for SANs, and picoseconds for OCNs.
                         ■   Transmission time—This is the time for the packet to pass through the network,
                             not including time of flight. One way to measure it is the difference in time
                             between when the first bit of the packet arrives at the receiver and when the
                             last bit of that packet arrives at the receiver. By definition, transmission time
                             is equal to the size of the packet divided by the data bandwidth of network
                             links. This measure assumes there are no other packets contending for that
                             bandwidth (i.e., a zero-load or no-load network).
                         ■   Transport latency—This is the sum of time of flight and transmission time.
                             Transport latency is the time that the packet spends in the interconnection net-
                             work. Stated alternatively, it is the time between when the first bit of the packet
                             is injected into the network and when the last bit of that packet arrives at the
                             receiver. It does not include the overhead of preparing the packet at the sender
                             or processing it when it arrives at the receiver.
                         ■   Sending overhead—This is the time for the end node to prepare the packet (as
                             opposed to the message) for injection into the network, including both hard-
                             ware and software components. Note that the end node is busy for the entire
                             time, hence the use of the term overhead. Once the end node is free, any sub-
                             sequent delays are considered part of the transport latency. We assume that
                             overhead consists of a constant term plus a variable term that depends on
                             packet size. The constant term includes memory allocation, packet header
                             preparation, setting up DMA devices, and so on. The variable term is mostly
                             due to copies from buffer to buffer and is usually negligible for very short
                             packets.
                         ■   Receiving overhead—This is the time for the end node to process an incoming
                             packet, including both hardware and software components. We also assume
                             here that overhead consists of a constant term plus a variable term that depends
                             on packet size. In general, the receiving overhead is larger than the sending
                             overhead. For example, the receiver may pay the cost of an interrupt or may
                             have to reorder and reassemble packets into messages.
                                                F.2   Interconnecting Two Devices        ■   F-15

          The total latency of a packet can be expressed algebraically by the following:
                                                              Packet size
              Latency ¼ Sending overhead + Time of flight +               + Receiving overhead
                                                              Bandwidth
          Let’s see how the various components of transport latency and the sending and
          receiving overheads change in importance as we go across the interconnection
          network domains: from OCNs to SANs to LANs to WANs.

Example   Assume that we have a dedicated link network with a data bandwidth of 8 Gbps
          for each link in each direction interconnecting two devices within an OCN, SAN,
          LAN, or WAN, and we wish to transmit packets of 100 bytes (including the
          header) between the devices. The end nodes have a per-packet sending overhead
          of x + 0.05 ns/byte and receiving overhead of 4/3(x) + 0.05 ns/byte, where x is 0 μs
          for the OCN, 0.3 μs for the SAN, 3 μs for the LAN, and 30 μs for the WAN, which
          are typical for these network types. Calculate the total latency to send packets from
          one device to the other for interconnection distances of 0.5 cm, 5 m, 5000 m, and
          5000 km assuming that time of flight consists only of link propagation delay
          (i.e., no switching or other sources of delay).

 Answer   Using the above expression and the calculation for propagation delay through a
          conductor given in the previous example, we can plug in the parameters for each
          of the networks to find their total packet latency. For the OCN:
                                                              Packet size
              Latency ¼Sending overhead + Time of flight +                + Receiving overhead
                                                              Bandwidth
                                        0:5 cm         100 bytes
                      ¼5 ns +                        +             + 5 ns
                                2=3 ? 300,000 km= sec 8 Gbits= sec
          Converting all terms into nanoseconds (ns) leads to the following for
          the OCN:
                                                        0:5 cm          100 ? 8
                  Total latency ðOCNÞ ¼5 ns +                         +         ns + 5 ns
                                                2=3 ? 300,000 km= sec      8

                                       ¼5 ns + 0:025 ns + 100 ns + 5 ns

                                       ¼110:025 ns
          Substituting in the appropriate values for the SAN gives the following latency:
                                                       5m            100 bytes
            Total latency ðSANÞ ¼0:305 μs +                        +             + 0:405 μs
                                              2=3 ? 300,000 km= sec 8 Gbits= sec

                                  ¼0:305 μs + 0:025 μs + 0:1 μs + 0:405 μs

                                  ¼0:835 μs
F-16   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         Substituting in the appropriate values for the LAN gives the following latency:
                                                                      5 km           100 bytes
                           Total latency ðLANÞ ¼3:005 μs +                         +             + 4:005 μs
                                                              2=3 ? 300,000 km= sec 8 Gbits= sec
                                               ¼3:005 μs + 25 μs + 0:1 μs + 4:005 μs

                                               ¼32:11 μs
                         Substituting in the appropriate values for the WAN gives the following latency:
                                                                     5000 km          100 bytes
                          Total latency ðWANÞ ¼ 30:005 μs +                         +            + 40:005 μs
                                                              2=3 ? 300, 000 km= sec 8 Gbits=sec
                                               ¼ 30:005 μs + 25000 μs + 0:1 μs + 40:005 μs
                                               ¼ 25:07 ms

                             The increased fraction of the latency required by time of flight for the longer
                         distances along with the greater likelihood of errors over the longer distances are
                         among the reasons why WANs and LANs use more sophisticated and time-consuming
                         communication protocols, which increase sending and receiving overheads. The need
                         for standardization is another reason. Complexity also increases due to the require-
                         ments imposed on the protocol by the typical applications that run over the various
                         interconnection network domains as we go from tens to hundreds to thousands to many
                         thousands of devices. We will consider this in later sections when we discuss connect-
                         ing more than two devices. The above example shows that the propagation delay com-
                         ponent of time of flight for WANs and some LANs is so long that other latency
                         components—including the sending and receiving overheads—can practically be
                         ignored. This is not so for SANs and OCNs where the propagation delay pales in com-
                         parison to the overheads and transmission delay. Remember that time-of-flight latency
                         due to switches and other hardware in the network besides sheer propagation delay
                         through the links is neglected in the above example. For noncongested networks,
                         switch latency generally is small compared to the overheads and propagation delay
                         through the links in WANs and LANs, but this is not necessarily so for multiprocessor
                         SANs and multicore OCNs, as we will see in later sections.
                             So far, we have considered the transport of a single packet and computed the
                         associated end-to-end total packet latency. In order to compute the effective band-
                         width for two networked devices, we have to consider a continuous stream of
                         packets transported between them. We must keep in mind that, in addition to min-
                         imizing packet latency, the goal of any network optimized for a given cost and
                         power consumption target is to transfer the maximum amount of available infor-
                         mation in the shortest possible time, as measured by the effective bandwidth deliv-
                         ered by the network. For applications that do not require a response before sending
                         the next packet, the sender can overlap the sending overhead of later packets with
                         the transport latency and receiver overhead of prior packets. This essentially pipe-
                         lines the transmission of packets over the network, also known as link pipelining.
                         Fortunately, as discussed in prior chapters of this book, there are many application
                                        F.2   Interconnecting Two Devices       ■   F-17

areas where communication from either several applications or several threads
from the same application can run concurrently (e.g., a Web server concurrently
serving thousands of client requests or streaming media), thus allowing a device
to send a stream of packets without having to wait for an acknowledgment or a
reply. Also, as long messages are usually divided into packets of maximum size
before transport, a number of packets are injected into the network in succession
for such cases. If such overlap were not possible, packets would have to wait for
prior packets to be acknowledged before being transmitted and thus suffer signif-
icant performance degradation.
     Packets transported in a pipelined fashion can be acknowledged quite straight-
forwardly simply by keeping a copy at the source of all unacknowledged packets
that have been sent and keeping track of the correspondence between returned
acknowledgments and packets stored in the buffer. Packets will be removed from
the buffer when the corresponding acknowledgment is received by the sender. This
can be done by including the message ID and packet sequence number associated
with the packet in the packet’s acknowledgment. Furthermore, a separate timer
must be associated with each buffered packet, allowing the packet to be resent
if the associated time-out expires.
     Pipelining packet transport over the network has many similarities with pipe-
lining computation within a processor. However, among some differences are that
it does not require any staging latches. Information is simply propagated through
network links as a sequence of signal waves. Thus, the network can be considered
as a logical pipeline consisting of as many stages as are required so that the time of
flight does not affect the effective bandwidth that can be achieved. Transmission of
a packet can start immediately after the transmission of the previous one, thus over-
lapping the sending overhead of a packet with the transport and receiver latency of
previous packets. If the sending overhead is smaller than the transmission time,
packets follow each other back-to-back, and the effective bandwidth approaches
the raw link bandwidth when continuously transmitting packets. On the other hand,
if the sending overhead is greater than the transmission time, the effective band-
width at the injection point will remain well below the raw link bandwidth. The
resulting link injection bandwidth, BWLinkInjection, for each link injecting a contin-
uous stream of packets into a network is calculated with the following expression:
                                                Packet size
              BWLinkInjection ¼
                                  max ðSending overhead, Transmission timeÞ
We must also consider what happens if the receiver is unable to consume packets
at the same rate they arrive. This occurs if the receiving overhead is greater than the
sending overhead and the receiver cannot process incoming packets fast enough.
In this case, the link reception bandwidth, BWLinkReception, for each reception link
of the network is less than the link injection bandwidth and is obtained with this
expression:
                                                  Packet size
            BWLinkReception ¼
                                  max ðReceiving overhead, Transmission timeÞ
F-18   ■    Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                                   When communication takes place between two devices interconnected by ded-
                              icated links, all the packets sent by one device will be received by the other. If the
                              receiver cannot process packets fast enough, the receiver buffer will become full,
                              and flow control will throttle transmission at the sender. As this situation is produced
                              by causes external to the network, we will not consider it further here. Moreover, if
                              the receiving overhead is greater than the sending overhead, the receiver buffer will
                              fill up and flow control will, likewise, throttle transmission at the sender. In this case,
                              the effect of flow control is, on average, the same as if we replace sending overhead
                              with receiving overhead. Assuming an ideal network that behaves like two dedi-
                              cated links running in opposite directions at the full link bandwidth between the
                              two devices—which is consistent with our black box view of the network to this
                              point—the resulting effective bandwidth is the smaller of twice the injection band-
                              width (to account for the two injection links, one for each device) or twice the recep-
                              tion bandwidth. This results in the following expression for effective bandwidth:
                                                                                            2 ? Packet size
           Effective bandwidth ¼ min 2 ? BWLinkInjection , 2 ? BWLinkReception ¼
                                                                                   max ðOverhead, Transmission timeÞ
                              where Overhead ¼ max(Sending overhead, Receiving overhead). Taking into
                              account the expression for the transmission time, it is obvious that the effective
                              bandwidth delivered by the network is identical to the aggregate network band-
                              width when the transmission time is greater than the overhead. Therefore, full
                              network utilization is achieved regardless of the value for the time of flight
                              and, thus, regardless of the distance traveled by packets, assuming ideal network
                              behavior (i.e., enough credits and buffers are provided for credit-based and Xon/
                              Xoff flow control). This analysis assumes that the sender and receiver network
                              interfaces can process only one packet at a time. If multiple packets can be pro-
                              cessed in parallel (e.g., as is done in IBM’s Federation network interfaces),
                              the overheads for those packets can be overlapped, which increases effective band-
                              width by that overlap factor up to the amount bounded by the transmission time.
                                  Let’s use the equation on page F-17 to explore the impact of packet size, trans-
                              mission time, and overhead on BWLink Injection, BWLinkReception, and effective band-
                              width for the various network domains: OCNs, SANs, LANs, and WANs.

                Example       As in the previous example, assume we have a dedicated link network with a data
                              bandwidth of 8 Gbps for each link in each direction interconnecting the two
                              devices within an OCN, SAN, LAN, or WAN. Plot effective bandwidth versus
                              packet size for each type of network for packets ranging in size from 4 bytes
                              (i.e., a single 32-bit word) to 1500 bytes (i.e., the maximum transfer unit for Ether-
                              net), assuming that end nodes have the same per-packet sending and receiving
                              overheads as before: x + 0.05 ns/byte and 4/3(x) + 0.05 ns/byte, respectively, where
                              x is 0 μs for the OCN, 0.3 μs for the SAN, 3 μs for the LAN, and 30 μs for the
                              WAN. What limits the effective bandwidth, and for what packet sizes is the effec-
                              tive bandwidth within 10% of the aggregate network bandwidth?
                                                                   F.2     Interconnecting Two Devices        ■      F-19

                                            100

                                             10

         Effective bandwidth (Gbits/sec)
                                               1

                                             0.1

                                                                                                             OCN
                                                                                                             SAN
                                            0.01                                                             LAN
                                                                                                             WAN

                                           0.001
                                                   4   200   400    600            800         1000   1200    1400
                                                                         Packet size (bytes)

         Figure F.6 Effective bandwidth versus packet size plotted in semi-log form for the
         four network domains. Overhead can be amortized by increasing the packet size, but
         for too large of an overhead (e.g., for WANs and some LANs) scaling the packet size is of
         little help. Other considerations come into play that limit the maximum packet size.

Answer   Figure F.6 plots effective bandwidth versus packet size for the four network
         domains using the simple equation and parameters given above. For all packet
         sizes in the OCN, transmission time is greater than overhead (sending or receiv-
         ing), allowing full utilization of the aggregate bandwidth, which is 16 Gbps—that
         is, injection link (alternatively, reception link) bandwidth times two to account for
         both devices. For the SAN, overhead—specifically, receiving overhead—is larger
         than transmission time for packets less than about 800 bytes; consequently, packets
         of 655 bytes and larger are needed to utilize 90% or more of the aggregate band-
         width. For LANs and WANs, most of the link bandwidth is not utilized since over-
         head in this example is many times larger than transmission time for all
         packet sizes.
             This example highlights the importance of reducing the sending and receiving
         overheads relative to packet transmission time in order to maximize the effective
         bandwidth delivered by the network.

             The analysis above suggests that it is possible to provide some upper bound for
         the effective bandwidth by analyzing the path followed by packets and determining
         where the bottleneck occurs. We can extend this idea beyond the network
         interfaces by defining a model that considers the entire network from end to
F-20   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         end as a pipe and identifying the narrowest section of that pipe. There are three
                         areas of interest in that pipe: the aggregate of all network injection links and the
                         corresponding network injection bandwidth (BWNetworkInjection), the aggregate of
                         all network reception links and the corresponding network reception bandwidth
                         (BWNetworkReception), and the aggregate of all network links and the corresponding
                         network bandwidth (BWNetwork). Expressions for these will be given in
                         later sections as various layers of the black box view of the network are
                         peeled away.
                             To this point, we have assumed that for just two interconnected devices the
                         black box network behaves ideally and the network bandwidth is equal to
                         the aggregate raw network bandwidth. In reality, it can be much less than the aggre-
                         gate bandwidth as we will see in the following sections. In general, the effective
                         bandwidth delivered end-to-end by the network to an application is upper bounded
                         by the minimum across all three potential bottleneck areas:
                                                                                                                
                               Effective bandwidth ¼ min BWNetworkInjection , BWNetwork , BWNetworkReception

                         We will expand upon this expression further in the following sections as we reveal
                         more about interconnection networks and consider the more general case of inter-
                         connecting more than two devices.
                              In some sections of this appendix, we show how the concepts introduced in
                         the section take shape in example high-end commercial products. Figure F.7
                         lists several commercial computers that, at one point in time in their existence,
                         were among the highest-performing systems in the world within their class.
                         Although these systems are capable of interconnecting more than two devices,
                         they implement the basic functions needed for interconnecting only two
                         devices. In addition to being applicable to the SANs used in those systems,
                         the issues discussed in this section also apply to other interconnect domains:
                         from OCNs to WANs.

               F.3       Connecting More than Two Devices
                         To this point, we have considered the connection of only two devices communi-
                         cating over a network viewed as a black box, but what makes interconnection net-
                         works interesting is the ability to connect hundreds or even many thousands of
                         devices together. Consequently, what makes them interesting also makes them
                         more challenging to build. In order to connect more than two devices, a suitable
                         structure and more functionality must be supported by the network. This section
                         continues with our black box approach by introducing, at a conceptual level, addi-
                         tional network structure and functions that must be supported when interconnect-
                         ing more than two devices. More details on these individual subjects are given in
                         Sections F.4 through F.7. Where applicable, we relate the additional structure and
                         functions to network media, flow control, and other basics presented in the previ-
                         ous section. In this section, we also classify networks into two broad categories
                                                                                    F.3   Connecting More than Two Devices                                        ■         F-21

                                                             System footprint for

                                                                                                             Injection [reception]
                                                                                                             node BW in MB/sec
                                                             max. configuration

                                                                                                                                                        Maximum copper
                                                                                                                                     receive overhead

                                                                                                                                                        link length; flow
                                                                                          max size (bytes)
                                            Max. number of
          [network] name

                                                                                                                                     Minimum send/
                                            compute nodes

                                                                                          Packet [header]

                                                                                                                                                        control; error
                           Intro year
Company

                                            [ # CPUs]
          System

Intel     ASCI Red         2001             4510             2500 ft2                     1984               400                     Few μs             Handshaking;
          Paragon                           [?2]                                          [4]                [400]                                      CRC + parity
IBM       ASCI White       2001             512              10,000 ft2                   1024               500                     ?3 μs              25 m; credit-
          SP Power3                         [?16]                                         [6]                [500]                                      based; CRC
          [Colony]
Intel     Thunder          2004             1024             120 m2                       2048               928                     0.240 μs           13 m; credit-
          Itanium2                          [?4]                                          [14]               [928]                                      based; CRC for
          Tiger4                                                                                                                                        link, dest.
          [QsNetII]
Cray      XT3 [SeaStar]    2004             30,508           263.8 m2                     80                 3200                    Few μs             7 m; credit-
                                            [?1]                                          [16]               [3200]                                     based; CRC
Cray      X1E              2004             1024             27 m2                        32                 1600                    0 (direct LD ST    5 m; credit-
                                            [?1]                                          [16]               [1600]                  accesses)          based; CRC
IBM       ASC Purple       2005             >1280            6720 ft2                     2048               2000                    ?1 μs with up      25 m; credit-
          pSeries 575                       [?8]                                          [7]                [2000]                  to 4 packets       based; CRC
          [Federation]                                                                                                               processed in k
IBM       Blue Gene/L      2005             65,536           2500 ft2                     256                612.5                   ?3 μs              8.6 m; credit-
          eServer Sol.                      [?2]             (.9 ? .9 ? 1.9 m3/           [8]                [1050]                  (2300 cycles)      based; CRC
          [Torus Net.]                                       1 K node rack)                                                                             (header/pkt)

Figure F.7 Basic characteristics of interconnection networks in commercial high-performance computer systems.

                                        based on their connection structure—shared-media versus switched-media net-
                                        works—and we compare them. Finally, expanded expressions for characterizing
                                        network performance are given, followed by an example.

                                        Additional Network Structure and Functions: Topology,
                                        Routing, Arbitration, and Switching
                                        Networks interconnecting more than two devices require mechanisms to physi-
                                        cally connect the packet source to its destination in order to transport the packet
                                        and deliver it to the correct destination. These mechanisms can be implemented
                                        in different ways and significantly vary across interconnection network domains.
                                        However, the types of network structure and functions performed by those mech-
                                        anisms are very much the same, regardless of the domain.
                                            When multiple devices are interconnected by a network, the connections
                                        between them oftentimes cannot be permanently established with dedicated links.
F-22   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         This could either be too restrictive as all the packets from a given source would go
                         to the same one destination (and not to others) or prohibitively expensive as a ded-
                         icated link would be needed from every source to every destination (we will eval-
                         uate this further in the next section). Therefore, networks usually share paths
                         among different pairs of devices, but how those paths are shared is determined
                         by the network connection structure, commonly referred to as the network topol-
                         ogy. Topology addresses the important issue of “What paths are possible for
                         packets?” so packets reach their intended destinations.
                              Every network that interconnects more than two devices also requires some
                         mechanism to deliver each packet to the correct destination. The associated func-
                         tion is referred to as routing, which can be defined as the set of operations that need
                         to be performed to compute a valid path from the packet source to its destinations.
                         Routing addresses the important issue of “Which of the possible paths are allow-
                         able (valid) for packets?” so packets reach their intended destinations. Depending
                         on the network, this function may be executed at the packet source to compute the
                         entire path, at some intermediate devices to compute fragments of the path on
                         the fly, or even at every possible destination device to verify whether that device
                         is the intended destination for the packet. Usually, the packet header shown in
                         Figure F.4 is extended to include the necessary routing information.
                              In general, as networks usually contain shared paths or parts thereof among dif-
                         ferent pairs of devices, packets may request some shared resources. When several
                         packets request the same resources at the same time, an arbitration function is
                         required to resolve the conflict. Arbitration, along with flow control, addresses
                         the important issue of “When are paths available for packets?” Every time arbitra-
                         tion is performed, there is a winner and possibly several losers. The losers are not
                         granted access to the requested resources and are typically buffered. As indicated in
                         the previous section, flow control may be implemented to prevent buffer overflow.
                         The winner proceeds toward its destination once the granted resources are switched
                         in, providing a path for the packet to advance. This function is referred to as switch-
                         ing. Switching addresses the important issue of “How are paths allocated to
                         packets?” To achieve better utilization of existing communication resources, most
                         networks do not establish an entire end-to-end path at once. Instead, as explained in
                         Section F.5, paths are usually established one fragment at a time.
                              These three network functions—routing, arbitration, and switching—must be
                         implemented in every network connecting more than two devices, no matter what
                         form the network topology takes. This is in addition to the basic functions men-
                         tioned in the previous section. However, the complexity of these functions and
                         the order in which they are performed depends on the category of network topol-
                         ogy, as discussed below. In general, routing, arbitration, and switching are required
                         to establish a valid path from source to destination from among the possible paths
                         provided by the network topology. Once the path has been established, the packet
                         transport functions previously described are used to reliably transmit packets and
                         receive them at the corresponding destination. Flow control, if implemented, pre-
                         vents buffer overflow by throttling the sender. It can be implemented at the end-to-
                         end level, the link level within the network, or both.
                                  F.3     Connecting More than Two Devices           ■   F-23

Shared-Media Networks
The simplest way to connect multiple devices is to have them share the network
media, as shown for the bus in Figure F.8 (a). This has been the traditional way
of interconnecting devices. The shared media can operate in half-duplex mode,
where data can be carried in either direction over the media but simultaneous trans-
mission and reception of data by the same device is not allowed, or in full-duplex,
where the data can be carried in both directions and simultaneously transmitted and
received by the same device. Until very recently, I/O devices in most systems typ-
ically shared a single I/O bus, and early system-on-chip (SoC) designs made use of
a shared bus to interconnect on-chip components. The most popular LAN, Ether-
net, was originally implemented as a half-duplex bus shared by up to a hundred
computers, although now switched-media versions also exist.
    Given that network media are shared, there must be a mechanism to coordinate
and arbitrate the use of the shared media so that only one packet is sent at a time. If
the physical distance between network devices is small, it may be possible to have
a central arbiter to grant permission to send packets. In this case, the network nodes
may use dedicated control lines to interface with the arbiter. Centralized arbitration
is impractical, however, for networks with a large number of nodes spread over
large distances, so distributed forms of arbitration are also used. This is the case
for the original Ethernet shared-media LAN.
    A first step toward distributed arbitration of shared media is “looking before
you leap.” A node first checks the network to avoid trying to send a packet while
another packet is already in the network. Listening before transmission to avoid
collisions is called carrier sensing. If the interconnection is idle, the node tries
to send. Looking first is not a guarantee of success, of course, as some other node
may also decide to send at the same instant. When two nodes send at the same time,

                                                                Switched-media network

                                                            Node                     Node
           Shared-media network

    Node           Node            Node

                                                                     Switch fabric

                                                            Node                     Node

  (A)                                                     (B)

Figure F.8 (a) A shared-media network versus (b) a switched-media network. Ether-
net was originally a shared media network, but switched Ethernet is now available. All
nodes on the shared-media networks must dynamically share the raw bandwidth of one
link, but switched-media networks can support multiple links, providing higher raw
aggregate bandwidth.
F-24   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         a collision occurs. Let’s assume that the network interface can detect any resulting
                         collisions by listening to hear if the data become garbled by other data appearing
                         on the line. Listening to detect collisions is called collision detection. This is the
                         second step of distributed arbitration.
                             The problem is not solved yet. If, after detecting a collision, every node on the
                         network waited exactly the same amount of time, listened to be sure there was no
                         traffic, and then tried to send again, we could still have synchronized nodes that
                         would repeatedly bump heads. To avoid repeated head-on collisions, each node
                         whose packet gets garbled waits (or backs off) a random amount of time before
                         resending. Randomization breaks the synchronization. Subsequent collisions
                         result in exponentially increasing time between attempts to retransmit, so as not
                         to tax the network.
                             Although this approach controls congestion on the shared media, it is not guar-
                         anteed to be fair—some subsequent node may transmit while those that collided
                         are waiting. If the network does not have high demand from many nodes, this
                         simple approach works well. Under high utilization, however, performance
                         degrades since the media are shared and fairness is not ensured. Another distrib-
                         uted approach to arbitration of shared media that can support fairness is to pass a
                         token between nodes. The function of the token is to grant the acquiring node the
                         right to use the network. If the token circulates in a cyclic fashion between the
                         nodes, a certain amount of fairness is ensured in the arbitration process.
                             Once arbitration has been performed and a device has been granted access to
                         the shared media, the function of switching is straightforward. The granted device
                         simply needs to connect itself to the shared media, thus establishing a path to every
                         possible destination. Also, routing is very simple to implement. Given that the
                         media are shared and attached to all the devices, every device will see every packet.
                         Therefore, each device just needs to check whether or not a given packet is
                         intended for that device. A beneficial side effect of this strategy is that a device
                         can send a packet to all the devices attached to the shared media through a single
                         transmission. This style of communication is called broadcasting, in contrast to
                         unicasting, in which each packet is intended for only one device. The shared media
                         make it easy to broadcast a packet to every device or, alternatively, to a subset of
                         devices, called multicasting.

                         Switched-Media Networks
                         The alternative to sharing the entire network media at once across all attached
                         nodes is to switch between disjoint portions of it shared by the nodes. Those por-
                         tions consist of passive point-to-point links between active switch components that
                         dynamically establish communication between sets of source-destination pairs.
                         These passive and active components make up what is referred to as the network
                         switch fabric or network fabric, to which end nodes are connected. This approach
                         is shown conceptually in Figure F.8(b). The switch fabric is described in greater
                         detail in Sections F.4 through F.7, where various black box layers for switched-
                         media networks are further revealed. Nevertheless, the high-level view shown
                            F.3    Connecting More than Two Devices         ■   F-25

in Figure F.8(b) illustrates the potential bandwidth improvement of switched-
media networks over shared-media networks: aggregate bandwidth can be many
times higher than that of shared-media networks, allowing the possibility of greater
effective bandwidth to be achieved. At best, only one node at a time can transmit
packets over the shared media, whereas it is possible for all attached nodes to do so
over the switched-media network.
    Like their shared-media counterparts, switched-media networks must imple-
ment the three additional functions previously mentioned: routing, arbitration,
and switching. Every time a packet enters the network, it is routed in order to select
a path toward its destination provided by the topology. The path requested by the
packet must be granted by some centralized or distributed arbiter, which resolves
conflicts among concurrent requests for resources along the same path. Once the
requested resources are granted, the network “switches in” the required connec-
tions to establish the path and allows the packet to be forwarded toward its desti-
nation. If the requested resources are not granted, the packet is usually buffered, as
mentioned previously. Routing, arbitration, and switching functions are usually
performed within switched networks in this order, whereas in shared-media net-
works routing typically is the last function performed.

Comparison of Shared- and Switched-Media Networks
In general, the advantage of shared-media networks is their low cost, but, conse-
quently, their aggregate network bandwidth does not scale at all with the number of
interconnected devices. Also, a global arbitration scheme is required to resolve
conflicting demands, possibly introducing another type of bottleneck and again
limiting scalability. Moreover, every device attached to the shared media increases
the parasitic capacitance of the electrical conductors, thus increasing the time of
flight propagation delay accordingly and, possibly, clock cycle time. In addition,
it is more difficult to pipeline packet transmission over the network as the shared
media are continuously granted to different requesting devices.
     The main advantage of switched-media networks is that the amount of network
resources implemented scales with the number of connected devices, increasing
the aggregate network bandwidth. These networks allow multiple pairs of nodes
to communicate simultaneously, allowing much higher effective network band-
width than that provided by shared-media networks. Also, switched-media net-
works allow the system to scale to very large numbers of nodes, which is not
feasible when using shared media. Consequently, this scaling advantage can, at
the same time, be a disadvantage if network resources grow superlinearly. Net-
works of superlinear cost that provide an effective network bandwidth that grows
only sublinearly with the number of interconnected devices are inefficient designs
for many applications and interconnection network domains.

Characterizing Performance: Latency and Effective Bandwidth
The routing, switching, and arbitration functionality described above introduces
some additional components of packet transport latency that must be taken into
F-26   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         account in the expression for total packet latency. Assuming there is no contention
                         for network resources—as would be the case in an unloaded network—total packet
                         latency is given by the following:
                                                                             Packet size
                     Latency ¼ Sending overhead + TTotalProp + TR + TA + TS +            + Receiving overhead
                                                                              Bandwidth
                         Here TR, TA, and TS are the total routing time, arbitration time, and switching time
                         experienced by the packet, respectively, and are either measured quantities or cal-
                         culated quantities derived from more detailed analyses. These components are
                         added to the total propagation delay through the network links, TTotalProp, to give
                         the overall time of flight of the packet.
                              The expression above gives only a lower bound for the total packet latency as it
                         does not account for additional delays due to contention for resources that may
                         occur. When the network is heavily loaded, several packets may request the same
                         network resources concurrently, thus causing contention that degrades perfor-
                         mance. Packets that lose arbitration have to be buffered, which increases packet
                         latency by some contention delay amount of waiting time. This additional delay
                         is not included in the above expression. When the network or part of it approaches
                         saturation, contention delay may be several orders of magnitude greater than the
                         total packet latency suffered by a packet under zero load or even under slightly
                         loaded network conditions. Unfortunately, it is not easy to compute analytically
                         the total packet latency when the network is more than moderately loaded. Mea-
                         surement of these quantities using cycle-accurate simulation of a detailed network
                         model is a better and more precise way of estimating packet latency under such
                         circumstances. Nevertheless, the expression given above is useful in calculating
                         best-case lower bounds for packet latency.
                              For similar reasons, effective bandwidth is not easy to compute exactly, but we
                         can estimate best-case upper bounds for it by appropriately extending the model
                         presented at the end of the previous section. What we need to do is to find the nar-
                         rowest section of the end-to-end network pipe by finding the network injection
                         bandwidth (BWNetworkInjection), the network reception bandwidth (BWNetworkRecep-
                         tion), and the network bandwidth (BWNetwork) across the entire network intercon-
                         necting the devices.
                              The BWNetworkInjection can be calculated simply by multiplying the expression
                         for link injection bandwidth, BWLinkInjection, by the total number of network injec-
                         tion links. The BWNetworkReception is calculated similarly using BWLinkReception, but
                         it must also be scaled by a factor that reflects application traffic and other charac-
                         teristics. For more than two interconnected devices, it is no longer valid to assume a
                         one-to-one relationship among sources and destinations when analyzing the effect
                         of flow control on link reception bandwidth. It could happen, for example, that
                         several packets from different injection links arrive concurrently at the same recep-
                         tion link for applications that have many-to-one traffic characteristics, which
                         causes contention at the reception links. This effect can be taken into account
                         by an average reception factor parameter, σ, which is either a measured quantity
                         or a calculated quantity derived from detailed analysis. It is defined as the average
                                       F.3    Connecting More than Two Devices            ■        F-27

          fraction or percentage of packets arriving at reception links that can be accepted.
          Only those packets can be immediately delivered, thus reducing network reception
          bandwidth by that factor. This reduction occurs as a result of application behavior
          regardless of internal network characteristics. Finally, BWNetwork takes into
          account the internal characteristics of the network, including contention. We
          will progressively derive expressions in the following sections that will enable
          us to calculate this as more details are revealed about the internals of our black
          box interconnection network.
              Overall, the effective bandwidth delivered by the network end-to-end to an
          application is determined by the minimum across the three sections, as described
          by the following:
                                                                                                
             Effective bandwidth¼ min BWNetworkInjection ,BWNetwork , σ ? BWNetworkReception
                                                                                                    
                                 ¼ min N ? BWLinkInjection , BWNetwork ,σ ? N ? BWLinkReception

          Let’s use the above expressions to compare the latency and effective bandwidth
          of shared-media networks against switched-media networks for the four intercon-
          nection network domains: OCNs, SANs, LANs, and WANs.

Example   Plot the total packet latency and effective bandwidth as the number of intercon-
          nected nodes, N, scales from 4 to 1024 for shared-media and switched-media
          OCNs, SANs, LANs, and WANs. Assume that all network links, including the
          injection and reception links at the nodes, each have a data bandwidth of 8 Gbps,
          and unicast packets of 100 bytes are transmitted. Shared-media networks share one
          link, and switched-media networks have at least as many network links as there are
          nodes. For both, ignore latency and bandwidth effects due to contention within
          the network. End nodes have per-packet sending and receiving overheads of
          x + 0.05 ns/byte and 4/3(x) + 0.05 ns/byte, respectively, where x is 0 μs for the
          OCN, 0.3 μs for the SAN, 3 μs for the LAN, and 30 μs for the WAN, and inter-
          connection distances are 0.5 cm, 5 m, 5000 m, and 5000 km, respectively. Also
          assume that the total routing, arbitration, and switching times are constants or func-
          tions of the number of interconnected nodes: TR ¼ 2.5 ns, TA ¼ 2.5(N) ns, and
          TS ¼ 2.5 ns for shared-media networks and TR ¼ TA ¼ TS ¼ 2.5(log2 N) ns for
          switched-media networks. Finally, taking into account application traffic charac-
          teristics for the network structure, the average reception factor, σ, is assumed to be
          N?1 for shared media and polylogarithmic (log2 N)?1/4 for switched media.

 Answer   All components of total packet latency are the same as in the example given in the
          previous section except for time of flight, which now has additional routing, arbi-
          tration, and switching delays. For shared-media networks, the additional delays
          total 5 + 2.5(N) ns; for switched-media networks, they total 7.5(log2 N) ns. Latency
          is plotted only for OCNs and SANs in Figure F.9 as these networks give the more
          interesting results. For OCNs, TR, TA, and TS combine to dominate time of flight
F-28   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                                        10,000

                                                     SAN— shared
                                                     OCN— shared
                                                     SAN— switched
                                                     OCN— switched

                         Latency (ns)

                                         1000

                                          100
                                                 4       8           16   32       64        128   256   512   1024
                                                                           Number of nodes (N)

                         Figure F.9 Latency versus number of interconnected nodes plotted in semi-log form
                         for OCNs and SANs. Routing, arbitration, and switching have more of an impact on latency
                         for networks in these two domains, particularly for networks with a large number of nodes,
                         given the low sending and receiving overheads and low propagation delay.

                         and are much greater than each of the other latency components for a moderate to
                         large number of nodes. This is particularly so for the shared-media network. The
                         latency increases much more dramatically with the number of nodes for shared
                         media as compared to switched media given the difference in arbitration delay
                         between the two. For SANs, TR, TA, and TS dominate time of flight for most net-
                         work sizes but are greater than each of the other latency components in shared-
                         media networks only for large-sized networks; they are less than the other latency
                         components for switched-media networks but are not negligible. For LANs and
                         WANs, time of flight is dominated by propagation delay, which dominates other
                         latency components as calculated in the previous section; thus, TR, TA, and TS are
                         negligible for both shared and switched media.
                             Figure F.10 plots effective bandwidth versus number of interconnected nodes
                         for the four network domains. The effective bandwidth for all shared-media net-
                         works is constant through network scaling as only one unicast packet can be
                         received at a time over all the network reception links, and that is further limited
                         by the receiving overhead of each network for all but the OCN. The effective band-
                         width for all switched-media networks increases with the number of intercon-
                         nected nodes, but it is scaled down by the average reception factor. The
                         receiving overhead further limits effective bandwidth for all but the OCN.
                                                                                        F.3     Connecting More than Two Devices       ■   F-29

                                           10,000

                                                                                                                       OCN— switched
                                                                                                                       SAN— switched
                                            1000
                                                                                                                       LAN— switched
                                                                                                                       WAN— switched
                                                                                                                       OCN— shared
         Effective bandwidth (Gbits/sec)

                                                                                                                       SAN— shared
                                             100
                                                                                                                       LAN— shared
                                                                                                                       WAN— shared

                                               10

                                                1

                                              0.1

                                             0.01
                                                    1   200         400           600             800       1000       1200
                                                                          Number of nodes (N)

Figure F.10 Effective bandwidth versus number of interconnected nodes plotted in semi-log form for the four
network domains. The disparity in effective bandwidth between shared- and switched-media networks for all inter-
connect domains widens significantly as the number of nodes in the network increases. Only the switched on-chip
network is able to achieve an effective bandwidth equal to the aggregate bandwidth for the parameters given in this
example.

                                                            Given the obvious advantages, why weren’t switched networks always used?
                                                        Earlier computers were much slower and could share the network media with little
                                                        impact on performance. In addition, the switches for earlier LANs and WANs took
                                                        up several large boards and were about as large as an entire computer. As a con-
                                                        sequence of Moore’s law, the size of switches has reduced considerably, and sys-
                                                        tems have a much greater need for high-performance communication. Switched
                                                        networks allow communication to harvest the same rapid advancements from sil-
                                                        icon as processors and main memory. Whereas switches from telecommunication
                                                        companies were once the size of mainframe computers, today we see single-chip
                                                        switches and even entire switched networks within a chip. Thus, technology and
                                                        application trends favor switched networks today. Just as single-chip processors
                                                        led to processors replacing logic circuits in a surprising number of places,
                                                        single-chip switches and switched on-chip networks are increasingly replacing
                                                        shared-media networks (i.e., buses) in several application domains. As an example,
                                                        PCI-Express (PCIe)—a switched network—was introduced in 2005 to replace the
                                                        traditional PCI-X bus on personal computer motherboards.
                                                            The previous example also highlights the importance of optimizing the routing,
                                                        arbitration, and switching functions in OCNs and SANs. For these network
                                                        domains in particular, the interconnect distances and overheads typically are small
F-30   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         enough to make latency and effective bandwidth much more sensitive to how well
                         these functions are implemented, particularly for larger-sized networks. This leads
                         mostly to implementations based mainly on the faster hardware solutions for these
                         domains. In LANs and WANs, implementations based on the slower but more flex-
                         ible software solutions suffice given that performance is largely determined by
                         other factors. The design of the topology for switched-media networks also plays
                         a major role in determining how close to the lower bound on latency and the upper
                         bound on effective bandwidth the network can achieve for OCN and SAN
                         domains.
                             The next three sections touch on these important issues in switched networks,
                         with the next section focused on topology.

               F.4       Network Topology
                         When the number of devices is small enough, a single switch is sufficient to inter-
                         connect them within a switched-media network. However, the number of switch
                         ports is limited by existing very-large-scale integration (VLSI) technology, cost
                         considerations, power consumption, and so on. When the number of required net-
                         work ports exceeds the number of ports supported by a single switch, a fabric of
                         interconnected switches is needed. To embody the necessary property of full
                         access (i.e., connectedness), the network switch fabric must provide a path from
                         every end node device to every other device. All the connections to the network
                         fabric and between switches within the fabric use point-to-point links as opposed
                         to shared links—that is, links with only one switch or end node device on either
                         end. The interconnection structure across all the components—including switches,
                         links, and end node devices—is referred to as the network topology.
                             The number of network topologies described in the literature would be difficult
                         to count, but the number that have been used commercially is no more than about a
                         dozen or so. During the 1970s and early 1980s, researchers struggled to propose
                         new topologies that could reduce the number of switches through which packets
                         must traverse, referred to as the hop count. In the 1990s, thanks to the introduction
                         of pipelined transmission and switching techniques, the hop count became less crit-
                         ical. Nevertheless, today, topology is still important, particularly for OCNs and
                         SANs, as subtle relationships exist between topology and other network design
                         parameters that impact performance, especially when the number of end nodes
                         is very large (e.g., 64 K in the Blue Gene/L supercomputer) or when the latency
                         is critical (e.g., in multicore processor chips). Topology also greatly impacts the
                         implementation cost of the network.
                             Topologies for parallel supercomputer SANs have been the most visible and
                         imaginative, usually converging on regularly structured ones to simplify routing,
                         packaging, and scalability. Those for LANs and WANs tend to be more haphazard
                         or ad hoc, having more to do with the challenges of long distance or connecting
                         across different communication subnets. Switch-based topologies for OCNs are
                         only recently emerging but are quickly gaining in popularity. This section
                                                                             F.4   Network Topology       ■   F-31

                             describes the more popular topologies used in commercial products. Their advan-
                             tages, disadvantages, and constraints are also briefly discussed.

                             Centralized Switched Networks
                             As mentioned above, a single switch suffices to interconnect a set of devices when
                             the number of switch ports is equal to or larger than the number of devices. This
                             simple network is usually referred to as a crossbar or crossbar switch. Within the
                             crossbar, crosspoint switch complexity increases quadratically with the number of
                             ports, as illustrated in Figure F.11(a). Thus, a cheaper solution is desirable when
                             the number of devices to be interconnected scales beyond the point supportable by
                             implementation technology.
                                 A common way of addressing the crossbar scaling problem consists of splitting
                             the large crossbar switch into several stages of smaller switches interconnected in
                             such a way that a single pass through the switch fabric allows any destination to be
                             reached from any source. Topologies arranged in this way are usually referred to as
                             multistage interconnection networks or multistage switch fabrics, and these net-
                             works typically have complexity that increases in proportion to N log N. Multistage
                             interconnection networks (MINs) were initially proposed for telephone exchanges
                             in the 1950s and have since been used to build the communication backbone for
                             parallel supercomputers, symmetric multiprocessors, multicomputer clusters, and
                             IP router switch fabrics.

         0   1    2    3    4    5    6    7           0                                                         0

                                                       1                                                         1
 0

                                                       2                                                         2
 1

 2                                                     3                                                         3

 3                                                     4                                                         4

 4
                                                       5                                                         5

 5
                                                       6                                                         6
 6
                                                       7                                                         7
 7

(A)                                                  (B)

Figure F.11 Popular centralized switched networks: (a) the crossbar network requires N2 crosspoint switches,
shown as black dots; (b) the Omega, a MIN, requires N/2 log2 N switches, shown as vertical rectangles. End node
devices are shown as numbered squares (total of eight). Links are unidirectional—data enter at the left and exit out
the top or right.
F-32   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                             The interconnection pattern or patterns between MIN stages are permutations
                         that can be represented mathematically by a set of functions, one for each stage.
                         Figure F.11(b) shows a well-known MIN topology, the Omega, which uses the
                         perfect-shuffle permutation as its interconnection pattern for each stage, followed
                         by exchange switches, giving rise to a perfect-shuffle exchange for each stage. In
                         this example, eight input-output ports are interconnected with three stages of 2 ? 2
                         switches. It is easy to see that a single pass through the three stages allows any input
                         port to reach any output port. In general, when using k ? k switches, a MIN with N
                         input-output ports requires at least logk N stages, each of which contains N/k
                         switches, for a total of N/k (logk N) switches.
                             Despite their internal structure, MINs can be seen as centralized switch fabrics
                         that have end node devices connected at the network periphery, hence the name
                         centralized switched network. From another perspective, MINs can be viewed
                         as interconnecting nodes through a set of switches that may not have any nodes
                         directly connected to them, which gives rise to another popular name for central-
                         ized switched networks—indirect networks.

             Example     Compute the cost of interconnecting 4096 nodes using a single crossbar switch
                         relative to doing so using a MIN built from 2 ? 2, 4 ? 4, and 16 ? 16 switches. Con-
                         sider separately the relative cost of the unidirectional links and the relative cost of
                         the switches. Switch cost is assumed to grow quadratically with the number of
                         input (alternatively, output) ports, k, for k ? k switches.

               Answer    The switch cost of the network when using a single crossbar is proportional to
                         40962. The unidirectional link cost is 8192, which accounts for the set of links from
                         the end nodes to the crossbar and also from the crossbar back to the end nodes.
                         When using a MIN with k ? k switches, the cost of each switch is proportional
                         to k2 but there are 4096/k (logk 4096) total switches. Likewise, there are (logk
                         4096) stages of N unidirectional links per stage from the switches plus N links
                         to the MIN from the end nodes. Therefore, the relative costs of the crossbar with
                         respect to each MIN is given by the following:
                                                                                                   
                                  Relative cost ð2 ? 2Þswitches ¼ 40962 = 22 ? 4096=2 ? log 2 4096 ¼ 170
                                                                                                   
                                  Relative cost ð4 ? 4Þswitches ¼ 40962 = 42 ? 4096=4 ? log 4 4096 ¼ 170
                                                                                                      
                                Relative cost ð16 ? 16Þswitches ¼ 40962 = 162 ? 4096=16 ? log 16 4096 ¼ 85
                               Relative cost ð2 ? 2Þlinks ¼ 8192=ð4096 ? ð log 2 4096 + 1ÞÞ ¼ 2=13 ¼ 0:1538
                                Relative cost ð4 ? 4Þlinks ¼ 8192=ð4096 ? ð log 4 4096 + 1ÞÞ ¼ 2=7 ¼ 0:2857

                                Relative cost ð16 ? 16Þlinks ¼ 8192=ð4096 ? ð log 16 4096 + 1ÞÞ ¼ 2=4 ¼ 0:5

                         In all cases, the single crossbar has much higher switch cost than the MINs. The
                         most dramatic reduction in cost comes from the MIN composed from the smallest
                         sized but largest number of switches, but it is interesting to see that the MINs with
                         2 ? 2 and 4 ? 4 switches yield the same relative switch cost. The relative link cost
                                                F.4   Network Topology        ■   F-33

of the crossbar is lower than the MINs, but by less than an order of magnitude in
all cases. We must keep in mind that end node links are different from switch links
in their length and packaging requirements, so they usually have different associ-
ated costs. Despite the lower link cost, the crossbar has higher overall relative cost.

     The reduction in switch cost of MINs comes at the price of performance: con-
tention is more likely to occur on network links, thus degrading performance. Con-
tention in the form of packets blocking in the network arises due to paths from
different sources to different destinations simultaneously sharing one or more
links. The amount of contention in the network depends on communication traffic
behavior. In the Omega network shown in Figure F.11(b), for example, a packet
from port 0 to port 1 blocks in the first stage of switches while waiting for a packet
from port 4 to port 0. In the crossbar, no such blocking occurs as links are not
shared among paths to unique destinations. The crossbar, therefore, is nonblock-
ing. Of course, if two nodes try to send packets to the same destination, there will
be blocking at the reception link even for crossbar networks. This is accounted for
by the average reception factor parameter (σ) when analyzing performance, as dis-
cussed at the end of the previous section.
     To reduce blocking in MINs, extra switches must be added or larger ones need
to be used to provide alternative paths from every source to every destination. The
first commonly used solution is to add a minimum of logk N ? 1 extra switch stages
to the MIN in such a way that they mirror the original topology. The resulting net-
work is rearrangeably nonblocking as it allows nonconflicting paths among new
source-destination pairs to be established, but it also doubles the hop count and
could require the paths of some existing communicating pairs to be rearranged
under some centralized control. The second solution takes a different approach.
Instead of using more switch stages, larger switches—which can be implemented
by multiple stages if desired—are used in the middle of two other switch stages in
such a way that enough alternative paths through the middle-stage switches allow
for nonconflicting paths to be established between the first and last stages. The
best-known example of this is the Clos network, which is nonblocking. The multi-
path property of the three-stage Clos topology can be recursively applied to the
middle-stage switches to reduce the size of all the switches down to 2 ? 2, assum-
ing that switches of this size are used in the first and last stages to begin with. What
results is a Beneŝ topology consisting of 2(log2 N) ? 1 stages, which is rearrange-
ably nonblocking. Figure F.12(a) illustrates both topologies, where all switches not
in the first and last stages comprise the middle-stage switches (recursively) of the
Clos network.
     The MINs described so far have unidirectional network links, but bidirectional
forms are easily derived from symmetric networks such as the Clos and Beneŝ sim-
ply by folding them. The overlapping unidirectional links run in different direc-
tions, thus forming bidirectional links, and the overlapping switches merge into
a single switch with twice the ports (i.e., 4 ? 4 switch). Figure F.12(b) shows
the resulting folded Beneŝ topology but in this case with the end nodes connected
F-34        ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

        0                                                         0            0
        1                                                         1            1
        2                                                         2            2
        3                                                         3            3
        4                                                         4            4
        5                                                         5            5
        6                                                         6            6
        7                                                         7            7
        8                                                         8            8
        9                                                         9            9
       10                                                         10          10
       11                                                         11          11
       12                                                         12          12
       13                                                         13          13
       14                                                         14          14
       15                                                         15          15

       (A)                                                                     (B)

Figure F.12 Two Beneŝ networks. (a) A 16-port Clos topology, where the middle-stage switches shown in the darker
shading are implemented with another Clos network whose middle-stage switches shown in the lighter shading are
implemented with yet another Clos network, and so on, until a Beneŝ network is produced that uses only 2 ? 2
switches everywhere. (b) A folded Beneŝ network (bidirectional) in which 4 ? 4 switches are used; end nodes attach
to the innermost set of the Beneŝ network (unidirectional) switches. This topology is equivalent to a fat tree, where
tree vertices are shown in shades.

                              to the innermost switch stage of the original Beneŝ. Ports remain free at the other
                              side of the network but can be used for later expansion of the network to larger
                              sizes. These kind of networks are referred to as bidirectional multistage intercon-
                              nection networks. Among many useful properties of these networks are their mod-
                              ularity and their ability to exploit communication locality, which saves packets
                              from having to hop across all network stages. Their regularity also reduces routing
                              complexity and their multipath property enables traffic to be routed more evenly
                              across network resources and to tolerate faults.
                                   Another way of deriving bidirectional MINs with nonblocking (rearrangeable)
                              properties is to form a balanced tree, where end node devices occupy leaves of the
                              tree and switches occupy vertices within the tree. Enough links in each tree level
                              must be provided such that the total link bandwidth remains constant across all
                              levels. Also, except for the root, switch ports for each vertex typically grow as ki ? ki,
                              where i is the tree level. This can be accomplished by using ki?1 total switches at
                              each vertex, where each switch has k input and k output ports, or k bidirectional ports
                              (i.e., k ? k input-output ports). Networks having such topologies are called fat tree
                              networks. As only half of the k bidirectional ports are used in each direction, 2 N/k
                              switches are needed in each stage, totaling 2 N/k (logk/2 N) switches in the fat tree.
                              The number of switches in the root stage can be halved as no forward links are
                              needed, reducing switch count by N/k. Figure F.12(b) shows a fat tree for 4 ? 4
                              switches. As can be seen, this is identical to the folded Beneŝ.
                                   The fat tree is the topology of choice across a wide range of network sizes
                              for most commercial systems that use multistage interconnection networks. Most
                              SANs used in multicomputer clusters, and many used in the most powerful
                                                         F.4   Network Topology       ■   F-35

          supercomputers, are based on fat trees. Commercial communication subsystems
          offered by Myrinet, Mellanox, and Quadrics are also built from fat trees.

          Distributed Switched Networks
          Switched-media networks provide a very flexible framework to design communi-
          cation subsystems external to the devices that need to communicate, as presented
          above. However, there are cases where it is convenient to more tightly integrate the
          end node devices with the network resources used to enable them to communicate.
          Instead of centralizing the switch fabric in an external subsystem, an alternative
          approach is to distribute the network switches among the end nodes, which then
          become network nodes or simply nodes, yielding a distributed switched network.
          As a consequence, each network switch has one or more end node devices directly
          connected to it, thus forming a network node. These nodes are directly connected to
          other nodes without indirectly going through some external switch, giving rise to
          another popular name for these networks—direct networks.
              The topology for distributed switched networks takes on a form much differ-
          ent from centralized switched networks in that end nodes are connected across
          the area of the switch fabric, not just at one or two of the peripheral edges of
          the fabric. This causes the number of switches in the system to be equal to the
          total number of nodes. A quite obvious way of interconnecting nodes consists
          of connecting a dedicated link between each node and every other node in the
          network. This fully connected topology provides the best connectivity (full con-
          nectivity in fact), but it is more costly than a crossbar network, as the following
          example shows.

Example   Compute the cost of interconnecting N nodes using a fully connected topology rel-
          ative to doing so using a crossbar topology. Consider separately the relative cost of
          the unidirectional links and the relative cost of the switches. Switch cost is assumed
          to grow quadratically with the number of unidirectional ports for k ? k switches but
          to grow only linearly with 1 ? k switches.

 Answer   The crossbar topology requires an N ? N switch, so the switch cost is proportional
          to N2. The link cost is 2N, which accounts for the unidirectional links from the end
          nodes to the centralized crossbar, and vice versa. In the fully connected topology,
          two sets of 1 ? (N ? 1) switches (possibly merged into one set) are used in each of
          the N nodes to connect nodes directly to and from all other nodes. Thus, the total
          switch cost for all N nodes is proportional to 2N(N ? 1). Regarding link cost, each
          of the N nodes requires two unidirectional links in opposite directions between its
          end node device and its local switch. In addition, each of the N nodes has N ? 1
          unidirectional links from its local switch to other switches distributed across
          all the other end nodes. Thus, the total number of unidirectional links is
          2N +N(N ? 1), which is equal to N(N + 1) for all N nodes. The relative costs of
          the fully connected topology with respect to the crossbar is, therefore, the
          following:
F-36   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                                    Relative costswitches ¼ 2N ðN ? 1Þ=N 2 ¼ 2ðN ? 1Þ=N ¼ 2ð1 ? 1=N Þ
                                              Relative costlinks ¼ N ðN + 1Þ=2N ¼ ðN + 1Þ=2
                         As the number of interconnected devices increases, the switch cost of the fully
                         connected topology is nearly double the crossbar, with both being very high
                         (i.e., quadratic growth). Moreover, the fully connected topology always has higher
                         relative link cost, which grows linearly with the number of nodes. Again, keep in
                         mind that end node links are different from switch links in their length and pack-
                         aging, particularly for direct networks, so they usually have different associated
                         costs. Despite its higher cost, the fully connected topology provides no extra per-
                         formance benefits over the crossbar as both are nonblocking. Thus, crossbar net-
                         works are usually used in practice instead of fully connected networks.

                              A lower-cost alternative to fully connecting all nodes in the network is to
                         directly connect nodes in sequence along a ring topology, as shown in
                         Figure F.13. For bidirectional rings, each of the N nodes now uses only 3 ? 3
                         switches and just two bidirectional network links (shared by neighboring nodes),
                         for a total of N switches and N bidirectional network links. This linear cost excludes
                         the N injection-reception bidirectional links required within nodes.
                              Unlike shared-media networks, rings can allow many simultaneous transfers:
                         the first node can send to the second while the second sends to the third, and so on.
                         However, as dedicated links do not exist between logically nonadjacent node pairs,
                         packets must hop across intermediate nodes before arriving at their destination,
                         increasing their transport latency. For bidirectional rings, packets can be trans-
                         ported in either direction, with the shortest path to the destination usually being
                         the one selected. In this case, packets must travel N/4 network switch hops, on
                         average, with total switch hop count being one more to account for the local switch
                         at the packet source node. Along the way, packets may block on network resources
                         due to other packets contending for the same resources simultaneously.
                              Fully connected and ring-connected networks delimit the two extremes of dis-
                         tributed switched topologies, but there are many points of interest in between for a
                         given set of cost-performance requirements. Generally speaking, the ideal
                         switched-media topology has cost approaching that of a ring but performance

                         Figure F.13 A ring network topology, folded to reduce the length of the longest link.
                         Shaded circles represent switches, and black squares represent end node devices. The
                         gray rectangle signifies a network node consisting of a switch, a device, and its
                         connecting link.
                                                         F.4     Network Topology         ■   F-37

              (A) 2D grid or mesh of 16 nodes                  (B) 2D torus of 16 nodes

                              (C) Hypercube of 16 nodes (16 = 24 so n = 4)

Figure F.14 Direct network topologies that have appeared in commercial systems,
mostly supercomputers.
The shaded circles represent switches, and the black squares represent end node
devices. Switches have many bidirectional network links, but at least one link goes
to the end node device. These basic topologies can be supplemented with extra links
to improve performance and reliability. For example, connecting the switches on the
periphery of the 2D mesh, shown in (a), using the unused ports on each switch forms
a 2D torus, shown in (b). The hypercube topology, shown in (c) is an n-dimensional inter-
connect for 2n nodes, requiring n + 1 ports per switch: one for the n nearest neighbor
nodes and one for the end node device.

approaching that of a fully connected topology. Figure F.14 illustrates three pop-
ular direct network topologies commonly used in systems spanning the cost-
performance spectrum. All of them consist of sets of nodes arranged along multiple
dimensions with a regular interconnection pattern among nodes that can be
expressed mathematically. In the mesh or grid topology, all the nodes in each
dimension form a linear array. In the torus topology, all the nodes in each dimen-
sion form a ring. Both of these topologies provide direct communication to neigh-
boring nodes with the aim of reducing the number of hops suffered by packets in
the network with respect to the ring. This is achieved by providing greater connec-
tivity through additional dimensions, typically no more than three in commercial
systems. The hypercube or n-cube topology is a particular case of the mesh in
which only two nodes are interconnected along each dimension, leading to a num-
ber of dimensions, n, that must be large enough to interconnect all N nodes in the
system (i.e., n ¼ log2 N). The hypercube provides better connectivity than meshes
F-38   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         and tori at the expense of higher link and switch costs, in terms of the number of
                         links and number of ports per node.

             Example     Compute the cost of interconnecting N devices using a torus topology relative to
                         doing so using a fat tree topology. Consider separately the relative cost of the bidi-
                         rectional links and the relative cost of the switches—which is assumed to grow
                         quadratically with the number of bidirectional ports. Provide an approximate
                         expression for the case of switches being similar in size.

               Answer    Using k ? k switches, the fat tree requires 2 N/k (logk/2 N) switches, assuming the
                         last stage (the root) has the same number of switches as each of the other stages.
                         Given that the number of bidirectional ports in each switch is k (i.e., there are k
                         input ports and k output ports for a k ? k switch) and that the switch cost grows
                         quadratically with this, total network switch cost is proportional to 2kN logk/2
                         N. The link cost is N logk/2 N as each of the logk/2 N stages requires N bidirectional
                         links, including those between the devices and the fat tree. The torus requires as
                         many switches as nodes, each of them having 2n + 1 bidirectional ports, including
                         the port to attach the communicating device, where n is the number of dimensions.
                         Hence, total switch cost for the torus is (2n + 1)2N. Each of the torus nodes requires
                         2n + 1 bidirectional links for the n different dimensions and the connection for its
                         end node device, but as the dimensional links are shared by two nodes, the total
                         number of links is (2n/2 + 1)N ¼ (n + 1)N bidirectional links for all N nodes. Thus,
                         the relative costs of the torus topology with respect to the fat tree are
                                  Relative costswitches ¼ ð2n + 1Þ2 N=2kN log k=2 N ¼ ð2n + 1Þ2 =2k log k=2 N
                                        Relative costlinks ¼ ðn + 1ÞN=N log k=2 N ¼ ðn + 1Þ= log k=2 N

                         When switch sizes are similar, 2n + 1 ffi k. In this case, the relative cost is
                             Relative costswitches ¼ ð2n + 1Þ2 =2k log k=2 N ¼ ð2n + 1Þ=2 log k=2 N ¼ k=2 log k=2 N

                         When the number of switch ports (also called switch degree) is small, tori have
                         lower cost, particularly when the number of dimensions is low. This is an espe-
                         cially useful property when N is large. On the other hand, when larger switches
                         and/or a high number of tori dimensions are used, fat trees are less costly and pref-
                         erable. For example, when interconnecting 256 nodes, a fat tree is four times more
                         expensive in terms of switch and link costs when 4 ? 4 switches are used. This
                         higher cost is compensated for by lower network contention, on average. The
                         fat tree is comparable in cost to the torus when 8 ? 8 switches are used (e.g., for
                         interconnecting 256 nodes). For larger switch sizes beyond this, the torus costs
                         more than the fat tree as each node includes a switch. This cost can be amortized
                         by connecting multiple end node devices per switch, called bristling.

                            The topologies depicted in Figure F.14 all have in common the interesting
                         characteristic of having their network links arranged in several orthogonal
                         dimensions in a regular way. In fact, these topologies all happen to be particular
                                              F.4    Network Topology      ■   F-39

instances of a larger class of direct network topologies known as k-ary n-cubes,
where k signifies the number of nodes interconnected in each of the n dimen-
sions. The symmetry and regularity of these topologies simplify network imple-
mentation (i.e, packaging) and packet routing as the movement of a
packet along a given network dimension does not modify the number of remain-
ing hops in any other dimension toward its destination. As we will see in the
next section, this topological property can be readily exploited by simple rout-
ing algorithms.
    Like their indirect counterpart, direct networks can introduce blocking among
packets that concurrently request the same path, or part of it. The only exception is
fully connected networks. The same way that the number of stages and switch hops
in indirect networks can be reduced by using larger switches, the hop count in
direct networks can likewise be reduced by increasing the number of topological
dimensions via increased switch degree.
    It may seem to be a good idea always to maximize the number of dimen-
sions for a system of a certain size and switch cost. However, this is not nec-
essarily the case. Most electronic systems are built within our three-dimensional
(3D) world using planar (2D) packaging technology such as integrated circuit
chips, printed circuit boards, and backplanes. Direct networks with up to three
dimensions can be implemented using relatively short links within this 3D
space, independent of system size. Links in higher-dimensioned networks
would require increasingly longer wires or fiber. This increase in link length
with system size is also indicative of MINs, including fat trees, which require
either long links within all the stages or increasingly longer links as more stages
are added. As we saw in the first example given in Section F.2, flow-controlled
buffers increase in size proportionally to link length, thus requiring greater sil-
icon area. This is among the reasons why the supercomputer with the largest
number of compute nodes existing in 2005, the IBM Blue Gene/L, implemented
a 3D torus network for interprocessor communication. A fat tree would have
required much longer links, rendering a 64K node system less feasible. This
highlights the importance of correctly selecting the proper network topology
that meets system requirements.
    Besides link length, other constraints derived from implementing the topology
may also limit the degree to which a topology can scale. These are available pin-out
and achievable bisection bandwidth. Pin count is a local restriction on the band-
width of a chip, printed circuit board, and backplane (or chassis) connector. In
a direct network that integrates processor cores and switches on a single chip or
multichip module, pin bandwidth is used both for interfacing with main memory
and for implementing node links. In this case, limited pin count could reduce the
number of switch ports or bit lines per link. In an indirect network, switches are
implemented separately from processor cores, allowing most of the pins to be ded-
icated to communication bandwidth. However, as switches are grouped onto
boards, the aggregate of all input-output links of the switch fabric on a board
for a given topology must not exceed the board connector pin-outs.
    The bisection bandwidth is a more global restriction that gives the interconnect
density and bandwidth that can be achieved by a given implementation
F-40    ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                              (packaging) technology. Interconnect density and clock frequency are related to
                              each other: When wires are packed closer together, crosstalk and parasitic capac-
                              itance increase, which usually impose a lower clock frequency. For example, the
                              availability and spacing of metal layers limit wire density and frequency of on-chip
                              networks, and copper track density limits wire density and frequency on a printed
                              circuit board. To be implementable, the topology of a network must not exceed the
                              available bisection bandwidth of the implementation technology. Most networks
                              implemented to date are constrained more so by pin-out limitations rather than
                              bisection bandwidth, particularly with the recent move to blade-based systems.
                              Nevertheless, bisection bandwidth largely affects performance.
                                  For a given topology, bisection bandwidth, BWBisection, is calculated by
                              dividing the network into two roughly equal parts—each with half the
                              nodes—and summing the bandwidth of the links crossing the imaginary divid-
                              ing line. For nonsymmetric topologies, bisection bandwidth is the smallest of all
                              pairs of equal-sized divisions of the network. For a fully connected network, the
                              bisection bandwidth is proportional to N2/2 unidirectional links (or N2/4 bidi-
                              rectional links), where N is the number of nodes. For a bus, bisection bandwidth
                              is the bandwidth of just the one shared half-duplex link. For other topologies,
                              values lie in between these two extremes. Network injection and reception
                              bisection bandwidth is commonly used as a reference value, which is N/2 for
                              a network with N injection and reception links, respectively. Any network
                              topology that provides this bisection bandwidth is said to have full bisection
                              bandwidth.
                                  Figure F.15 summarizes the number of switches and links required, the corre-
                              sponding switch size, the maximum and average switch hop distances between
                              nodes, and the bisection bandwidth in terms of links for several topologies
                              discussed in this section for interconnecting 64 nodes.

Evaluation category         Bus     Ring        2D mesh      2D torus     Hypercube       Fat tree    Fully connected
Performance
  BWBisection in # links       1           2          8           16            32             32           1024
  Max (ave.) hop count      1 (1)   32 (16)      14 (7)        8 (4)          6 (3)        11 (9)            1 (1)
Cost
  I/O ports per switch       NA            3          5            5             7              4              64
  Number of switches         NA            64        64           64            64            192              64
  Number of net. links         1           64       112          128           192            320           2016
  Total number of links        1        128         176          192           256            384           2080

Figure F.15 Performance and cost of several network topologies for 64 nodes. The bus is the standard reference at
unit network link cost and bisection bandwidth. Values are given in terms of bidirectional links and ports. Hop count
includes a switch and its output link, but not the injection link at end nodes. Except for the bus, values are given for
the number of network links and total number of links, including injection/reception links between end node devices
and the network.
                                                                               F.4   Network Topology        ■   F-41

                         Effects of Topology on Network Performance
                         Switched network topologies require packets to take one or more hops to reach
                         their destination, where each hop represents the transport of a packet through a
                         switch and one of its corresponding links. Interestingly, each switch and its corre-
                         sponding links can be modeled as a black box network connecting more than two
                         devices, as was described in the previous section, where the term “devices” here
                         refers to end nodes or other switches. The only differences are that the sending and
                         receiving overheads are null through the switches, and the routing, switching, and
                         arbitration delays are not cumulative but, instead, are delays associated with each
                         switch.
                              As a consequence of the above, if the average packet has to traverse d hops to
                         its destination, then TR + TA + TS ¼ (Tr + Ta + Ts) ? d, where Tr, Ta, and Ts are the
                         routing, arbitration, and switching delays, respectively, of a switch. With the
                         assumption that pipelining over the network is staged on each hop at the packet
                         level (this assumption will be challenged in the next section), the transmission
                         delay is also increased by a factor of the number of hops. Finally, with the simpli-
                         fying assumption that all injection links to the first switch or stage of switches and
                         all links (including reception links) from the switches have approximately the same
                         length and delay, the total propagation delay through the network TTotalProp is the
                         propagation delay through a single link, TLinkProp, multiplied by d + 1, which is the
                         hop count plus one to account for the injection link. Thus, the best-case lower-
                         bound expression for average packet latency in the network (i.e., the latency in
                         the absence of contention) is given by the following expression:
                                                                           Packet size
Latency ¼ Sending overhead + TLinkProp ? ðd + 1Þ + ðTr + Ta + Ts Þ ? d +               ? ðd + 1Þ + Receiving overhead
                                                                           Bandwidth
                         Again, the expression on page F-40 assumes that switches are able to pipeline
                         packet transmission at the packet level.
                             Following the method presented previously, we can estimate the best-case
                         upper bound for effective bandwidth by finding the narrowest section of the
                         end-to-end network pipe. Focusing on the internal network portion of that pipe,
                         network bandwidth is determined by the blocking properties of the topology.
                         Non-blocking behavior can be achieved only by providing many alternative paths
                         between every source-destination pair, leading to an aggregate network bandwidth
                         that is many times higher than the aggregate network injection or reception band-
                         width. This is quite costly. As this solution usually is prohibitively expensive, most
                         networks have different degrees of blocking, which reduces the utilization of the
                         aggregate bandwidth provided by the topology. This, too, is costly but not in terms
                         of performance.
                             The amount of blocking in a network depends on its topology and the traffic
                         distribution. Assuming the bisection bandwidth, BWBisection, of a topology is
                         implementable (as typically is the case), it can be used as a constant measure of
                         the maximum degree of blocking in a network. In the ideal case, the network
                         always achieves full bisection bandwidth irrespective of the traffic behavior, thus
F-42   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         transferring the bottlenecking point to the injection or reception links. However, as
                         packets destined to locations in the other half of the network necessarily must cross
                         the bisection links, those links pose as potential bottleneck links—potentially
                         reducing the network bandwidth to below full bisection bandwidth. Fortunately,
                         not all of the traffic must cross the network bisection, allowing more of the aggre-
                         gate network bandwidth provided by the topology to be utilized. Also, network
                         topologies with a higher number of bisection links tend to have less blocking as
                         more alternative paths are possible to reach destinations and, hence, a higher per-
                         centage of the aggregate network bandwidth can be utilized. If only a fraction of the
                         traffic must cross the network bisection, as captured by a bisection traffic fraction
                         parameter γ (0 < γ ? 1), the network pipe at the bisection is, effectively, widened by
                         the reciprocal of that fraction, assuming a traffic distribution that loads the bisec-
                         tion links at least as heavily, on average, as other network links. This defines the
                         upper limit on achievable network bandwidth, BWNetwork:
                                                                        BWBisection
                                                          BWNetwork ¼
                                                                           γ
                         Accordingly, the expression for effective bandwidth becomes the following when
                         network topology is taken into consideration:
                                                                                                                  
                                                                           BWBisection
                           Effective bandwidth ¼ min N ? BWLinkInjection ,             , σ ? N ? BWLinkReception
                                                                              γ
                         It is important to note that γ depends heavily on the traffic patterns generated
                         by applications. It is a measured quantity or calculated from detailed traffic
                         analysis.

             Example     A common communication pattern in scientific programs is to have nearest neigh-
                         bor elements of a two-dimensional array to communicate in a given direction. This
                         pattern is sometimes called NEWS communication, standing for north, east, west,
                         and south—the directions on a compass. Map an 8 ? 8 array of elements one-to-
                         one onto 64 end node devices interconnected in the following topologies: bus, ring,
                         2D mesh, 2D torus, hypercube, fully connected, and fat tree. How long does it take
                         in the best case for each node to send one message to its northern neighbor and one
                         to its eastern neighbor, assuming packets are allowed to use any minimal path pro-
                         vided by the topology? What is the corresponding effective bandwidth? Ignore ele-
                         ments that have no northern or eastern neighbors. To simplify the analysis, assume
                         that all networks experience unit packet transport time for each network hop—that
                         is, TLinkProp, Tr, Ta, Ts, and packet transmission time for each hop sum to one. Also
                         assume the delay through injection links is included in this unit time, and sending/
                         receiving overhead is null.

               Answer    This communication pattern requires us to send 2 ? (64 ? 8) or 112 total packets—
                         that is, 56 packets in each of the two communication phases: northward and east-
                         ward. The number of hops suffered by packets depends on the topology. Commu-
                         nication between sources and destinations are one-to-one, so σ is 100%.
                                               F.4   Network Topology      ■   F-43

The injection and reception bandwidth cap the effective bandwidth to a maximum
of 64 BW units (even though the communication pattern requires only 56 BW
units). However, this maximum may get scaled down by the achievable network
bandwidth, which is determined by the bisection bandwidth and the fraction of
traffic crossing it, γ, both of which are topology dependent. Here are the various
cases:
■   Bus—The mapping of the 8 ? 8 array elements to nodes makes no difference
    for the bus as all nodes are equally distant at one hop away. However,
    the 112 transfers are done sequentially, taking a total of 112 time units.
    The bisection bandwidth is 1, and γ is 100%. Thus, effective bandwidth
    is only 1 BW unit.
■   Ring—Assume the first row of the array is mapped to nodes 0 to 7, the second
    row to nodes 8 to 15, and so on. It takes just one time unit for all nodes simul-
    taneously to send to their eastern neighbor (i.e., a transfer from node i to node
    i + 1). With this mapping, the northern neighbor for each node is exactly eight
    hops away so it takes eight time units, which also is done in parallel for all
    nodes. Total communication time is, therefore, 9 time units. The bisection
    bandwidth is 2 bidirectional links (assuming a bidirectional ring), which is
    less than the full bisection bandwidth of 32 bidirectional links. For eastward
    communication, because only 2 of the eastward 56 packets must cross the
    bisection in the worst case, the bisection links do not pose as bottlenecks.
    For northward communication, 8 of the 56 packets must cross the two bisec-
    tion links, yielding a γ of 10/112 ¼ 8.93%. Thus, the network bandwidth is
    2/.0893 ¼ 22.4 BW units. This limits the effective bandwidth at 22.4 BW
    units as well, which is less than half the bandwidth required by the commu-
    nication pattern.
■   2D mesh—There are eight rows and eight columns in our grid of 64 nodes,
    which is a perfect match to the NEWS communication. It takes a total of just
    2 time units for all nodes to send simultaneously to their northern neighbors
    followed by simultaneous communication to their eastern neighbors. The
    bisection bandwidth is 8 bidirectional links, which is less than full bisection
    bandwidth. However, the perfect matching of this nearest neighbor communi-
    cation pattern on this topology allows the maximum effective bandwidth to be
    achieved regardless. For eastward communication, 8 of the 56 packets must
    cross the bisection in the worst case, which does not exceed the bisection band-
    width. None of the northward communications crosses the same network bisec-
    tion, yielding a γ of 8/112 ¼ 7.14% and a network bandwidth of 8/0.0714 ¼ 112
    BW units. The effective bandwidth is, therefore, limited by the communication
    pattern at 56 BW units as opposed to the mesh network.
■   2D torus—Wrap-around links of the torus are not used for this communication
    pattern, so the torus has the same mapping and performance as the mesh.
F-44   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         ■   Hypercube—Assume elements in each row are mapped to the same location
                             within the eight 3-cubes comprising the hypercube such that consecutive row
                             elements are mapped to nodes only one hop away. Northern neighbors can be
                             similarly mapped to nodes only one hop away in an orthogonal dimension. Thus,
                             the communication pattern takes just 2 time units. The hypercube provides full
                             bisection bandwidth of 32 links, but at most only 8 of the 112 packets must cross
                             the bisection. Thus, effective bandwidth is limited only by the communication
                             pattern to be 56 BW units, not by the hypercube network.
                         ■   Fully connected—Here, nodes are equally distant at one hop away, regardless
                             of the mapping. Parallel transfer of packets in both the northern and eastern
                             directions would take only 1 time unit if the injection and reception links
                             could source and sink two packets at a time. As this is not the case, 2 time units
                             are required. Effective bandwidth is limited by the communication pattern
                             at 56 BW units, so the 1024 network bisection links largely go underutilized.
                         ■   Fat tree—Assume the same mapping of elements to nodes as is done for the
                             ring and the use of switches with eight bidirectional ports. This allows simul-
                             taneous communication to eastern neighbors that takes at most three hops and,
                             therefore, 3 time units through the three bidirectional stages interconnecting the
                             eight nodes in each of the eight groups of nodes. The northern neighbor for
                             each node resides in the adjacent group of eight nodes, which requires five
                             hops, or 5 time units. Thus, the total time required on the fat tree is 8 time units.
                             The fat tree provides full bisection bandwidth, so in the worst case of half the
                             traffic needing to cross the bisection, an effective bandwidth of 56 BW units (as
                             limited by the communication pattern and not by the fattree network) is
                             achieved when packets are continually injected.

                              The above example should not lead one to the wrong conclusion that meshes
                         are just as good as tori, hypercubes, fat trees, and other networks with higher bisec-
                         tion bandwidth. A number of simplifications that benefit low-bisection networks
                         were assumed to ease the analysis. In practice, packets typically are larger than the
                         link width and occupy links for many more than just one network cycle. Also,
                         many communication patterns do not map so cleanly to the 2D mesh network
                         topology; instead, usually they are more global and irregular in nature. These
                         and other factors combine to increase the chances of packets blocking in low-
                         bisection networks, increasing latency and reducing effective bandwidth.
                              To put this discussion on topologies into further perspective, Figure F.16
                         lists various attributes of topologies used in commercial high-performance computers.

               F.5       Network Routing, Arbitration, and Switching
                         Routing, arbitration, and switching are performed at every switch along a packet’s
                         path in a switched media network, no matter what the network topology. Numerous
                         interesting techniques for accomplishing these network functions have been
                                             F.5      Network Routing, Arbitration, and Switching        ■   F-45

                                                                                     Raw
                          Max.                                                       network
                          number                         Injection     # of data     link BW     Raw network
           System         of nodes                       [reception]   bits per      per         bisection BW
           [network]      [× #       Basic network       node BW in    link per      direction   (bidirectional)
Company    name           CPUs]      topology            MB/sec        direction     in MB/sec   in GB/sec
Intel      ASCI Red       4816       2D mesh             400 [400]     16 bits       400         51.2
           Paragon        [?2]       64 ? 64
IBM        ASCI White     512        Bidirectional       500 [500]     8 bits (+1    500         256
           SP Power3      [?16]      MIN with 8-                       bit of
           [Colony]                  port                              control)
                                     bidirectional
                                     switches
                                     (typically a fat
                                     tree or Omega)
Intel      Thunder        1024       Fat tree with 8-    928 [928]     8 bits (+2    1333        1365
           Itanium2       [?4]       port                              of control
           Tiger4                    bidirectional                     for 4b/5b
           [QsNetII]                 switches                          encoding)
Cray       XT3            30,508     3D torus            3200 [3200]   12 bits       3800        5836.8
           [SeaStar]      [?1]       40 ? 32 ? 24
Cray       X1E            1024       4-way bristled      1600 [1600]   16 bits       1600        51.2
                          [?1]       2D torus
                                     (?23 ? 11)
                                     with express
                                     links
IBM        ASC Purple     >1280      Bidirectional       2000 [2000]   8 bits (+2    2000        2560
           pSeries 575    [?8]       MIN with 8-                       bits of
           [Federation]              port                              control for
                                     bidirectional                     novel 5b/
                                     switches                          6b
                                     (typically a fat                  encoding
                                     tree or Omega)                    scheme)
IBM        Blue Gene/     65,536     3D torus            612.5         1 bit (bit    175         358.4
           L eServer      [?2]       32 ? 32 ? 64        [1050]        serial)
           Sol. [Torus
           Net.]

Figure F.16 Topological characteristics of interconnection networks used in commercial high-performance
machines.

                          proposed in the literature. In this section, we focus on describing a representative
                          set of approaches used in commercial systems for the more commonly used net-
                          work topologies. Their impact on performance is also highlighted.

                          Routing
                          The routing algorithm defines which network path, or paths, are allowed for each
                          packet. Ideally, the routing algorithm supplies shortest paths to all packets such that
F-46   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         traffic load is evenly distributed across network links to minimize contention.
                         However, some paths provided by the network topology may not be allowed in
                         order to guarantee that all packets can be delivered, no matter what the traffic
                         behavior. Paths that have an unbounded number of allowed nonminimal hops from
                         packet sources, for instance, may result in packets never reaching their destina-
                         tions. This situation is referred to as livelock. Likewise, paths that cause a set of
                         packets to block in the network forever waiting only for network resources (i.e.,
                         links or associated buffers) held by other packets in the set also prevent packets
                         from reaching their destinations. This situation is referred to as deadlock. As dead-
                         lock arises due to the finiteness of network resources, the probability of its occur-
                         rence increases with increased network traffic and decreased availability of
                         network resources. For the network to function properly, the routing algorithm must
                         guard against this anomaly, which can occur in various forms—for example, routing
                         deadlock, request-reply (protocol) deadlock, and fault-induced (reconfiguration)
                         deadlock, etc. At the same time, for the network to provide the highest possible per-
                         formance, the routing algorithm must be efficient—allowing as many routing
                         options to packets as there are paths provided by the topology, in the best case.
                              The simplest way of guarding against livelock is to restrict routing such that
                         only minimal paths from sources to destinations are allowed or, less restrictively,
                         only a limited number of nonminimal hops. The strictest form has the added benefit
                         of consuming the minimal amount of network bandwidth, but it prevents packets
                         from being able to use alternative nonminimal paths in case of contention or faults
                         along the shortest (minimal) paths.
                              Deadlock is more difficult to guard against. Two common strategies are used in
                         practice: avoidance and recovery. In deadlock avoidance, the routing algorithm
                         restricts the paths allowed by packets to only those that keep the global network
                         state deadlock-free. A common way of doing this consists of establishing an order-
                         ing between a set of resources—the minimal set necessary to support network full
                         access—and granting those resources to packets in some total or partial order such
                         that cyclic dependency cannot form on those resources. This allows an escape path
                         always to be supplied to packets no matter where they are in the network to avoid
                         entering a deadlock state. In deadlock recovery, resources are granted to packets
                         without regard for avoiding deadlock. Instead, as deadlock is possible, some mech-
                         anism is used to detect the likely existence of deadlock. If detected, one or more
                         packets are removed from resources in the deadlock set—possibly by regressively
                         dropping the packets or by progressively redirecting the packets onto special dead-
                         lock recovery resources. The freed network resources are then granted to other
                         packets needing them to resolve the deadlock.
                              Let us consider routing algorithms designed for distributed switched networks.
                         Figure F.17(a) illustrates one of many possible deadlocked configurations for
                         packets within a region of a 2D mesh network. The routing algorithm can avoid
                         all such deadlocks (and livelocks) by allowing only the use of minimal paths that
                         cross the network dimensions in some total order. That is, links of a given dimen-
                         sion are not supplied to a packet by the routing algorithm until no other links are
                         needed by the packet in all of the preceding dimensions for it to reach its
                                                   F.5   Network Routing, Arbitration, and Switching        ■        F-47

      s1                                      s2                      s1                                        s2

                   d3           d4            d5                                   d3           d4           d5

                   d2           d1                                                 d2           d1

      s4                        s5            s3                      s4                        s5              s3

(A)                                                             (B)

Figure F.17 A mesh network with packets routing from sources, si, to destinations, di. (a) Deadlock forms from
packets destined to d1 through d4 blocking on others in the same set that fully occupy their requested buffer
resources one hop away from their destinations. This deadlock cycle causes other packets needing those resources
also to block, like packets from s5 destined to d5 that have reached node s3. (b) Deadlock is avoided using dimension-
order routing. In this case, packets exhaust their routes in the X dimension before turning into the Y dimension in
order to complete their routing.

                             destination. This is illustrated in Figure F.17(b), where dimensions are crossed in
                             XY dimension order. All the packets must follow the same order when traversing
                             dimensions, exiting a dimension only when links are no longer required in that
                             dimension. This well-known algorithm is referred to as dimension-order routing
                             (DOR) or e-cube routing in hypercubes. It is used in many commercial systems
                             built from distributed switched networks and on-chip networks. As this routing
                             algorithm always supplies the same path for a given source-destination pair, it
                             is a deterministic routing algorithm.
                                 Crossing dimensions in order on some minimal set of resources required to
                             support network full access avoids deadlock in meshes and hypercubes. However,
                             for distributed switched topologies that have wrap-around links (e.g., rings and
                             tori), a total ordering on a minimal set of resources within each dimension is also
                             needed if resources are to be used to full capacity. Alternatively, some empty
                             resources or bubbles along the dimensions would be required to remain below full
                             capacity and avoid deadlock. To allow full access, either the physical links must be
                             duplicated or the logical buffers associated with each link must be duplicated,
                             resulting in physical channels or virtual channels, respectively, on which the
                             ordering is done. Ordering is not necessary on all network resources to avoid dead-
                             lock—it is needed only on some minimal set required to support network full
                             access (i.e., some escape resource set). Routing algorithms based on this technique
                             (called Duato’s protocol) can be defined that allow alternative paths provided by
                             the topology to be used for a given source-destination pair in addition to the escape
                             resource set. One of those allowed paths must be selected, preferably the most
F-48   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         efficient one. Adapting the path in response to prevailing network traffic condi-
                         tions enables the aggregate network bandwidth to be better utilized and contention
                         to be reduced. Such routing capability is referred to as adaptive routing and is used
                         in many commercial systems.

             Example     How many of the possible dimensional turns are eliminated by dimension-order
                         routing on an n-dimensional mesh network? What is the fewest number of turns
                         that actually need to be eliminated while still maintaining connectedness and dead-
                         lock freedom? Explain using a 2D mesh network.

               Answer    The dimension-order routing algorithm eliminates exactly half of the possible
                         dimensional turns as it is easily proven that all turns from any lower-ordered
                         dimension into any higher-ordered dimension are allowed, but the converse is
                         not true. For example, of the eight possible turns in the 2D mesh shown in
                         Figure F.17, the four turns from X+ to Y+, X+ to Y?, X? to Y+, and X? to Y?
                         are allowed, where the signs (+ or ?) refer to the direction of travel within a dimen-
                         sion. The four turns from Y+ to X+, Y+ to X?, Y? to X+, and Y? to X? are dis-
                         allowed turns. The elimination of these turns prevents cycles of any kind from
                         forming—and, thus, avoids deadlock—while keeping the network connected.
                         However, it does so at the expense of not allowing any routing adaptivity.
                             The Turn Model routing algorithm proves that the minimum number of elim-
                         inated turns to prevent cycles and maintain connectedness is a quarter of the pos-
                         sible turns, but the right set of turns must be chosen. Only some particular set of
                         eliminated turns allow both requirements to be satisfied. With the elimination of
                         the wrong set of a quarter of the turns, it is possible for combinations of allowed
                         turns to emulate the eliminated ones (and, thus, form cycles and deadlock) or for
                         the network not to be connected. For the 2D mesh, for example, it is possible to
                         eliminate only the two turns ending in the westward direction (i.e., Y+ to X?
                         and Y? to X?) by requiring packets to start their routes in the westward direction
                         (if needed) to maintain connectedness. Alternatives to this west-first routing for 2D
                         meshes are negative-first routing and north-last routing. For these, the extra quarter
                         of turns beyond that supplied by DOR allows for partial adaptivity in routing, mak-
                         ing these adaptive routing algorithms.

                             Routing algorithms for centralized switched networks can similarly be
                         defined to avoid deadlocks by restricting the use of resources in some total
                         or partial order. For fat trees, resources can be totally ordered along paths start-
                         ing from the input leaf stage upward to the root and then back down to the out-
                         put leaf stage. The routing algorithm can allow packets to use resources in
                         increasing partial order, first traversing up the tree until they reach some least
                         common ancestor (LCA) of the source and destination, and then back down the
                         tree until they reach their destinations. As there are many least common ances-
                         tors for a given destination, multiple alternative paths are allowed while going
                         up the tree, making the routing algorithm adaptive. However, only a single
                   F.5   Network Routing, Arbitration, and Switching        ■   F-49

deterministic path to the destination is provided by the fat tree topology from a
least common ancestor. This self-routing property is common to many MINs
and can be readily exploited: The switch output port at each stage is given sim-
ply by shifts of the destination node address.
    More generally, a tree graph can be mapped onto any topology—whether
direct or indirect—and links between nodes at the same tree level can be allowed
by assigning directions to them, where “up” designates paths moving toward the
tree root and “down” designates paths moving away from the root node. This
allows for generic up*/down* routing to be defined on any topology such
that packets follow paths (possibly adaptively) consisting of zero or more up links
followed by zero or more down links to their destination. Up/down ordering pre-
vents cycles from forming, avoiding deadlock. This routing technique was used in
Autonet—a self-configuring switched LAN—and in early Myrinet SANs.
    Routing algorithms are implemented in practice by a combination of the rout-
ing information placed in the packet header by the source node and the routing
control mechanism incorporated in the switches. For source routing, the entire
routing path is precomputed by the source—possibly by table lookup—and placed
in the packet header. This usually consists of the output port or ports supplied for
each switch along the predetermined path from the source to the destination, which
can be stripped off by the routing control mechanism at each switch. An additional
bit field can be included in the header to signify whether adaptive routing is
allowed (i.e., that any one of the supplied output ports can be used). For distributed
routing, the routing information usually consists of the destination address. This is
used by the routing control mechanism in each switch along the path to determine
the next output port, either by computing it using a finite-state machine or by look-
ing it up in a local routing table (i.e., forwarding table). Compared to distributed
routing, source routing simplifies the routing control mechanism within the net-
work switches, but it requires more routing bits in the header of each packet, thus
increasing the header overhead.

Arbitration
The arbitration algorithm determines when requested network paths are available
for packets. Ideally, arbiters maximize the matching of free network resources and
packets requesting those resources. At the switch level, arbiters maximize the
matching of free output ports and packets located in switch input ports requesting
those output ports. When all requests cannot be granted simultaneously, switch
arbiters resolve conflicts by granting output ports to packets in a fair way such that
starvation of requested resources by packets is prevented. This could happen to
packets in shorter queues if a serve-longest-queue (SLQ) scheme is used. For
packets having the same priority level, simple round-robin (RR) or age-based
schemes are sufficiently fair and straightforward to implement.
    Arbitration can be distributed to avoid centralized bottlenecks. A straightfor-
ward technique consists of two phases: a request phase and a grant phase. Let
us assume that each switch input port has an associated queue to hold incoming
F-50   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                             Request          Grant                Request          Grant       Acknowledgment

                          (A)                                    (B)

                         Figure F.18 Two arbitration techniques. (a) Two-phased arbitration in which two of
                         the four input ports are granted requested output ports. (b) Three-phased arbitration
                         in which three of the four input ports are successful in gaining the requested output
                         ports, resulting in higher switch utilization.

                         packets and that each switch output port has an associated local arbiter implement-
                         ing a round-robin strategy. Figure F.18(a) shows a possible set of requests for a
                         four-port switch. In the request phase, packets at the head of each input port queue
                         send a single request to the arbiters corresponding to the output ports requested by
                         them. Then, each output port arbiter independently arbitrates among the requests it
                         receives, selecting only one. In the grant phase, one of the requests to each arbiter
                         is granted the requested output port. When two packets from different input ports
                         request the same output port, only one receives a grant, as shown in the figure. As a
                         consequence, some output port bandwidth remains unused even though all input
                         queues have packets to transmit.
                             The simple two-phase technique can be improved by allowing several simul-
                         taneous requests to be made by each input port, possibly coming from different
                         virtual channels or from multiple adaptive routing options. These requests are sent
                         to different output port arbiters. By submitting more than one request per input
                         port, the probability of matching increases. Now, arbitration requires three phases:
                         request, grant, and acknowledgment. Figure F.18(b) shows the case in which up to
                         two requests can be made by packets at each input port. In the request phase,
                         requests are submitted to output port arbiters, and these arbiters select one of
                         the received requests, as is done for the two-phase arbiter. Likewise, in the grant
                         phase, the selected requests are granted to the corresponding requesters. Taking
                         into account that an input port can submit more than one request, it may receive
                         more than one grant. Thus, it selects among possibly multiple grants using some
                         arbitration strategy such as round-robin. The selected grants are confirmed to the
                         corresponding output port arbiters in the acknowledgment phase.
                             As can be seen in Figure F.18(b), it could happen that an input port that submits
                         several requests does not receive any grants, while some of the requested ports
                         remain free. Because of this, a second arbitration iteration can improve the prob-
                         ability of matching. In this iteration, only the requests corresponding to non-
                         matched input and output ports are submitted. Iterative arbiters with multiple
                    F.5   Network Routing, Arbitration, and Switching          ■   F-51

requests per input port are able to increase the utilization of switch output ports and,
thus, the network link bandwidth. However, this comes at the expense of additional
arbiter complexity and increased arbitration delay, which could increase the router
clock cycle time if it is on the critical path.

Switching
The switching technique defines how connections are established in the network. Ide-
ally, connections between network resources are established or “switched in” only for
as long as they are actually needed and exactly at the point that they are ready and
needed to be used, considering both time and space. This allows efficient use of avail-
able network bandwidth by competing traffic flows and minimal latency. Connections
at each hop along the topological path allowed by the routing algorithm and granted by
the arbitration algorithm can be established in three basic ways: prior to packet arrival
using circuit switching, upon receipt of the entire packet using store-and-forward
packet switching, or upon receipt of only portions of the packet with unit size no smal-
ler than that of the packet header using cut-through packet switching.
     Circuit switching establishes a circuit a priori such that network bandwidth is
allocated for packet transmissions along an entire source-destination path. It is
possible to pipeline packet transmission across the circuit using staging at each
hop along the path, a technique known as pipelined circuit switching. As routing,
arbitration, and switching are performed only once for one or more packets, routing
bits are not needed in the header of packets, thus reducing latency and overhead. This
can be very efficient when information is continuously transmitted between devices
for the same circuit setup. However, as network bandwidth is removed from the
shared pool and preallocated regardless of whether sources are in need of consuming
it or not, circuit switching can be very inefficient and highly wasteful of bandwidth.
     Packet switching enables network bandwidth to be shared and used more
efficiently when packets are transmitted intermittently, which is the more common
case. Packet switching comes in two main varieties—store-and-forward and
cutthrough switching, both of which allow network link bandwidth to be multi-
plexed on packet-sized or smaller units of information. This better enables band-
width sharing by packets originating from different sources. The finer granularity
of sharing, however, increases the overhead needed to perform switching: Routing,
arbitration, and switching must be performed for every packet, and routing and
flow control bits are required for every packet if flow control is used.
     Store-and-forward packet switching establishes connections such that a packet
is forwarded to the next hop in sequence along its source-destination path only after
the entire packet is first stored (staged) at the receiving switch. As packets are
completely stored at every switch before being transmitted, links are completely
decoupled, allowing full link bandwidth utilization even if links have very different
bandwidths. This property is very important in WANs, but the price to pay is
packet latency; the total routing, arbitration, and switching delay is multiplicative
with the number of hops, as we have seen in Section F.4 when analyzing perfor-
mance under this assumption.
F-52   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                             Cut-through packet switching establishes connections such that a packet can “cut
                         through” switches in a pipelined manner once the header portion of the packet
                         (or equivalent amount of payload trailing the header) is staged at receiving switches.
                         That is, the rest of the packet need not arrive before switching in the granted resources.
                         This allows routing, arbitration, and switching delay to be additive with the number of
                         hops rather than multiplicative to reduce total packet latency. Cut-through comes
                         in two varieties, the main differences being the size of the unit of information on
                         which flow control is applied and, consequently, the buffer requirements at switches.
                         Virtual cut-through switching implements flow control at the packet level, whereas
                         wormhole switching implements it on flow units, or flits, which are smaller than
                         the maximum packet size but usually at least as large as the packet header. Since
                         wormhole switches need to be capable of storing only a small portion of a packet,
                         packets that block in the network may span several switches. This can cause other
                         packets to block on the links they occupy, leading to premature network saturation
                         and reduced effective bandwidth unless some centralized buffer is used within the
                         switch to store them—a technique called buffered wormhole switching. As chips
                         can implement relatively large buffers in current technology, virtual cut-through is
                         the more commonly used switching technique. However, wormhole switching
                         may still be preferred in OCNs designed to minimize silicon resources.
                             Premature network saturation caused by wormhole switching can be mitigated
                         by allowing several packets to share the physical bandwidth of a link simulta-
                         neously via time-multiplexed switching at the flit level. This requires physical links
                         to have a set of virtual channels (i.e., the logical buffers mentioned previously) at
                         each end, into which packets are switched. Before, we saw how virtual channels
                         can be used to decouple physical link bandwidth from buffered packets in such a
                         way as to avoid deadlock. Now, virtual channels are multiplexed in such a way that
                         bandwidth is switched in and used by flits of a packet to advance even though the
                         packet may share some links in common with a blocked packet ahead. This, again,
                         allows network bandwidth to be used more efficiently, which, in turn, reduces the
                         average packet latency.

                         Impact on Network Performance
                         Routing, arbitration, and switching can impact the packet latency of a loaded
                         network by reducing the contention delay experienced by packets. For an unloaded
                         network that has no contention, the algorithms used to perform routing and
                         arbitration have no impact on latency other than to determine the amount of delay
                         incurred in implementing those functions at switches—typically, the pin-to-pin
                         latency of a switch chip is several tens of nanoseconds. The only change to the
                         best-case packet latency expression given in the previous section comes from
                         the switching technique. Store-and-forward packet switching was assumed before
                         in which transmission delay for the entire packet is incurred on all d hops plus at the
                         source node. For cut-through packet switching, transmission delay is pipelined
                         across the network links comprising the packet’s path at the granularity of the
                         packet header instead of the entire packet. Thus, this delay component is reduced,
                         as shown in the following lower-bound expression for packet latency:
                                                  F.5   Network Routing, Arbitration, and Switching             ■   F-53

                                                                           ðPacket + ðd ? HeaderÞÞ
Latency ¼ Sending overhead + TLinkProp ? ðd + 1Þ + ðTr + τa + TS Þ ? d +                           + Receiving overhead
                                                                                 Bandwidth
                             The effective bandwidth is impacted by how efficiently routing, arbitration, and
                             switching allow network bandwidth to be used. The routing algorithm can distrib-
                             ute traffic more evenly across a loaded network to increase the utilization of the
                             aggregate bandwidth provided by the topology—particularly, by the bisection
                             links. The arbitration algorithm can maximize the number of switch output ports
                             that accept packets, which also increases the utilization of network bandwidth. The
                             switching technique can increase the degree of resource sharing by packets, which
                             further increases bandwidth utilization. These combine to affect network band-
                             width, BWNetwork, by an efficiency factor, ρ, where 0 < ρ ? 1:
                                                                                BWBisection
                                                             BWNetwork ¼ ρ ?
                                                                                   γ
                             The efficiency factor, ρ, is difficult to calculate or to quantify by means other than
                             simulation. Nevertheless, with this parameter we can estimate the best-case upper-
                             bound effective bandwidth by using the following expression that takes into
                             account the effects of routing, arbitration, and switching:
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                     BWBisection
                             Effective bandwidth ¼ min     N ? BWLinkInjection , ρ ?             ,σ ? N ? BWLinkReception
                                                                                        γ
                             We note that ρ also depends on how well the network handles the traffic generated
                             by applications. For instance, ρ could be higher for circuit switching than for
                             cut-through switching if large streams of packets are continually transmitted
                             between a source-destination pair, whereas the converse could be true if packets
                             are transmitted intermittently.

              Example        Compare the performance of deterministic routing versus adaptive routing for a 3D
                             torus network interconnecting 4096 nodes. Do so by plotting latency versus
                             applied load and throughput versus applied load. Also compare the efficiency
                             of the best and worst of these networks. Assume that virtual cut-through switching,
                             three-phase arbitration, and virtual channels are implemented. Consider separately
                             the cases for two and four virtual channels, respectively. Assume that one of the
                             virtual channels uses bubble flow control in dimension order so as to avoid dead-
                             lock; the other virtual channels are used either in dimension order (for deterministic
                             routing) or minimally along shortest paths (for adaptive routing), as is done in the
                             IBM Blue Gene/L torus network.

                Answer       It is very difficult to compute analytically the performance of routing algorithms
                             given that their behavior depends on several network design parameters with com-
                             plex interdependences among them. As a consequence, designers typically resort
                             to cycle-accurate simulators to evaluate performance. One way to evaluate the
                             effect of a certain design decision is to run sets of simulations over a range of net-
                             work loads, each time modifying one of the design parameters of interest while
F-54                                       ■    Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                                                                    keeping the remaining ones fixed. The use of synthetic traffic loads is quite fre-
                                                                    quent in these evaluations as it allows the network to stabilize at a certain working
                                                                    point and for behavior to be analyzed in detail. This is the method we use here
                                                                    (alternatively, trace-driven or execution-driven simulation can be used).
                                                                        Figure F.19 shows the typical interconnection network performance plots. On
                                                                    the left, average packet latency (expressed in network cycles) is plotted as a func-
                                                                    tion of applied load (traffic generation rate) for the two routing algorithms with two
                                                                    and four virtual channels each; on the right, throughput (traffic delivery rate) is
                                                                    similarly plotted. Applied load is normalized by dividing it by the number of nodes
                                                                    in the network (i.e., bytes per cycle per node). Simulations are run under the
                                                                    assumption of uniformly distributed traffic consisting of 256-byte packets, where
                                                                    flits are byte sized. Routing, arbitration, and switching delays are assumed to sum
                                                                    to 1 network cycle per hop while the time-of-flight delay over each link is assumed
                                                                    to be 10 cycles. Link bandwidth is 1 byte per cycle, thus providing results that are
                                                                    independent of network clock frequency.
                                                                        As can be seen, the plots within each graph have similar characteristic shapes,
                                                                    but they have different values. For the latency graph, all start at the no-load latency

                                  10,000

                                                  Deterministic DOR, 2 VC
                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                                  Deterministic DOR, 4 VC
                                                  Adaptive routing, 2 VC
                                   8000           Adaptive routing, 4 VC
                                                                                                      Throughput (bytes/cycle/node)
Average packet latency (cycles)

                                                                                                                                      0.3

                                   6000

                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                   4000

                                                                                                                                      0.1                               Adaptive routing, 4 VC
                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                        Deterministic DOR, 4 VC
                                                                                                                                                                        Adaptive routing, 2 VC
                                                                                                                                                                        Deterministic DOR, 2 VC

                                        0                                                                                              0
                                         0.01     0.09      0.17       0.25        0.33    0.41                                         0.01   0.13   0.25   0.37   0.49    0.61    0.73   0.85   0.97
                                                         Applied load (bytes/cycle/node)                                                                 Applied load (bytes/cycle/node)

                                  (A)                                                                                           (B)

Figure F.19 Deterministic routing is compared against adaptive routing, both with either two or four virtual
channels, assuming uniformly distributed traffic on a 4 K node 3D torus network with virtual cut-through switch-
ing and bubble flow control to avoid deadlock. (a) Average latency is plotted versus applied load, and (b) through-
put is plotted versus applied load (the upper grayish plots show peak throughput, and the lower black plots show
sustained throughput). Simulation data were collected by P. Gilabert and J. Flich at the Universidad Politècnica de
València, Spain (2006).
                   F.5    Network Routing, Arbitration, and Switching         ■   F-55

as predicted by the latency expression given above, then slightly increase with traf-
fic load as contention for network resources increases. At higher applied loads,
latency increases exponentially, and the network approaches its saturation point
as it is unable to absorb the applied load, ¼ causing packets to queue up at their
source nodes awaiting injection. In these simulations, the queues keep growing
over time, making latency tend toward infinity. However, in practice, queues reach
their capacity and trigger the application to stall further packet generation, or the
application throttles itself waiting for acknowledgments/responses to outstanding
packets. Nevertheless, latency grows at a slower rate for adaptive routing as alter-
native paths are provided to packets along congested resources.
    For this same reason, adaptive routing allows the network to reach a higher peak
throughput for the same number of virtual channels as compared to deterministic
routing. At nonsaturation loads, throughput increases fairly linearly with applied
load. When the network reaches its saturation point, however, it is unable to deliver
traffic at the same rate at which traffic is generated. The saturation point, therefore,
indicates the maximum achievable or “peak” throughput, which would be no more
than that predicted by the effective bandwidth expression given above. Beyond
saturation, throughput tends to drop as a consequence of massive head-of-line
blocking across the network (as will be explained further in Section F.6), very
much like cars tend to advance more slowly at rush hour. This is an important
region of the throughput graph as it shows how significant of a performance drop
the routing algorithm can cause if congestion management techniques (discussed
briefly in Section F.7) are not used effectively. In this case, adaptive routing has
more of a performance drop after saturation than deterministic routing, as mea-
sured by the postsaturation sustained throughput.
    For both routing algorithms, more virtual channels (i.e., four) give packets a
greater ability to pass over blocked packets ahead, allowing for a higher peak
throughput as compared to fewer virtual channels (i.e., two). For adaptive routing
with four virtual channels, the peak throughput of 0.43 bytes/cycle/node is near the
maximum of 0.5 bytes/cycle/node that can be obtained with 100% efficiency (i.e.,
ρ ¼ 100%), assuming there is enough injection and reception bandwidth to make
the network bisection the bottlenecking point. In that case, the network bandwidth
is simply 100% times the network bisection bandwidth (BWBisection) divided by the
fraction of traffic crossing the bisection (γ), as given by the expression above. Tak-
ing into account that the bisection splits the torus into two equally sized halves, γ is
equal to 0.5 for uniform traffic as only half the injected traffic is destined to a node
at the other side of the bisection. The BWBisection for a 4096-node 3D torus network
is 16 ? 16 ? 4 unidirectional links times the link bandwidth (i.e., 1 byte/cycle). If
we normalize the bisection bandwidth by dividing it by the number of nodes (as we
did with network bandwidth), the BWBisection is 0.25 bytes/cycle/node. Dividing
this by γ gives the ideal maximally obtainable network bandwidth of 0.5 bytes/
cycle/node.
    We can find the efficiency factor, ρ, of the simulated network simply by divid-
ing the measured peak throughput by the ideal throughput. The efficiency factor for
F-56   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         the network with fully adaptive routing and four virtual channels is 0.43/(0.25/
                         0.5) ¼ 86%, whereas for the network with deterministic routing and two virtual
                         channels it is 0.37/(0.25/0.5) ¼ 74%. Besides the 12% difference in efficiency
                         between the two, another 14% gain in efficiency might be obtained with even bet-
                         ter routing, arbitration, switching, and virtual channel designs.

                             To put this discussion on routing, arbitration, and switching in perspective,
                         Figure F.20 lists the techniques used in SANs designed for commercial high-
                         performance computers. In addition to being applied to the SANs as shown in
                         the figure, the issues discussed in this section also apply to other interconnect
                         domains: from OCNs to WANs.

               F.6       Switch Microarchitecture
                         Network switches implement the routing, arbitration, and switching functions of
                         switched-media networks. Switches also implement buffer management mecha-
                         nisms and, in the case of lossless networks, the associated flow control. For some
                         networks, switches also implement part of the network management functions that
                         explore, configure, and reconfigure the network topology in response to boot-up
                         and failures. Here, we reveal the internal structure of network switches by describ-
                         ing a basic switch microarchitecture and various alternatives suitable for different
                         routing, arbitration, and switching techniques presented previously.

                         Basic Switch Microarchitecture
                         The internal data path of a switch provides connectivity among the input and output
                         ports. Although a shared bus or a multiported central memory could be used, these
                         solutions are insufficient or too expensive, respectively, when the required aggre-
                         gate switch bandwidth is high. Most high-performance switches implement an
                         internal crossbar to provide nonblocking connectivity within the switch, thus
                         allowing concurrent connections between multiple input-output port pairs. Buffer-
                         ing of blocked packets can be done using first in, first out (FIFO) or circular
                         queues, which can be implemented as dynamically allocatable multi-queues
                         (DAMQs) in static RAM to provide high capacity and flexibility. These queues
                         can be placed at input ports (i.e., input buffered switch), output ports (i.e., output
                         buffered switch), centrally within the switch (i.e., centrally buffered switch), or at
                         both the input and output ports of the switch (i.e., input-output-buffered switch).
                         Figure F.21 shows a block diagram of an input-output-buffered switch.
                             Routing can be implemented using a finite-state machine or forwarding table
                         within the routing control unit of switches. In the former case, the routing infor-
                         mation given in the packet header is processed by a finite-state machine that deter-
                         mines the allowed switch output port (or ports if routing is adaptive), according to
                         the routing algorithm. Portions of the routing information in the header are usually
                                                                      F.6   Switch Microarchitecture     ■   F-57

                           Max.
                           number
            System         of nodes   Basic              Switch       Network         Switch         Network
            [network]      [× #       network            queuing      routing         arbitration    switching
Company     name           CPUs]      topology           (buffers)    algorithm       technique      technique
Intel       ASCI Red       4510       2D mesh            Input        Distributed     2-phased       Wormhole
            Paragon        [?2]       (64 ? 64)          buffered     dimension-      RR,            with no
                                                         (1 flit)     order routing   distributed    virtual
                                                                                      across         channels
                                                                                      switch
IBM         ASCI White     512        Bidirectional      Input and    Source-based    2-phased       Buffered
            SP Power3      [?16]      MIN with 8-        central      LCA             RR,            wormhole
            [Colony]                  port               buffer       adaptive,       centralized    and virtual
                                      bidirectional      with         shortest-path   and            cut-through
                                      switches           output       routing, and    distributed    for
                                      (typically a fat   queuing      table-based     at outputs     multicasting,
                                      tree or            (8-way       multicast       for bypass     no virtual
                                      Omega)             speedup)     routing         paths          channels
Intel       Thunder        1024       Fat tree with      Input        Source-based    2-phased       Wormhole
            Itanium2       [?4]       8-port             buffered     LCA             RR,            with 2 virtual
            Tiger4                    bidirectional                   adaptive,       priority,      channels
            [QsNetII]                 switches                        shortest-path   aging,
                                                                      routing         distributed
                                                                                      at output
                                                                                      ports
Cray        XT3            30,508     3D torus           Input with   Distributed     2-phased       Virtual cut-
            [SeaStar]      [?1]       (40 ? 32 ? 24)     staging      table-based     RR,            through with
                                                         output       dimension-      distributed    4 virtual
                                                                      order routing   at output      channels
                                                                                      ports
Cray        X1E            1024       4-way bristled     Input with   Distributed     2-phased       Virtual cut-
                           [?1]       2D torus           virtual      table-based     wavefront      through with
                                      (?23 ? 11)         output       dimension-      (pipelined)    4 virtual
                                      with express       queuing      order routing   global         channels
                                      links                                           arbiter
IBM         ASC Purple     >1280      Bidirectional      Input and    Source and      2-phased       Buffered
            pSeries 575    [?8]       MIN with 8-        central      distributed     RR,            wormhole
            [Federation]              port               buffer       table-based     centralized    and virtual
                                      bidirectional      with         LCA             and            cut-through
                                      switches           output       adaptive,       distributed    for
                                      (typically a fat   queuing      shortest-path   at outputs     multicasting
                                      tree or            (8-way       routing, and    for bypass     with 8 virtual
                                      Omega)             speedup)     multicast       paths          channels
IBM         Blue Gene/     65,536     3D torus           Input-       Distributed,    2-phased       Virtual cut-
            L eServer      [?2]       (32 ? 32 ? 64)     output       adaptive with   SLQ,           through with
            Solution                                     buffered     bubble escape   distributed    4 virtual
            [Torus Net.]                                              virtual         at input and   channels
                                                                      channel         output

Figure F.20 Routing, arbitration, and switching characteristics of interconnections networks in commercial
machines.
F-58       ■      Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                               Input                                                             Output
                              buffers                                                            buffers
Physical                                                                                                                   Physical
channel                                                                                                                    channel
                Link                                                                                              Link

                          Demux

                                                                                 Demux
                                                                Mux

                                                                                                           Mux
               control                                                                                           control

                                                                      Crossbar
                               Input                                                             Output
                              buffers                                                            buffers
Physical                                                                                                                   Physical
channel                                                                                                                    channel
                Link                                                                                              Link
                          Demux

                                                                                 Demux
                                                                Mux

                                                                                                           Mux
               control                                                                                           control

                                                             Routing control and
                                                               arbitration unit

Figure F.21 Basic microarchitectural components of an input-output-buffered switch.

                                        stripped off or modified by the routing control unit after use to simplify processing
                                        at the next switch along the path. When routing is implemented using forwarding
                                        tables, the routing information given in the packet header is used as an address to
                                        access a forwarding table entry that contains the allowed switch output port(s) pro-
                                        vided by the routing algorithm. Forwarding tables must be preloaded into the
                                        switches at the outset of network operation. Hybrid approaches also exist where
                                        the forwarding table is reduced to a small set of routing bits and combined with
                                        a small logic block. Those routing bits are used by the routing control unit to know
                                        what paths are allowed and decide the output ports the packets need to take. The
                                        goal with those approaches is to build flexible yet compact routing control units,
                                        eliminating the area and power wastage of a large forwarding table and thus being
                                        suitable for OCNs. The routing control unit is usually implemented as a centralized
                                        resource, although it could be replicated at every input port so as not to become a
                                        bottleneck. Routing is done only once for every packet, and packets typically are
                                        large enough to take several cycles to flow through the switch, so a centralized
                                        routing control unit rarely becomes a bottleneck. Figure F.21 assumes a centralized
                                        routing control unit within the switch.
                                             Arbitration is required when two or more packets concurrently request the
                                        same output port, as described in the previous section. Switch arbitration can be
                                        implemented in a centralized or distributed way. In the former case, all of the
                                        requests and status information are transmitted to the central switch arbitration
                                        unit; in the latter case, the arbiter is distributed across the switch, usually among
                                        the input and/or output ports. Arbitration may be performed multiple times on
                                        packets, and there may be multiple queues associated with each input port,
                                         F.6    Switch Microarchitecture      ■   F-59

increasing the number of arbitration requests that must be processed. Thus, many
implementations use a hierarchical arbitration approach, where arbitration is first
performed locally at every input port to select just one request among the corre-
sponding packets and queues, and later arbitration is performed globally to process
the requests made by each of the local input port arbiters. Figure F.21 assumes a
centralized arbitration unit within the switch.
    The basic switch microarchitecture depicted in Figure F.21 functions in the fol-
lowing way. When a packet starts to arrive at a switch input port, the link controller
decodes the incoming signal and generates a sequence of bits, possibly deserializ-
ing data to adapt them to the width of the internal data path if different from the
external link width. Information is also extracted from the packet header or link
control signals to determine the queue to which the packet should be buffered.
As the packet is being received and buffered (or after the entire packet has been
buffered, depending on the switching technique), the header is sent to the routing
unit. This unit supplies a request for one or more output ports to the arbitration unit.
Arbitration for the requested output port succeeds if the port is free and has enough
space to buffer the entire packet or flit, depending on the switching technique. If
wormhole switching with virtual channels is implemented, additional arbitration
and allocation steps may be required for the transmission of each individual flit.
Once the resources are allocated, the packet is transferred across the internal cross-
bar to the corresponding output buffer and link if no other packets are ahead of it
and the link is free. Link-level flow control implemented by the link controller pre-
vents input queue overflow at the neighboring switch on the other end of the link. If
virtual channel switching is implemented, several packets may be time-
multiplexed across the link on a flit-by-flit basis. As the various input and output
ports operate independently, several incoming packets may be processed concur-
rently in the absence of contention.

Buffer Organizations
As mentioned above, queues can be located at the switch input, output, or both
sides. Output-buffered switches have the advantage of completely eliminating
head-of-line blocking. Head-of-line (HOL) blocking occurs when two or more
packets are buffered in a queue, and a blocked packet at the head of the queue
blocks other packets in the queue that would otherwise be able to advance if they
were at the queue head. This cannot occur in output-buffered switches as all the
packets in a given queue have the same status; they require the same output port.
However, it may be the case that all the switch input ports simultaneously receive a
packet for the same output port. As there are no buffers at the input side, output
buffers must be able to store all those incoming packets at the same time. This
requires implementing output queues with an internal switch speedup of k. That
is, output queues must have a write bandwidth k times the link bandwidth, where
k is the number of switch ports. This oftentimes is too expensive. Hence, this solu-
tion by itself has rarely been implemented in lossless networks. As the probability
of concurrently receiving many packets for the same output port is usually small,
F-60     ■      Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                              commercial systems that use output-buffered switches typically implement only
                              moderate switch speedup, dropping packets on rare buffer overflow.
                                  Switches with buffers on the input side are able to receive packets without hav-
                              ing any switch speedup; however, HOL blocking can occur within input port
                              queues, as illustrated in Figure F.22(a). This can reduce switch output port utiliza-
                              tion to less than 60% even when packet destinations are uniformly distributed. As
                              shown in Figure F.22(b), the use of virtual channels (two in this case) can mitigate
                              HOL blocking but does not eliminate it. A more effective solution is to organize the
                              input queues as virtual output queues (VOQs), shown in Figure F.22(c). With this,
                              each input port implements as many queues as there are output ports, thus provid-
                              ing separate buffers for packets destined to different output ports. This is a popular
                              technique widely used in ATM switches and IP routers. The main drawbacks of

             Input port i                                                                Input port i
          Input buffers                            Output port X+                        Input buffers                 Output port X+
                                                           X+                                                                 X+
                                                                                                   X – X+

                                                                                 Demux
        Y – Y+ Y+ X – X+
                                                   Output port X–                                                      Output port X–
                                                                                              Y – Y+ Y+

                             Crossbar                                                                       Crossbar
                                                   Output port Y+                                                      Output port Y+

                                                   Output port Y–                                                      Output port Y–

  (A)                                                                           (B)

                                                Input port i
                                                Input buffers                            Output port X+
                                                                                                 X+
                                                                X+

                                                                X–
                                        Demux

                                                                                         Output port X–
                                                          Y+ Y+

                                                                Y–   Crossbar
                                                                                         Output port Y+

                                                                                         Output port Y–

                              (C)

Figure F.22 (a) Head-of-line blocking in an input buffer, (b) the use of two virtual channels to reduce HOL block-
ing, and (c) the use of virtual output queuing to eliminate HOL blocking within a switch. The shaded input buffer is
the one to which the crossbar is currently allocated. This assumes each input port has only one access port to the
switch’s internal crossbar.
                                         F.6   Switch Microarchitecture      ■   F-61

VOQs, however, are cost and lack of scalability: The number of VOQs grows qua-
dratically with switch ports. Moreover, although VOQs eliminate HOL blocking
within a switch, HOL blocking occurring at the network level end-to-end is not
solved. Of course, it is possible to design a switch with VOQ support at the network
level also—that is, to implement as many queues per switch input port as there are
output ports across the entire network—but this is extremely expensive. An alter-
native is to dynamically assign only a fraction of the queues to store (cache) sep-
arately only those packets headed for congested destinations.
     Combined input-output-buffered switches minimize HOL blocking when there
is sufficient buffer space at the output side to buffer packets, and they minimize the
switch speedup required due to buffers being at the input side. This solution has the
further benefit of decoupling packet transmission through the internal crossbar of
the switch from transmission through the external links. This is especially useful
for cut-through switching implementations that use virtual channels, where flit
transmissions are time-multiplexed over the links. Many designs used in commer-
cial systems implement input-output-buffered switches.

Routing Algorithm Implementation
It is important to distinguish between the routing algorithm and its implementation.
While the routing algorithm describes the rules to forward packets across the net-
work and affects packet latency and network throughput, its implementation affects
the delay suffered by packets when reaching a node, the required silicon area, and the
power consumption associated with the routing computation. Several techniques
have been proposed to pre-compute the routing algorithm and/or hide the routing
computation delay. However, significantly less effort has been devoted to reduce
silicon area and power consumption without significantly affecting routing flexibil-
ity. Both issues have become very important, particularly for OCNs. Many existing
designs address these issues by implementing relatively simple routing algorithms,
but more sophisticated routing algorithms will likely be needed in the future to deal
with increasing manufacturing defects, process variability, and other complications
arising from continued technology scaling, as discussed briefly below.
     As mentioned in a previous section, depending on where the routing algorithm
is computed, two basic forms of routing exist: source and distributed routing. In
source routing, the complexity of implementation is moved to the end nodes where
paths need to be stored in tables, and the path for a given packet is selected based on
the destination end node identifier. In distributed routing, however, the complexity
is moved to the switches where, at each hop along the path of a packet, a selection
of the output port to take is performed. In distributed routing, two basic implemen-
tations exist. The first one consists of using a logic block that implements a fixed
routing algorithm for a particular topology. The most common example of such an
implementation is dimension-order routing, where dimensions are offset in an
established order. Alternatively, distributed routing can be implemented with for-
warding tables, where each entry encodes the output port to be used for a particular
F-62   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         destination. Therefore, in the worst case, as many entries as destination nodes are
                         required.
                              Both methods for implementing distributed routing have their benefits and
                         drawbacks. Logic-based routing features a very short computation delay, usually
                         requires a small silicon area, and has low power consumption. However, logic-
                         based routing needs to be designed with a specific topology in mind and, therefore,
                         is restricted to that topology. Table-based distributed routing is quite flexible and
                         supports any topology and routing algorithm. Simply, tables need to be filled with
                         the proper contents based on the applied routing algorithm (e.g., the up*/down*
                         routing algorithm can be defined for any irregular topology). However, the down
                         side of table-based distributed routing is its non-negligible area and power cost.
                         Also, scalability is problematic in table-based solutions as, in the worst case, a sys-
                         tem with N end nodes (and switches) requires as many as N tables each with N
                         entries, thus having quadratic cost.
                              Depending on the network domain, one solution is more suitable than the other.
                         For instance, in SANs, it is usual to find table-based solutions as is the case with
                         InfiniBand. In other environments, like OCNs, table-based implementations are
                         avoided due to the aforementioned costs in power and silicon area. In such envi-
                         ronments, it is more advisable to rely on logic-based implementations. Herein lies
                         some of the challenges OCN designers face: ever continuing technology scaling
                         through device miniaturization leads to increases in the number of manufacturing
                         defects, higher failure rates (either transient or permanent), significant process var-
                         iations (transistors behaving differently from design specs), the need for different
                         clock frequency and voltage domains, and tight power and energy budgets. All of
                         these challenges translate to the network needing support for heterogeneity. Dif-
                         ferent—possibly irregular—regions of the network will be created owing to failed
                         components, powered down switches and links, disabled components (due to
                         unacceptable variations in performance) and so on. Hence, heterogeneous systems
                         may emerge from a homogeneous design. In this framework, it is important to effi-
                         ciently implement routing algorithms designed to provide enough flexibility to
                         address these new challenges.
                              A well-known solution for providing a certain degree of flexibility while being
                         much more compact than traditional table-based approaches is interval routing
                         [Leeuwen 1987], where a range of destinations is defined for each output port.
                         Although this approach is not flexible enough, it provides a clue on how to address
                         emerging challenges. A more recent approach provides a plausible implementation
                         design point that lies between logic-based implementation (efficiency) and table-
                         based implementation (flexibility). Logic-Based Distributed Routing (LBDR) is a
                         hybrid approach that takes as a reference a regular 2D mesh but allows an irregular
                         network to be derived from it due to changes in topology induced by manufactur-
                         ing defects, failures, and other anomalies. Due to the faulty, disabled, and powered-
                         down components, regularity is compromised and the dimension-order routing
                         algorithm can no longer be used. To support such topologies, LBDR defines a
                         set of configuration bits at each switch. Four connectivity bits are used at each
                         switch to indicate the connectivity of the switch to the neighbor switches in the
                                                                          F.6    Switch Microarchitecture      ■    F-63

                                topology. Thus, one connectivity bit per port is used. Those connectivity bits are
                                used, for instance, to disable an output port leading to a faulty component. Addi-
                                tionally, eight routing bits are used, two per output port, to define the available
                                routing options. The value of the routing bits is set at power-on and is computed
                                from the routing algorithm to be implemented in the network. Basically, when a
                                routing bit is set, it indicates that a packet can leave the switch through the asso-
                                ciated output port and is allowed to perform a certain turn at the next switch. In this
                                respect, LBDR is similar to interval routing, but it defines geographical areas
                                instead of ranges of destinations. Figure F.23 shows an example where a
                                topology-agnostic routing algorithm is implemented with LBDR on an irregular
                                topology. The figure shows the computed configuration bits.
                                    The connectivity and routing bits are used to implement the routing algorithm.
                                For that purpose, a small set of logic gates are used in combination with the con-
                                figuration bits. Basically, the LBDR approach takes as a reference the initial topol-
                                ogy (a 2D mesh), and makes a decision based on the current coordinates of the
                                router, the coordinates of the destination router, and the configuration bits.
                                Figure F.24 shows the required logic, and Figure F.25 shows an example of where
                                a packet is forwarded from its source to its destination with the use of the config-
                                uration bits. As can be noticed, routing restrictions are enforced by preventing the
                                use of the west port at switch 10.
                                    LBDR represents a method for efficient routing implementation in OCNs.
                                This mechanism has been recently extended to support non-minimal paths,
                                collective communication operations, and traffic isolation. All of these improve-
                                ments have been made while maintaining a compact and efficient implementation
                                with the use of a small set of configuration bits. A detailed description of
                                LBDR and its extensions, and the current research on OCNs can be found in
                                Flich [2010].

                                             Router   Cn   Ce   Cw   Cs   Rne   Rnw   Ren   Res   Rwn   Rws   Rse   Rsw
    0           1           2           3      0       0    1    0   1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1
                                               1      0     1    1   1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     0
                                               2      0     1    1   1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     0
                                               3      0     0    1   1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     0
                                               4       1    1    0   1     1     1     0     1     1     1     0     1
    4           5           6           7      5       1    1    1   1     1     1     0     1     1     1     1     1
                                               6       1    1    1   0     1     1     0     1     1     1     1     1
                                               7       1    0    1   0     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1
                                               8       1    1    0   1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1
    8           9                              9       1    0    1   1     1     1     1     1     0     1     1     0
                                              10       -    -    -    -    -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -
                                              11       -    -    -    -    -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -
                                              12       1    1    0   0     1     1     0     1     1     1     1     1
                                              13       1    0    1   0     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1
   12          13                             14       -    -    -    -    -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -
                                              15       -    -    -    -    -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -

    Bidirectional routing restriction

Figure F.23 Shown is an example of an irregular network that uses LBDR to implement the routing algorithm.
For each router, connectivity and routing bits are defined.
F-64     ■     Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                                             1st stage                                                           2nd stage
        Xdst                                   N'                                                  Cn
        Ydst                                   E'            N'
                      Comparator                             E'                                                         N
       Xcurr                                   W'
                                                             W'
       Ycurr                                   S'
                                                             N'
                                                             E'
                                                            Rne

                                                              N'                  E = Ce·(E'·!N'·!S' + E'·N'·Ren + E'·S'·Res)
                                                             W'                   W = Cw·(W'·!N'·!S' + W'·N'·Rwn + W'·S'·Rws)
                                                            Rnw
                                                                                  S = Cs·(S'·!E'·!W' + S'·E'·Rse + S'·W'·Rsw)
                                                                                  L = !N'·!E'·!W'·!S'

Figure F.24 LBDR logic at each input port of the router.

    0           1          2            3              0       1     2        3             0         1          2           3

    4           5          6            7              4       5     6        7             4         5          6           7

    8           9          10           11             8       9    10       11             8         9          10         11

   12          13          14           15             12     13    14       15            12         13         14         15

    Bidirectional routing restriction        Message

Figure F.25 Example of routing a message from Router 14 to Router 5 using LBDR at each router.

                                    Pipelining the Switch Microarchitecture
                                    Performance can be enhanced by pipelining the switch microarchitecture. Pipe-
                                    lined processing of packets in a switch has similarities with pipelined execution
                                    of instructions in a vector processor. In a vector pipeline, a single instruction indi-
                                    cates what operation to apply to all the vector elements executed in a pipelined
                                    way. Similarly, in a switch pipeline, a single packet header indicates how to pro-
                                    cess all of the internal data path physical transfer units (or phits) of a packet, which
                                    are processed in a pipelined fashion. Also, as packets at different input ports are
                                    independent of each other, they can be processed in parallel similar to the way mul-
                                    tiple independent instructions or threads of pipelined instructions can be executed
                                    in parallel.
                                                                                                        F.6         Switch Microarchitecture                    ■   F-65

                                                  The switch microarchitecture can be pipelined by analyzing the basic functions
                                              performed within the switch and organizing them into several stages. Figure F.26
                                              shows a block diagram of a five-stage pipelined organization for the basic switch
                                              microarchitecture given in Figure F.21, assuming cut-through switching and the
                                              use of a forwarding table to implement routing. After receiving the header portion
                                              of the packet in the first stage, the routing information (i.e., destination address) is
                                              used in the second stage to look up the allowed routing option(s) in the forwarding
                                              table. Concurrent with this, other portions of the packet are received and buffered
                                              in the input port queue at the first stage. Arbitration is performed in the third stage.
                                              The crossbar is configured to allocate the granted output port for the packet in the
                                              fourth stage, and the packet header is buffered in the switch output port and ready
                                              for transmission over the external link in the fifth stage. Note that the second and

                      Stage 1                                    Stage 2               Stage 3                  Stage 4                              Stage 5

                                     Input                                                                                           Output
                                    buffers                                                                                          buffers
Physical                                                                                                                                                            Physical
channel                                                                                                                                                             channel
             Link                                                                                                                                          Link
                                Demux

                                                                                                                             Demux
                                                                                                          Mux

                                                                                                                                               Mux
            control                                                                                                                                       control

                                                                                                                  Crossbar
                                     Input                                                                                           Output
                                    buffers                                                                                          buffers
Physical                                                                                                                                                            Physical
channel                                                                                                                                                             channel
             Link                                                                                                                                          Link
                                Demux

                                                                                                                             Demux
                                                                                                          Mux

                                                                                                                                               Mux
            control                                                                                                                                       control

                                                             Routing                    Arbit ration
                                                            control unit                   unit        Crossbar
                                                                                                        control
                                                        Header                       Output
                                                        fill                         port #
                                                                  Forwarding
                                                                     table

           Packet header                IB    RC   SA     ST       OB

           Payload fragment                   IB   IB      IB      ST      OB

           Payload fragment                        IB      IB      IB      ST   OB

           Payload fragment                                IB      IB      IB   ST     OB

Figure F.26 Pipelined version of the basic input-output-buffered switch. The notation in the figure is as follows: IB
is the input link control and buffer stage, RC is the route computation stage, SA is the crossbar switch arbitration stage,
ST is the crossbar switch traversal stage, and OB is the output buffer and link control stage. Packet fragments (flits)
coming after the header remain in the IB stage until the header is processed and the crossbar switch resources are
provided.
F-66   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         third stages are used only by the packet header; the payload and trailer portions of
                         the packet use only three of the stages—those used for data flow-thru once the
                         internal data path of the switch is set up.
                              A virtual channel switch usually requires an additional stage for virtual channel
                         allocation. Moreover, arbitration is required for every flit before transmission
                         through the crossbar. Finally, depending on the complexity of the routing and arbi-
                         tration algorithms, several clock cycles may be required for these operations.

                         Other Switch Microarchitecture Enhancements
                         As mentioned earlier, internal switch speedup is sometimes implemented to
                         increase switch output port utilization. This speedup is usually implemented by
                         increasing the clock frequency and/or the internal data path width (i.e., phit size)
                         of the switch. An alternative solution consists of implementing several parallel data
                         paths from each input port’s set of queues to the output ports. One way of doing this
                         is by increasing the number of crossbar input ports. When implementing several
                         physical queues per input port, this can be achieved by devoting a separate crossbar
                         port to each input queue. For example, the IBM Blue Gene/L implements two
                         crossbar access ports and two read ports per switch input port.
                              Another way of implementing parallel data paths between input and output
                         ports is to move the buffers to the crossbar crosspoints. This switch architecture
                         is usually referred to as a buffered crossbar switch. A buffered crossbar provides
                         independent data paths from each input port to the different output ports, thus mak-
                         ing it possible to send up to k packets at a time from a given input port to k different
                         output ports. By implementing independent crosspoint memories for each input-
                         output port pair, HOL blocking is eliminated at the switch level. Moreover, arbi-
                         tration is significantly simpler than in other switch architectures. Effectively, each
                         output port can receive packets from only a disjoint subset of the crosspoint mem-
                         ories. Thus, a completely independent arbiter can be implemented at each switch
                         output port, each of those arbiters being very simple.
                              A buffered crossbar would be the ideal switch architecture if it were not so
                         expensive. The number of crosspoint memories increases quadratically with the
                         number of switch ports, dramatically increasing its cost and reducing its scalability
                         with respect to the basic switch architecture. In addition, each crosspoint memory
                         must be large enough to efficiently implement link-level flow control. To reduce
                         cost, most designers prefer input-buffered or combined input-output-buffered
                         switches enhanced with some of the mechanisms described previously.

               F.7       Practical Issues for Commercial Interconnection
                         Networks
                         There are practical issues in addition to the technical issues described thus far that
                         are important considerations for interconnection networks within certain domains.
                         We mention a few of these below.
     F.7   Practical Issues for Commercial Interconnection Networks           ■   F-67

Connectivity
The type and number of devices that communicate and their communication require-
ments affect the complexity of the interconnection network and its protocols. The
protocols must target the largest network size and handle the types of anomalous
systemwide events that might occur. Among some of the issues are the following:
How lightweight should the network interface hardware/software be? Should it
attach to the memory network or the I/O network? Should it support cache coher-
ence? If the operating system must get involved for every network transaction,
the sending and receiving overhead becomes quite large. If the network interface
attaches to the I/O network (PCI-Express or HyperTransport interconnect), the
injection and reception bandwidth will be limited to that of the I/O network. This
is the case for the Cray XT3 SeaStar, Intel Thunder Tiger 4 QsNetII, and many other
supercomputer and cluster networks. To support coherence, the sender may have to
flush the cache before each send, and the receiver may have to flush its cache before
each receive to prevent the stale-data problem. Such flushes further increase sending
and receiving overhead, often causing the network interface to be the network
bottleneck.
     Computer systems typically have a multiplicity of interconnects with different
functions and cost-performance objectives. For example, processor-memory inter-
connects usually provide higher bandwidth and lower latency than I/O interconnects
and are more likely to support cache coherence, but they are less likely to follow or
become standards. Personal computers typically have a processormemory intercon-
nect and an I/O interconnect (e.g., PCI-X 2.0, PCIe or Hyper-Transport) designed to
connect both fast and slow devices (e.g., USB 2.0, Gigabit Ethernet LAN, Firewire
800). The Blue Gene/L supercomputer uses five interconnection networks, only
one of which is the 3D torus used for most of the interprocessor application traffic.
The others include a tree-based collective communication network for broadcast
and multicast; a tree-based barrier network for combining results (scatter, gather);
a control network for diagnostics, debugging, and initialization; and a Gigabit Ethernet
network for I/O between the nodes and disk. The University of Texas at Austin’s TRIPS
Edge processor has eight specialized on-chip networks—some with bidirectional
channels as wide as 128 bits and some with 168 bits in each direction—to interconnect
the 106 heterogeneous tiles composing the two processor cores with L2 on-chip cache.
It also has a chip-to-chip switched network to interconnect multiple chips in a multi-
processor configuration. Two of the on-chip networks are switched networks: One is
used for operand transport and the other is used for on-chip memory communication.
The others are essentially fan-out trees or recombination dedicated link networks
used for status and control. The portion of chip area allocated to the interconnect is
substantial, with five of the seven metal layers used for global network wiring.

Standardization: Cross-Company Interoperability
Standards are useful in many places in computer design, including interconnection
networks. Advantages of successful standards include low cost and stability.
F-68   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         The customer has many vendors to choose from, which keeps price close to cost
                         due to competition. It makes the viability of the interconnection independent of the
                         stability of a single company. Components designed for a standard interconnection
                         may also have a larger market, and this higher volume can reduce the vendors’
                         costs, further benefiting the customer. Finally, a standard allows many companies
                         to build products with interfaces to the standard, so the customer does not have to
                         wait for a single company to develop interfaces to all the products of interest.
                              One drawback of standards is the time it takes for committees and special-
                         interest groups to agree on the definition of standards, which is a problem when
                         technology is changing rapidly. Another problem is when to standardize: On
                         the one hand, designers would like to have a standard before anything is built;
                         on the other hand, it would be better if something were built before standardization
                         to avoid legislating useless features or omitting important ones. When done too
                         early, it is often done entirely by committee, which is like asking all of the chefs
                         in France to prepare a single dish of food—masterpieces are rarely served. Stan-
                         dards can also suppress innovation at that level, since standards fix the interfaces—
                         at least until the next version of the standards surface, which can be every few years
                         or longer. More often, we are seeing consortiums of companies getting together to
                         define and agree on technology that serve as “de facto” industry standards. This
                         was the case for InfiniBand.
                              LANs and WANs use standards and interoperate effectively. WANs involve
                         many types of companies and must connect to many brands of computers, so it
                         is difficult to imagine a proprietary WAN ever being successful. The ubiquitous
                         nature of the Ethernet shows the popularity of standards for LANs as well as
                         WANs, and it seems unlikely that many customers would tie the viability of their
                         LAN to the stability of a single company. Some SANs are standardized such as
                         Fibre Channel, but most are proprietary. OCNs for the most part are proprietary
                         designs, with a few gaining widespread commercial use in system-on-chip
                         (SoC) applications, such as IBM’s CoreConnect and ARM’s AMBA.

                         Congestion Management
                         Congestion arises when too many packets try to use the same link or set of links.
                         This leads to a situation in which the bandwidth required exceeds the bandwidth
                         supplied. Congestion by itself does not degrade network performance: simply, the
                         congested links are running at their maximum capacity. Performance degradation
                         occurs in the presence of HOL blocking where, as a consequence of packets going
                         to noncongested destinations getting blocked by packets going to congested des-
                         tinations, some link bandwidth is wasted and network throughput drops, as illus-
                         trated in the example given at the end of Section F.4. Congestion control refers to
                         schemes that reduce traffic when the collective traffic of all nodes is too large for
                         the network to handle.
                             One advantage of a circuit-switched network is that, once a circuit is estab-
                         lished, it ensures that there is sufficient bandwidth to deliver all the information
     F.7   Practical Issues for Commercial Interconnection Networks         ■   F-69

sent along that circuit. Interconnection bandwidth is reserved as circuits are estab-
lished, and if the network is full, no more circuits can be established. Other switch-
ing techniques generally do not reserve interconnect bandwidth in advance, so the
interconnection network can become clogged with too many packets. Just as with
poor rush-hour commuters, a traffic jam of packets increases packet latency and, in
extreme cases, fewer packets per second get delivered by the interconnect. In order
to handle congestion in packet-switched networks, some form of congestion man-
agement must be implemented. The two kinds of mechanisms used are those that
control congestion and those that eliminate the performance degradation intro-
duced by congestion.
     There are three basic schemes used for congestion control in interconnection
networks, each with its own weaknesses: packet discarding, flow control, and
choke packets. The simplest scheme is packet discarding, which we discussed
briefly in Section F.2. If a packet arrives at a switch and there is no room in the
buffer, the packet is discarded. This scheme relies on higher-level software that
handles errors in transmission to resend lost packets. This leads to significant band-
width wastage due to (re)transmitted packets that are later discarded and, therefore,
is typically used only in lossy networks like the Internet.
     The second scheme relies on flow control, also discussed previously. When
buffers become full, link-level flow control provides feedback that prevents the
transmission of additional packets. This backpressure feedback rapidly propagates
backward until it reaches the sender(s) of the packets producing congestion,
forcing a reduction in the injection rate of packets into the network. The main draw-
backs of this scheme are that sources become aware of congestion too late when the
network is already congested, and nothing is done to alleviate congestion. Back-
pressure flow control is common in lossless networks like SANs used in supercom-
puters and enterprise systems.
     A more elaborate way of using flow control is by implementing it directly
between the sender and the receiver end nodes, generically called end-to-end flow
control. Windowing is one version of end-to-end credit-based flow control where
the window size should be large enough to efficiently pipeline packets through the
network. The goal of the window is to limit the number of unacknowledged
packets, thus bounding the contribution of each source to congestion, should it
arise. The TCP protocol uses a sliding window. Note that end-to-end flow control
describes the interaction between just two nodes of the interconnection network,
not the entire interconnection network between all end nodes. Hence, flow control
helps congestion control, but it is not a global solution.
     Choke packets are used in the third scheme, which is built upon the premise that
traffic injection should be throttled only when congestion exists across the net-
work. The idea is for each switch to see how busy it is and to enter into a warning
state when it passes a threshold. Each packet received by a switch in the warning
state is sent back to the source via a choke packet that includes the intended des-
tination. The source is expected to reduce traffic to that destination by a fixed per-
centage. Since it likely will have already sent other packets along that path, the
source node waits for all the packets in transit to be returned before acting on
F-70   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         the choke packets. In this scheme, congestion is controlled by reducing the packet
                         injection rate until traffic reduces, just as metering lights that guard on-ramps con-
                         trol the rate of cars entering a freeway. This scheme works efficiently when the
                         feedback delay is short. When congestion notification takes a long time, usually
                         due to long time of flight, this congestion control scheme may become unsta-
                         ble—reacting too slowly or producing oscillations in packet injection rate, both
                         of which lead to poor network bandwidth utilization.
                             An alternative to congestion control consists of eliminating the negative
                         consequences of congestion. This can be done by eliminating HOL blocking at
                         every switch in the network as discussed previously. Virtual output queues can
                         be used for this purpose; however, it would be necessary to implement as many
                         queues at every switch input port as devices attached to the network. This solution
                         is very expensive, and not scalable at all. Fortunately, it is possible to achieve
                         good results by dynamically assigning a few set-aside queues to store only
                         the congested packets that travel through some hot-spot regions of the network,
                         very much like caches are intended to store only the more frequently accessed
                         memory locations. This strategy is referred to as regional explicit congestion
                         notification (RECN).

                         Fault Tolerance
                         The probability of system failures increases as transistor integration density and the
                         number of devices in the system increases. Consequently, system reliability and
                         availability have become major concerns and will be even more important in future
                         systems with the proliferation of interconnected devices. A practical issue arises,
                         therefore, as to whether or not the interconnection network relies on all the devices
                         being operational in order for the network to work properly. Since software failures
                         are generally much more frequent than hardware failures, another question sur-
                         faces as to whether a software crash on a single device can prevent the rest of
                         the devices from communicating. Although some hardware designers try to build
                         fault-free networks, in practice, it is only a question of the rate of failures, not
                         whether they can be prevented. Thus, the communication subsystem must have
                         mechanisms for dealing with faults when—not if—they occur.
                             There are two main kinds of failure in an interconnection network: transient
                         and permanent. Transient failures are usually produced by electromagnetic inter-
                         ference and can be detected and corrected using the techniques described in
                         Section F.2. Oftentimes, these can be dealt with simply by retransmitting the
                         packet either at the link level or end-to-end. Permanent failures occur when some
                         component stops working within specifications. Typically, these are produced by
                         overheating, overbiasing, overuse, aging, and so on and cannot be recovered from
                         simply by retransmitting packets with the help of some higher-layer software pro-
                         tocol. Either an alternative physical path must exist in the network and be supplied
                         by the routing algorithm to circumvent the fault or the network will be crippled,
                         unable to deliver packets whose only paths are through faulty resources.
                             Three major categories of techniques are used to deal with permanent failures:
                         resource sparing, fault-tolerant routing, and network reconfiguration. In the first
     F.7   Practical Issues for Commercial Interconnection Networks         ■   F-71

technique, faulty resources are switched off or bypassed, and some spare resources
are switched in to replace the faulty ones. As an example, the ServerNet intercon-
nection network is designed with two identical switch fabrics, only one of which is
usable at any given time. In case of failure in one fabric, the other is used. This
technique can also be implemented without switching in spare resources, leading
to a degraded mode of operation after a failure. The IBM Blue Gene/L supercom-
puter, for instance, has the facility to bypass failed network resources while retain-
ing its base topological structure and routing algorithm. The main drawback of this
technique is the relatively large number of healthy resources (e.g., midplane node
boards) that may need to be switched off after a failure in order to retain the base
topological structure (e.g., a 3D torus).
    Fault-tolerant routing, on the other hand, takes advantage of the multiple paths
already existing in the network topology to route messages in the presence of fail-
ures without requiring spare resources. Alternative paths for each supported fault
combination are identified at design time and incorporated into the routing algo-
rithm. When a fault is detected, a suitable alternative path is used. The main dif-
ficulty when using this technique is guaranteeing that the routing algorithm will
remain deadlock-free when using the alternative paths, given that arbitrary fault
patterns may occur. This is especially difficult in direct networks whose regularity
can be compromised by the fault pattern. The Cray T3E is an example system that
successfully applies this technique on its 3D torus direct network. There are many
examples of this technique in systems using indirect networks, such as with the
bidirectional multistage networks in the ASCI White and ASC Purple. Those net-
works provide multiple minimal paths between end nodes and, inherently, have no
routing deadlock problems (see Section F.5). In these networks, alternative paths
are selected at the source node in case of failure.
    Network reconfiguration is yet another, more general technique to handle vol-
untary and involuntary changes in the network topology due either to failures or to
some other cause. In order for the network to be reconfigured, the nonfaulty por-
tions of the topology must first be discovered, followed by computation of the new
routing tables and distribution of the routing tables to the corresponding network
locations (i.e., switches and/or end node devices). Network reconfiguration
requires the use of programmable switches and/or network interfaces, depending
on how routing is performed. It may also make use of generic routing algorithms
(e.g., up*/down* routing) that can be configured for all the possible network topol-
ogies that may result after faults. This strategy relieves the designer from having to
supply alternative paths for each possible fault combination at design time. Pro-
grammable network components provide a high degree of flexibility but at the
expense of higher cost and latency. Most standard and proprietary interconnection
networks for clusters and SANs—including Myrinet, Quadrics, InfiniBand,
Advanced Switching, and Fibre Channel—incorporate software for (re)configur-
ing the network routing in accordance with the prevailing topology.
    Another practical issue ties to node failure tolerance. If an interconnection net-
work can survive a failure, can it also continue operation while a new node is added
to or removed from the network, usually referred to as hot swapping? If not, each
addition or removal of a new node disables the interconnection network, which is
F-72   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         impractical for WANs and LANs and is usually intolerable for most SANs. Online
                         system expansion requires hot swapping, so most networks allow for it. Hot swap-
                         ping is usually supported by implementing dynamic network reconfiguration, in
                         which the network is reconfigured without having to stop user traffic. The main
                         difficulty with this is guaranteeing deadlock-free routing while routing tables
                         for switches and/or end node devices are dynamically and asynchronously updated
                         as more than one routing algorithm may be alive (and, perhaps, clashing) in the
                         network at the same time. Most WANs solve this problem by dropping packets
                         whenever required, but dynamic network reconfiguration is much more complex
                         in lossless networks. Several theories and practical techniques have recently been
                         developed to address this problem efficiently.

             Example     Figure F.27 shows the number of failures of 58 desktop computers on a local
                         area network for a period of just over one year. Suppose that one local area net-
                         work is based on a network that requires all machines to be operational for the
                         interconnection network to send data; if a node crashes, it cannot accept mes-
                         sages, so the interconnection becomes choked with data waiting to be delivered.
                         An alternative is the traditional local area network, which can operate in the
                         presence of node failures; the interconnection simply discards messages for a
                         node that decides not to accept them. Assuming that you need to have both your
                         workstation and the connecting LAN to get your work done, how much greater
                         are your chances of being prevented from getting your work done using the
                         failure-intolerant LAN versus traditional LANs? Assume the downtime for a
                         crash is less than 30 minutes. Calculate using the one-hour intervals from this
                         figure.

               Answer    Assuming the numbers for Figure F.27, the percentage of hours that you can’t get
                         your work done using the failure-intolerant network is
                                   Intervals with failures Total intervals ? Intervals with no failures
                                                          ¼
                                       Total intervals                   Total intervals
                                                            8974 ? 8605 369
                                                          ¼             ¼        ¼ 4:1%
                                                               8974        8974
                         The percentage of hours that you can’t get your work done using the traditional
                         network is just the time your workstation has crashed. If these failures are equally
                         distributed among workstations, the percentage is
                                             Failures=Machines 654=58 11:28
                                                               ¼      ¼      ¼ 0:13%
                                               Total intervals   8974   8974
                         Hence, you are more than 30 times more likely to be prevented from getting your
                         work done with the failure-intolerant LAN than with the traditional LAN, accord-
                         ing to the failure statistics in Figure F.27. Stated alternatively, the person respon-
                         sible for maintaining the LAN would receive a 30-fold increase in phone calls from
                         irate users!
                                                         F.8     Examples of Interconnection Networks          ■        F-73

   Failed           One-hour intervals with          Total failures       One-day intervals with          Total failures
machines per       number of failed machines         per one-hour       number of failed machines         per one-day
time interval           in first column                interval              in first column                interval
        0                      8605                          0                       184                           0
        1                       264                       264                        105                       105
        2                        50                       100                         35                           70
        3                        25                        75                         11                           33
        4                        10                        40                          6                           24
        5                          7                       35                          9                           45
        6                          3                       18                          6                           36
        7                          1                         7                         4                           28
        8                          1                         8                         4                           32
        9                          2                       18                          2                           18
        10                         2                       20
        11                         1                       11                          2                           22
        12                                                                             1                           12
        17                         1                       17
        20                         1                       20
        21                         1                       21                          1                           21
        31                                                                             1                           31
        38                                                                             1                           38
        58                                                                             1                           58
Total                          8974                       654                        373                       573

Figure F.27 Measurement of reboots of 58 DECstation 5000 s running Ultrix over a 373-day period. These reboots
are distributed into time intervals of one hour and one day. The first column sorts the intervals according to the num-
ber of machines that failed in that interval. The next two columns concern one-hour intervals, and the last two col-
umns concern one-day intervals. The second and fourth columns show the number of intervals for each number of
failed machines. The third and fifth columns are just the product of the number of failed machines and the number of
intervals. For example, there were 50 occurrences of one-hour intervals with 2 failed machines, for a total of 100 failed
machines, and there were 35 days with 2 failed machines, for a total of 70 failures. As we would expect, the number of
failures per interval changes with the size of the interval. For example, the day with 31 failures might include one hour
with 11 failures and one hour with 20 failures. The last row shows the total number of each column; the number of
failures doesn’t agree because multiple reboots of the same machine in the same interval do not result in separate
entries. (Randy Wang of the University of California–Berkeley collected these data.)

                  F.8         Examples of Interconnection Networks
                              To further provide mass to the concepts described in the previous sections, we look
                              at five example networks from the four interconnection network domains consid-
                              ered in this appendix. In addition to one for each of the OCN, LAN, and WAN
                              areas, we look at two examples from the SAN area: one for system area networks
F-74   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         and one for system/storage area networks. The first two examples are proprietary
                         networks used in high-performance systems; the latter three examples are network
                         standards widely used in commercial systems.

                         On-Chip Network: Intel Single-Chip Cloud Computer
                         With continued increases in transistor integration as predicted by Moore’s law,
                         processor designers are under the gun to find ways of combating chip-crossing
                         wire delay and other problems associated with deep submicron technology scaling.
                         Multicore microarchitectures have gained popularity, given their advantages of
                         simplicity, modularity, and ability to exploit parallelism beyond that which can
                         be achieved through aggressive pipelining and multiple instruction/data issuing
                         on a single core. No matter whether the processor consists of a single core or mul-
                         tiple cores, higher and higher demands are being placed on intrachip communica-
                         tion bandwidth to keep pace—not to mention interchip bandwidth. This has
                         spurred a great amount of interest in OCN designs that efficiently support commu-
                         nication of instructions, register operands, memory, and I/O data within and
                         between processor cores both on and off the chip. Here we focus on one such
                         on-chip network: The Intel Single-chip Cloud Computer prototype.
                             The Single-chip Cloud Computer (SCC) is a prototype chip multiprocessor
                         with 48 Intel IA-32 architecture cores. Cores are laid out (see Figure F.28) on a
                         network with a 2D mesh topology (6 ? 4). The network connects 24 tiles, 4 on-
                         die memory controllers, a voltage regulator controller (VRC), and an external
                         system interface controller (SIF). In each tile two cores are connected to a router.
                         The four memory controllers are connected at the boundaries of the mesh, two on
                         each side, while the VRC and SIF controllers are connected at the bottom border of
                         the mesh.
                             Each memory controller can address two DDR3 DIMMS, each up to 8 GB of
                         memory, thus resulting in a maximum of 64 GB of memory. The VRC controller
                         allows any core or the system interface to adjust the voltage in any of the six pre-
                         defined regions configuring the network (two 2-tile regions). The clock can also
                         be adjusted at a finer granularity with each tile having its own operating frequency.
                         These regions can be turned off or scaled down for large power savings. This method
                         allows full application control of the power state of the cores. Indeed, applications
                         have an API available to define the voltage and the frequency of each region. The SIF
                         controller is used to communicate the network from outside the chip.
                             Each of the tiles includes two processor cores (P54C-based IA) with associated
                         L1 16 KB data cache and 16 KB instruction cache and a 256 KB L2 cache (with
                         the associated controller), a 5-port router, traffic generator (for testing purposes
                         only), a mesh interface unit (MIU) handling all message passing requests, memory
                         look-up tables (with configuration registers to set the mapping of a core’s physical
                         addresses to the extended memory map of the system), a message-passing buffer,
                         and circuitry for the clock generation and synchronization for crossing asynchro-
                         nous boundaries.
                                                                            F.8             Examples of Interconnection Networks               ■   F-75

                                       Tile              Tile       Tile           Tile              Tile        Tile
                              R                      R          R            R                   R          R
                              (x, y) = (0, 3)                                                               (x, y) = (5, 3)

                                       Tile              Tile       Tile           Tile              Tile        Tile

               DIMM

                                                                                                                                        DIMM
                      MC      R                      R          R            R                   R          R                   MC

                                       Tile              Tile       Tile           Tile              Tile        Tile
                              R                      R          R            R                   R          R

                                       Tile )            Tile       Tile           Tile )            Tile        Tile
               DIMM

                                                                                                                                        DIMM
                      MC      R                 ,0   R          R            R              ,0   R          R                   MC
                                          =   (0                                      =   (3
                                       y)                                          y)                       (x, y) = (5, 0)
                                 (x,                                         (x,

                             VRC                                System interface
                                                                                                                              SCC die

                                                                           System
                                                                           FPGA
                                                                                                                     Management console PC

                                                                             PCIe

Figure F.28 SCC Top-level architecture. From Howard, J. et al., IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference
Digest of Technical Papers, pp. 58–59.

                                Focusing on the OCN, the MIU unit is in charge of interfacing the cores to the
                            network, including the packetization and de-packetization of large messages; com-
                            mand translation and address decoding/lookup; link-level flow control and credit
                            management; and arbiter decisions following a round-robin scheme. A credit-
                            based flow control mechanism is used together with virtual cut-through switching
                            (thus making it necessary to split long messages into packets). The routers are con-
                            nected in a 2D mesh layout, each on its own power supply and clock source. Links
                            connecting routers have 16B + 2B side bands running at 2 GHz. Zero-load latency
                            is set to 4 cycles, including link traversal. Eight virtual channels are used for per-
                            formance (6 VCs) and protocol-level deadlock handling (2 VCs). A message-level
                            arbitration is implemented by a wrapped wave-front arbiter. The dimension-order
                            XY routing algorithm is used and pre-computation of the output port is performed
                            at every router.
                                Besides the tiles having regions defined for voltage and frequency, the network
                            (made of routers and links) has its own single region. Thus, all the network com-
                            ponents run at the same speed and use the same power supply. An asynchronous
                            clock transition is required between the router and the tile.
                                One of the distinctive features of the SCC architecture is the support for a
                            messaging-based communication protocol rather than hardware cache-coherent
F-76   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         memory for inter-core communication. Message passing buffers are located on
                         every router and APIs are provided to take full control of MPI structures. Cache
                         coherency can be implemented by software.
                             The SCC router represents a significant improvement over the Teraflops pro-
                         cessor chip in the implementation of a 2D on-chip interconnect. Contrasted with
                         the 2D mesh implemented in the Teraflops processor, this implementation is tuned
                         for a wider data path in a multiprocessor interconnect and is more latency, area, and
                         power optimized for such a width. It targets a lower 2-GHz frequency of operation
                         compared to the 5 GHz of its predecessor Teraflops processor, yet with a higher-
                         performance interconnect architecture.

                         System Area Network: IBM Blue Gene/L 3D Torus Network
                         The IBM BlueGene/L was the largest-scaled, highest-performing computer system
                         in the world in 2005, according to www.top500.org. With 65,536 dual-processor
                         compute nodes and 1024 I/O nodes, this 360 TFLOPS (peak) supercomputer has a
                         system footprint of approximately 2500 square feet. Both processors at each node
                         can be used for computation and can handle their own communication protocol
                         processing in virtual mode or, alternatively, one of the processors can be used
                         for computation and the other for network interface processing. Packets range
                         in size from 32 bytes to a maximum of 256 bytes, and 8 bytes are used for the
                         header. The header includes routing, virtual channel, link-level flow control,
                         packet size, and other such information, along with 1 byte for CRC to protect
                         the header. Three bytes are used for CRC at the packet level, and 1 byte serves
                         as a valid indicator.
                              The main interconnection network is a proprietary 32 ? 32 ? 64 3D torus SAN
                         that interconnects all 64 K nodes. Each node switch has six 350 MB/sec bidirec-
                         tional links to neighboring torus nodes, an injection bandwidth of 612.5 MB/sec
                         from the two node processors, and a reception bandwidth of 1050 MB/sec to
                         the two node processors. The reception bandwidth from the network equals the
                         inbound bandwidth across all switch ports, which prevents reception links from
                         bottlenecking network performance. Multiple packets can be sunk concurrently
                         at each destination node because of the higher reception link bandwidth.
                              Two nodes are implemented on a 2 ? 1 ? 1 compute card, 16 compute cards
                         and 2 I/O cards are implemented on a 4 ? 4 ? 2 node board, 16 node boards are
                         implemented on an 8 ? 8 ? 8 midplane, and 2 midplanes form a 1024-node rack
                         with physical dimensions of 0.9 ? 0.9 ? 1.9 cubic meters. Links have a maximum
                         physical length of 8.6 meters, thus enabling efficient link-level flow control with
                         reasonably low buffering requirements. Low latency is achieved by implementing
                         virtual cut-through switching, distributing arbitration at switch input and output
                         ports, and precomputing the current routing path at the previous switch using a
                         finite-state machine so that part of the routing delay is removed from the critical
                         path in switches. High effective bandwidth is achieved using input-buffered
                          F.8   Examples of Interconnection Networks        ■   F-77

switches with dual read ports, virtual cut-through switching with four virtual chan-
nels, and fully adaptive deadlock-free routing based on bubble flow control.
    A key feature in networks of this size is fault tolerance. Failure rate is reduced
by using a relatively low link clock frequency of 700 MHz (same as processor
clock) on which both edges of the clock are used (i.e., 1.4 Gbps or 175 MB/sec
transfer rate is supported for each bit-serial network link in each direction), but
failures may still occur in the network. In case of failure, the midplane node boards
containing the fault(s) are switched off and bypassed to isolate the fault, and com-
putation resumes from the last checkpoint. Bypassing is done using separate
bypass switch boards associated with each midplane that are additional to the
set of torus node boards. Each bypass switch board can be configured to connect
either to the corresponding links in the midplane node boards or to the next bypass
board, effectively removing the corresponding set of midplane node boards.
Although the number of processing nodes is reduced to some degree in some net-
work dimensions, the machine retains its topological structure and routing
algorithm.
    Some collective communication operations such as barrier synchronization,
broadcast/multicast, reduction, and so on are not performed well on the 3D
torus as the network would be flooded with traffic. To remedy this, two separate
tree networks with higher per-link bandwidth are used to implement collective
and combining operations more efficiently. In addition to providing support for
efficient synchronization and broadcast/multicast, hardware is used to perform
some arithmetic reduction operations in an efficient way (e.g., to compute the
sum or the maximum value of a set of values, one from each processing node).
In addition to the 3D torus and the two tree networks, the Blue Gene/L imple-
ments an I/O Gigabit Ethernet network and a control system Fast Ethernet net-
work of lower bandwidth to provide for parallel I/O, configuration, debugging,
and maintenance.

System/Storage Area Network: InfiniBand
InfiniBand is an industrywide de facto networking standard developed in October
2000 by a consortium of companies belonging to the InfiniBand Trade Associa-
tion. InfiniBand can be used as a system area network for interprocessor commu-
nication or as a storage area network for server I/O. It is a switch-based
interconnect technology that provides flexibility in the topology, routing algo-
rithm, and arbitration technique implemented by vendors and users. InfiniBand
supports data transmission rates of 2 to 120 Gbp/link per direction across distances
of 300 meters. It uses cut-through switching, 16 virtual channels and service levels,
credit-based link-level flow control, and weighted round-robin fair scheduling and
implements programmable forwarding tables. It also includes features useful for
increasing reliability and system availability, such as communication subnet man-
agement, end-to-end path establishment, and virtual destination naming.
F-78    ■     Appendix F Interconnection Networks

Institution              Number of                                                                         # of chip
and                      network                         # of data     Link                                metal layers;
processor                ports [cores      Basic         bits per      bandwidth       Routing;            flow control;
[network]        Year    or tiles          network       link per      [link clock     arbitration;        #virtual
name             built   + other ports]    topology      direction     speed]          switching           channels
MIT Raw          2002    16 ports [16      2D mesh       32 bits       0.9 GB/sec      XY DOR with         6 layers;
[General                 tiles]            (4 ? 4)                     [225 MHz,       request-reply       credit-based
Dynamic                                                                clocked at      deadlock            no virtual
Network]                                                               proc speed]     recovery; RR        channels
                                                                                       arbitration;
                                                                                       wormhole
IBM Power5       2004    7 ports [2 PE     Crossbar      256 bits      [1.9 GHz,       Shortest-path;      7 layers;
                         cores + 5 other                 Inst fetch;   clocked at      nonblocking;        handshaking;
                         ports]                          64 bits for   proc speed]     circuit switch      no virtual
                                                         stores;                                           channels
                                                         256 bits
                                                         LDs
U.T. Austin      2005    25 ports [25      2D mesh       110 bits      5.86 GB/sec     YX DOR;             7 layers; on/
TRIP Edge                execution unit    (5 ? 5)                     [533 MHz        distributed RR      off flow
[Operand                 tiles]                                        clock scaled    arbitration;        control; no
Network]                                                               by 80%]         wormhole            virtual
                                                                                                           channels
U.T. Austin      2005    40 ports          2D mesh       128 bits      6.8 GB/sec      YX DOR;             7 layers;
TRIP Edge                [16 L2 tiles      (10 ? 4)                    [533 MHz        distributed RR      credit-based
[On-Chip                 + 24 network                                  clock scaled    arbitration;        flow control;
Network]                 interface tile]                               by 80%]         VCT switched        4 virtual
                                                                                                           channels
Sony, IBM,       2005    12 ports [1       Ring (4       128 bits      25.6 GB/sec     Shortest-path;      8 layers;
Toshiba Cell             PPE and           total, 2 in   data (+16     [1.6 GHz,       tree-based RR       credit-based
BE [Element              8 SPEs + 3        each          bits tag)     clocked at      arbitration         flow control;
Interconnect             other ports for   direction)                  half the proc   (centralized);      no virtual
Bus]                     memory, I/O                                   speed]          pipelined circuit   channels
                         interface]                                                    switch
Sun              2005    Up to 13 ports    Crossbar      128 bits      19.2 GB/sec     Shortest-path;      9 layers;
UltraSPARC               [8 PE cores                     both for      [1.2 GHz,       age-based           handshaking;
T1 processor             + 4 L2 banks                    the 8 cores   clocked at      arbitration;        no virtual
                         + 1 shared I/O]                 and the       proc speed]     VCT switched        channels
                                                         4 L2
                                                         banks

Figure F.29 Characteristics of on-chip networks implemented in recent research and commercial processors.
Some processors implement multiple on-chip networks (not all shown)—for example, two in the MIT Raw and eight
in the TRIP Edge.

                             Figure F.30 shows the packet format for InfiniBand juxtaposed with two other net-
                             work standards from the LAN and WAN areas. Figure F.31 compares various char-
                             acteristics of the InfiniBand standard with two proprietary system area networks
                             widely used in research and commercial high-performance computer systems.
                                                                    F.8       Examples of Interconnection Networks   ■       F-79

                        InfiniBand                                 Ethernet                             ATM

             Version                 Destination                  Preamble                           Destination         T

               Length                  Source                     Preamble                Checksum

        T                           Partition key                 Destination

              Destination queue                     Destination                 Source

                           Sequence number                          Source

                                                     Type                        Length

                                                                                                      Data (48)

                                                              Data (0–1500)

                       Data (0–4096)

                                                                                                       32 bits

                                                                  Pad (0–46)

                                                                  Checksum

                        Checksum
                                                                    32 bits

            Checksum

                          32 bits

Figure F.30 Packet format for InfiniBand, Ethernet, and ATM. ATM calls their messages “cells” instead of packets, so
the proper name is ATM cell format. The width of each drawing is 32 bits. All three formats have destination addres-
sing fields, encoded differently for each situation. All three also have a checksum field to catch transmission errors,
although the ATM checksum field is calculated only over the header; ATM relies on higher-level protocols to catch
errors in the data. Both InfiniBand and Ethernet have a length field, since the packets hold a variable amount of data,
with the former counted in 32-bit words and the latter in bytes. InfiniBand and ATM headers have a type field (T) that
gives the type of packet. The remaining Ethernet fields are a preamble to allow the receiver to recover the clock from
the self-clocking code used on the Ethernet, the source address, and a pad field to make sure the smallest packet is 64
bytes (including the header). InfiniBand includes a version field for protocol version, a sequence number to allow in-
order delivery, a field to select the destination queue, and a partition key field. Infiniband has many more small fields
not shown and many other packet formats; above is a simplified view. ATM’s short, fixed packet is a good match to
real-time demand of digital voice.
F-80    ■    Appendix F Interconnection Networks

Network      Used in top 10                  Basic           Raw link                            Switching
name         supercomputer Number            network         bidirectional Routing   Arbitration technique;
[vendors]    clusters (2005) of nodes        topology        BW            algorithm technique flow control
InfiniBand SGI Altrix and        >Millions Completely        4–240 Gbps    Arbitrary    Weighted      Cut-through,
[Mellanox, Dell Poweredge        (2128      configurable                   (table-      RR fair       16 virtual
Voltair]   Thunderbird           GUID       (arbitrary)                    driven),     scheduling    channels (15
                                 addresses,                                typically    (2-level      for data);
                                 like IPv6)                                up*/down*    priority)     credit-based
Myrinet-     Barcelona           8192        Bidirectional 4 Gbps          Source-      Round-        Cut-through
2000         Supercomputer       nodes       MIN with 16-                  based        robin         switching with
[Myricom]    Center in Spain                 port                          dispersive   arbitration   no virtual
                                             bidirectional                 (adaptive)                 channels; Xon/
                                             switches                      minimal                    Xoff flow
                                             (Clos net.)                   routing                    control
QsNetII      Intel Thunder       >Tens of    Fat tree with   21.3 Gbps     Source-   2-phased      Wormhole with
[Quadrics]   Itanium2 Tiger4     thousands   8-port                        based LCA RR, priority, 2 virtual
                                             bidirectional                 adaptive  aging,        channels;
                                             switches                      shortest- distributed credit-based
                                                                           path      at output
                                                                           routing   ports

Figure F.31 Characteristics of system area networks implemented in various top 10 supercomputer clusters in
2005.

                                   InfiniBand offers two basic mechanisms to support user-level communica-
                               tion: send/receive and remote DMA (RDMA). With send/receive, the receiver
                               has to explicitly post a receive buffer (i.e., allocate space in its channel adapter
                               network interface) before the sender can transmit data. With RDMA, the sender
                               can remotely DMA data directly into the receiver device’s memory. For exam-
                               ple, for a nominal packet size of 4 bytes measured on a Mellanox MHEA28-XT
                               channel adapter connected to a 3.4 GHz Intel Xeon host device, sending and
                               receiving overhead is 0.946 and 1.423 μs, respectively, for the send/receive
                               mechanism, whereas it is 0.910 and 0.323 μs, respectively, for the RDMA
                               mechanism.
                                   As discussed in Section F.2, the packet size is important in getting full benefit
                               of the network bandwidth. One might ask, “What is the natural size of messages?”
                               Figure F.32(a) shows the size of messages for a commercial fluid dynamics sim-
                               ulation application, called Fluent, collected on an InfiniBand network at The Ohio
                               State University’s Network-Based Computer Laboratory. One plot is cumulative in
                               messages sent and the other is cumulative in data bytes sent. Messages in this graph
                               are message passing interface (MPI) units of information, which gets divided into
                               InfiniBand maximum transfer units (packets) transferred over the network. As
                               shown, the maximum message size is over 512 KB, but approximately 90% of
                               the messages are less than 512 bytes. Messages of 2 KB represent approximately
                               50% of the bytes transferred. An Integer Sort application kernel in the NAS Parallel
                                                                     F.8                      Examples of Interconnection Networks                                ■   F-81

             100%                                                                                                  1600

              90%                                                                                                             MVAPICH native DDR
                                                                                                                   1400
                                                                                                                              MVAPICH native SDR

                                                                           Measured effective bandwidth (MB/sec)
              80%                                                                                                             MVAPICH 1PoIB SDR
                                                                                                                   1200       MVAPICH 1PoIB DDR
              70%
                                                                                                                   1000
              60%
Percentage

              50%                                                                                                   800

              40%
                                                                                                                    600
              30%
                                                                                                                    400
              20%
                                              Number of messages
                                                                                                                    200
              10%                             Data volume

               0%                                                                                                     0
                    64   256   1K       4K       16K     64K       256K                                                   4     64         1K         16K      256K     4M
                               Message size (bytes)                                                                                     Message size (bytes)
             (A)                                                                            (B)

Figure F.32 Data collected by D.K. Panda, S. Sur, and L. Chai (2005) in the Network-Based Computing Laboratory
at The Ohio State University. (a) Cumulative percentage of messages and volume of data transferred as message size
varies for the Fluent application (www.fluent.com). Each x-axis entry includes all bytes up to the next one; for example,
128 represents 1 byte to 128 bytes. About 90% of the messages are less than 512 bytes, which represents about 40%
of the total bytes transferred. (b) Effective bandwidth versus message size measured on SDR and DDR InfiniBand
networks running MVAPICH (http://nowlab.cse.ohio-state.edu/projects/mpi-iba) with OS bypass (native) and
without (IPoIB).

                                     Benchmark suite is also measured to have about 75% of its messages below 512
                                     bytes (plots not shown). Many applications send far more small messages than
                                     large ones, particularly since requests and acknowledgments are more frequent
                                     than data responses and block writes.
                                         InfiniBand reduces protocol processing overhead by allowing it to be off-
                                     loaded from the host computer to a controller on the InfiniBand network inter-
                                     face card. The benefits of protocol offloading and bypassing the operating
                                     system are shown in Figure F.32(b) for MVAPICH, a widely used implemen-
                                     tation of MPI over InfiniBand. Effective bandwidth is plotted against message
                                     size for MVAPICH configured in two modes and two network speeds. One
                                     mode runs IPoIB, in which InfiniBand communication is handled by the IP
                                     layer implemented by the host’s operating system (i.e., no OS bypass). The
                                     other mode runs MVAPICH directly over VAPI, which is the native Mellanox
                                     InfiniBand interface that offloads transport protocol processing to the channel
                                     adapter hardware (i.e., OS bypass). Results are shown for 10 Gbps single data
                                     rate (SDR) and 20 Gbps double data rate (DDR) InfiniBand networks. The
                                     results clearly show that offloading the protocol processing and bypassing
                                     the OS significantly reduce sending and receiving overhead to allow near
                                     wire-speed effective bandwidth to be achieved.
F-82     ■     Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                                       Ethernet: The Local Area Network
                                       Ethernet has been extraordinarily successful as a LAN—from the 10 Mbit/sec stan-
                                       dard proposed in 1978 used practically everywhere today to the more recent 10
                                       Gbit/sec standard that will likely be widely used. Many classes of computers
                                       include Ethernet as a standard communication interface. Ethernet, codified as IEEE
                                       standard 802.3, is a packet-switched network that routes packets using the desti-
                                       nation address. It was originally designed for coaxial cable but today uses primarily
                                       Cat5E copper wire, with optical fiber reserved for longer distances and higher
                                       bandwidths. There is even a wireless version (802.11), which is testimony to its
                                       ubiquity.
                                           Over a 20-year span, computers became thousands of times faster than they
                                       were in 1978, but the shared media Ethernet network remained the same. Hence,
                                       engineers had to invent temporary solutions until a faster, higher-bandwidth net-
                                       work became available. One solution was to use multiple Ethernets to interconnect
                                       machines and to connect those Ethernets with internetworking devices that could
                                       transfer traffic from one Ethernet to another, as needed. Such devices allow indi-
                                       vidual Ethernets to operate in parallel, thereby increasing the aggregate intercon-
                                       nection bandwidth of a collection of computers. In effect, these devices provide
                                       similar functionality to the switches described previously for point-to-point
                                       networks.
                                           Figure F.33 shows the potential parallelism that can be gained. Depending on
                                       how they pass traffic and what kinds of interconnections they can join together,
                                       these devices have different names:

   Single Ethernet: one packet at a time

        Node               Node                     Node          Node           Node                    Node

                 Node                                      Node          Node                     Node          Node

   Multiple Ethernets: multiple packets at a time

        Node               Node                     Node          Node           Node                    Node

                                      Bridge                                            Bridge

                 Node                                      Node          Node                     Node          Node

Figure F.33 The potential increased bandwidth of using many Ethernets and bridges.
                                                                     F.8     Examples of Interconnection Networks                          ■       F-83

                                    ■       Bridges—These devices connect LANs together, passing traffic from one side
                                            to another depending on the addresses in the packet. Bridges operate at the
                                            Ethernet protocol level and are usually simpler and cheaper than routers, dis-
                                            cussed next. Using the notation of the OSI model described in the next section
                                            (see Figure F.36 on page F-85), bridges operate at layer 2, the data link layer.
                                    ■       Routers or gateways—These devices connect LANs to WANs, or WANs to
                                            WANs, and resolve incompatible addressing. Generally slower than bridges,
                                            they operate at OSI layer 3, the network layer. WAN routers divide the network
                                            into separate smaller subnets, which simplifies manageability and improves
                                            security.

                                    The final internetworking devices are hubs, but they merely extend multiple seg-
                                    ments into a single LAN. Thus, hubs do not help with performance, as only one
                                    message can transmit at a time. Hubs operate at OSI layer 1, called the physical

                                   Internet

                                        T3 line

                       fd-0.enss128.t3.                          SU-CM.                        CIS-Gateway.                     mojave.
                            ans.net                           BARRNet.net                      Stanford.edu                   Stanford.edu
     Stanford,          192.31.48.244                          131.119.5.3                       36.1.0.22                    36.22.0.120
     California

                                                                                    FDDI                          Ethernet
                                              FDDI

                                                  T1 line

                     UCB1.                         inr-108-eecs.                              inr-111-cs2.                           mammoth.
                  BARRNet.net                      Berkeley.edu                             Berkeley.edu                            Berkeley.edu
     Berkeley,    192.31.161.4                    128.32.120.108               128.32.120.111           128.32.149.13              128.32.149.78
     California

                                 Ethernet                               FDDI                                            Ethernet

Figure F.34 The connection established between mojave.stanford.edu and mammoth.berkeley.edu (1995). FDDI
is a 100 Mbit/sec LAN, while a T1 line is a 1.5 Mbit/sec telecommunications line and a T3 is a 45 Mbit/sec telecom-
munications line. BARRNet stands for Bay Area Research Network. Note that inr-111-cs2.Berkeley.edu is a router with
two Internet addresses, one for each port.
F-84   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                                                                 Applications

                                                                             Internetworking

                                                                  Networks

                            Figure F.35 The role of internetworking. The width indicates the relative number of
                            items at each level.

Layer      Layer                                                                               Example      Network
number     name           Main function                                                        protocol     component
   7       Application    Used for applications specifically written to run over the           FTP, DNS,    Gateway, smart
                          network                                                              NFS, http    switch
   6       Presentation   Translates from application to network format, and vice                           Gateway
                          versa
   5       Session        Establishes, maintains, and ends sessions across the                 Named        Gateway
                          network                                                              pipes, RPC
   4       Transport      Additional connection below the session layer                        TCP          Gateway
   3       Network        Translates logical network address and names to their                IP           Router, ATM
                          physical address (e.g., computer name to MAC address)                             switch
   2       Data Link      Turns packets into raw bits and at the receiving end turns           Ethernet     Bridge, network
                          bits into packets                                                                 interface card
   1       Physical       Transmits raw bit stream over physical cable                         IEEE 802     Hub

Figure F.36 The OSI model layers. Based on www.geocities.com/SiliconValley/Monitor/3131/ne/osimodel.html.

                            layer. Since these devices were not planned as part of the Ethernet standard, their
                            ad hoc nature has added to the difficulty and cost of maintaining LANs.
                                As of 2011, Ethernet link speeds are available at 10, 100, 10,000, and 100,000
                            Mbits/sec. Although 10 and 100 Mbits/sec Ethernets share the media with multiple
                            devices, 1000 Mbits/sec and above Ethernets rely on point-to-point links and
                            switches. Ethernet switches normally use some form of store-and-forward.
                                Ethernet has no real flow control, dating back to its first instantiation. It orig-
                            inally used carrier sensing with exponential back-off (see page F-23) to arbitrate for
                            the shared media. Some switches try to use that interface to retrofit their version of
                            flow control, but flow control is not part of the Ethernet standard.

                            Wide Area Network: ATM
                            Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) is a wide area networking standard set by the
                            telecommunications industry. Although it flirted as competition to Ethernet as a
                            LAN in the 1990s, ATM has since retreated to its WAN stronghold.
                                                        F.9    Internetworking    ■   F-85

           The telecommunications standard has scalable bandwidth built in. It starts at 155
      Mbits/sec and scales by factors of 4 to 620 Mbits/sec, 2480 Mbits/sec, and so on.
      Since it is a WAN, ATM’s medium is fiber, both single mode and multimode.
      Although it is a switched medium, unlike the other examples it relies on virtual con-
      nections for communication. ATM uses virtual channels for routing to multiplex dif-
      ferent connections on a single network segment, thereby avoiding the inefficiencies
      of conventional connection-based networking. The WAN focus also led to store-
      and-forward switching. Unlike the other protocols, Figure F.30 shows ATM has
      a small, fixed-sized packet with 48 bytes of payload. It uses a credit-based flow con-
      trol scheme as opposed to IP routers that do not implement flow control.
           The reason for virtual connections and small packets is quality of service. Since
      the telecommunications industry is concerned about voice traffic, predictability
      matters as well as bandwidth. Establishing a virtual connection has less variability
      than connectionless networking, and it simplifies store-and-forward switching.
      The small, fixed packet also makes it simpler to have fast routers and switches.
      Toward that goal, ATM even offers its own protocol stack to compete with
      TCP/IP. Surprisingly, even though the switches are simple, the ATM suite of pro-
      tocols is large and complex. The dream was a seamless infrastructure from LAN to
      WAN, avoiding the hodgepodge of routers common today. That dream has faded
      from inspiration to nostalgia.

F.9   Internetworking
      Undoubtedly one of the most important innovations in the communications com-
      munity has been internetworking. It allows computers on independent and incom-
      patible networks to communicate reliably and efficiently. Figure F.34 illustrates
      the need to traverse between networks. It shows the networks and machines
      involved in transferring a file from Stanford University to the University of Cal-
      ifornia at Berkeley, a distance of about 75 km.
          The low cost of internetworking is remarkable. For example, it is vastly less
      expensive to send electronic mail than to make a coast-to-coast telephone call
      and leave a message on an answering machine. This dramatic cost improvement
      is achieved using the same long-haul communication lines as the telephone call,
      which makes the improvement even more impressive.
          The enabling technologies for internetworking are software standards that
      allow reliable communication without demanding reliable networks. The underly-
      ing principle of these successful standards is that they were composed as a hierar-
      chy of layers, each layer taking responsibility for a portion of the overall
      communication task. Each computer, network, and switch implements its layer
      of the standards, relying on the other components to faithfully fulfill their respon-
      sibilities. These layered software standards are called protocol families or protocol
      suites. They enable applications to work with any interconnection without extra
      work by the application programmer. Figure F.35 suggests the hierarchical model
      of communication.
F-86   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                              The most popular internetworking standard is TCP/IP (Transmission Control
                         Protocol/Internet Protocol). This protocol family is the basis of the humbly named
                         Internet, which connects hundreds of millions of computers around the world.
                         This popularity means TCP/IP is used even when communicating locally across
                         compatible networks; for example, the network file system (NFS) uses IP even
                         though it is very likely to be communicating across a homogenous LAN such
                         as Ethernet. We use TCP/IP as our protocol family example; other protocol
                         families follow similar lines. Section F.13 gives the history of TCP/IP.
                              The goal of a family of protocols is to simplify the standard by dividing respon-
                         sibilities hierarchically among layers, with each layer offering services needed by
                         the layer above. The application program is at the top, and at the bottom is the phys-
                         ical communication medium, which sends the bits. Just as abstract data types sim-
                         plify the programmer’s task by shielding the programmer from details of the
                         implementation of the data type, this layered strategy makes the standard easier
                         to understand.
                              There were many efforts at network protocols, which led to confusion in terms.
                         Hence, Open Systems Interconnect (OSI) developed a model that popularized
                         describing networks as a series of layers. Figure F.36 shows the model. Although
                         all protocols do not exactly follow this layering, the nomenclature for the different
                         layers is widely used. Thus, you can hear discussions about a simple layer 3 switch
                         versus a layer 7 smart switch.
                              The key to protocol families is that communication occurs logically at the same
                         level of the protocol in both sender and receiver, but services of the lower level
                         implement it. This style of communication is called peer-to-peer. As an analogy,
                         imagine that General A needs to send a message to General B on the battlefield.
                         General A writes the message, puts it in an envelope addressed to General B, and
                         gives it to a colonel with orders to deliver it. This colonel puts it in an envelope, and
                         writes the name of the corresponding colonel who reports to General B, and gives it
                         to a major with instructions for delivery. The major does the same thing and gives it
                         to a captain, who gives it to a lieutenant, who gives it to a sergeant. The sergeant
                         takes the envelope from the lieutenant, puts it into an envelope with the name of a
                         sergeant who is in General B’s division, and finds a private with orders to take the
                         large envelope. The private borrows a motorcycle and delivers the envelope to the
                         other sergeant. Once it arrives, it is passed up the chain of command, with each
                         person removing an outer envelope with his name on it and passing on the inner
                         envelope to his superior. As far as General B can tell, the note is from another gen-
                         eral. Neither general knows who was involved in transmitting the envelope, nor
                         how it was transported from one division to the other.
                              Protocol families follow this analogy more closely than you might think, as
                         Figure F.37 shows. The original message includes a header and possibly a trailer
                         sent by the lower-level protocol. The next-lower protocol in turn adds its own
                         header to the message, possibly breaking it up into smaller messages if it is too
                         large for this layer. Reusing our analogy, a long message from the general is
                         divided and placed in several envelopes if it could not fit in one. This division
                         of the message and appending of headers and trailers continues until the message
                                                          F.9       Internetworking           ■     F-87

                                          Logical
                     Message                                          Message

                          Actual                                           Actual

                                          Logical
     H         T    H     T    H     T                H         T    H     T    H         T

                          Actual                                           Actual

         T T       H H     T T     H H   T T    H H       T T       H H     T T     H H           T T

                                           Actual

Figure F.37 A generic protocol stack with two layers. Note that communication is
peer-to-peer, with headers and trailers for the peer added at each sending layer and
removed by each receiving layer. Each layer offers services to the one above to shield
it from unnecessary details.

descends to the physical transmission medium. The message is then sent to the des-
tination. Each level of the protocol family on the receiving end will check the mes-
sage at its level and peel off its headers and trailers, passing it on to the next higher
level and putting the pieces back together. This nesting of protocol layers for a spe-
cific message is called a protocol stack, reflecting the last in, first out nature of the
addition and removal of headers and trailers.
    As in our analogy, the danger in this layered approach is the considerable
latency added to message delivery. Clearly, one way to reduce latency is to reduce
the number of layers, but keep in mind that protocol families define a standard but
do not force how to implement the standard. Just as there are many ways to imple-
ment an instruction set architecture, there are many ways to implement a protocol
family.
    Our protocol stack example is TCP/IP. Let’s assume that the bottom protocol
layer is Ethernet. The next level up is the Internet Protocol or IP layer; the official
term for an IP packet is a datagram. The IP layer routes the datagram to the des-
tination machine, which may involve many intermediate machines or switches. IP
makes a best effort to deliver the packets but does not guarantee delivery, content,
or order of datagrams. The TCP layer above IP makes the guarantee of reliable, in-
order delivery and prevents corruption of datagrams.
    Following the example in Figure F.37, assume an application program wants to
send a message to a machine via an Ethernet. It starts with TCP. The largest number
of bytes that can be sent at once is 64 KB. Since the data may be much larger than
64 KB, TCP must divide them into smaller segments and reassemble them in
proper order upon arrival. TCP adds a 20-byte header (Figure F.38) to every data-
gram and passes them down to IP. The IP layer above the physical layer adds a
20-byte header, also shown in Figure F.38. The data sent down from the IP level
                                         V       L        Type                 Length

                                             Identifier                       Fragment

                           IP header      Time         Protocol            Header checksum

                                                                 Source

                                                             Destination

                                                 Source                     Destination

                                                     Sequence number (length)

                                                     Piggyback acknowledgment                TCP header

                                         L           Flags                     Window

                                             Checksum                       Urgent pointer

                             IP data

                                                             TCP data
                                                                                             TCP data
                                                          (0–65,516 bytes)

                                                                 32 bits

Figure F.38 The headers for IP and TCP. This drawing is 32 bits wide. The standard headers for both are 20 bytes,
but both allow the headers to optionally lengthen for rarely transmitted information. Both headers have a length of
header field (L) to accommodate the optional fields, as well as source and destination fields. The length field of the
whole datagram is in a separate length field in IP, while TCP combines the length of the datagram with the sequence
number of the datagram by giving the sequence number in bytes. TCP uses the checksum field to be sure that the
datagram is not corrupted, and the sequence number field to be sure the datagrams are assembled into the proper
order when they arrive. IP provides checksum error detection only for the header, since TCP has protected the rest of
the packet. One optimization is that TCP can send a sequence of datagrams before waiting for permission to send
more. The number of datagrams that can be sent without waiting for approval is called the window, and the window
field tells how many bytes may be sent beyond the byte being acknowledged by this datagram. TCP will adjust the
size of the window depending on the success of the IP layer in sending datagrams; the more reliable and faster it is,
the larger TCP makes the window. Since the window slides forward as the data arrive and are acknowledged, this
technique is called a sliding window protocol. The piggyback acknowledgment field of TCP is another optimization.
Since some applications send data back and forth over the same connection, it seems wasteful to send a datagram
containing only an acknowledgment. This piggyback field allows a datagram carrying data to also carry the acknowl-
edgment for a previous transmission, “piggybacking” on top of a data transmission. The urgent pointer field of TCP
gives the address within the datagram of an important byte, such as a break character. This pointer allows the appli-
cation software to skip over data so that the user doesn’t have to wait for all prior data to be processed before seeing a
character that tells the software to stop. The identifier field and fragment field of IP allow intermediary machines to
break the original datagram into many smaller datagrams. A unique identifier is associated with the original datagram
and placed in every fragment, with the fragment field saying which piece is which. The time-to-live field allows a
datagram to be killed off after going through a maximum number of intermediate switches no matter where it is
in the network. Knowing the maximum number of hops that it will take for a datagram to arrive—if it ever
arrives—simplifies the protocol software. The protocol field identifies which possible upper layer protocol sent
the IP datagram; in our case, it is TCP. The V (for version) and type fields allow different versions of the IP protocol
software for the network. Explicit version numbering is included so that software can be upgraded gracefully machine
by machine, without shutting down the entire network. Nowadays, version six of the Internet protocol (IPv6) was
widely used.
                    F.10   Crosscutting Issues for Interconnection Networks      ■   F-89

       to the Ethernet are sent in packets with the format shown in Figure F.30. Note that
       the TCP packet appears inside the data portion of the IP datagram, just as
       Figure F.37 suggests.

F.10   Crosscutting Issues for Interconnection Networks
       This section describes five topics discussed in other chapters that are fundamen-
       tally impacted by interconnection networks, and vice versa.

       Density-Optimized Processors versus SPEC-Optimized
       Processors
       Given that people all over the world are accessing Web sites, it doesn’t really mat-
       ter where servers are located. Hence, many servers are kept at collocation sites,
       which charge by network bandwidth reserved and used and by space occupied
       and power consumed. Desktop microprocessors in the past have been designed
       to be as fast as possible at whatever heat could be dissipated, with little regard
       for the size of the package and surrounding chips. In fact, some desktop micropro-
       cessors from Intel and AMD as recently as 2006 burned as much as 130 watts!
       Floor space efficiency was also largely ignored. As a result of these priorities,
       power is a major cost for collocation sites, and processor density is limited by
       the power consumed and dissipated, including within the interconnect!
           With the proliferation of portable computers (notebook sales exceeded desktop
       sales for the first time in 2005) and their reduced power consumption and cooling
       demands, the opportunity exists for using this technology to create considerably
       denser computation. For instance, the power consumption for the Intel Pentium
       M in 2006 was 25 watts, yet it delivered performance close to that of a desktop
       microprocessor for a wide set of applications. It is therefore conceivable that per-
       formance per watt or performance per cubic foot could replace performance per
       microprocessor as the important figure of merit. The key is that many applications
       already make use of large clusters, so it is possible that replacing 64 power-hungry
       processors with, say, 256 power-efficient processors could be cheaper yet be soft-
       ware compatible. This places greater importance on power- and performance-
       efficient interconnection network design.
           The Google cluster is a prime example of this migration to many “cooler”
       processors versus fewer “hotter” processors. It uses racks of up to 80 Intel Pen-
       tium III 1 GHz processors instead of more power-hungry high-end processors.
       Other examples include blade servers consisting of 1-inch-wide by 7-inch-high
       rack unit blades designed based on mobile processors. The HP ProLiant BL10e
       G2 blade server supports up to 20 1-GHz ultra-low-voltage Intel Pentium M
       processors with a 400-MHz front-side bus, 1-MB L2 cache, and up to 1 GB
       memory. The Fujitsu Primergy BX300 blade server supports up to 20 1.4- or
       1.6-GHz Intel Pentium M processors, each with 512 MB of memory expandable
       to 4 GB.
F-90   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         Smart Switches versus Smart Interface Cards
                         Figure F.39 shows a trade-off as to where intelligence can be located within a net-
                         work. Generally, the question is whether to have either smarter network interfaces
                         or smarter switches. Making one smarter generally makes the other simpler and
                         less expensive. By having an inexpensive interface, it was possible for Ethernet
                         to become standard as part of most desktop and server computers. Lower-cost
                         switches were made available for people with small configurations, not needing
                         sophisticated forwarding tables and spanning-tree protocols of larger Ethernet
                         switches.
                             Myrinet followed the opposite approach. Its switches are dumb components
                         that, other than implementing flow control and arbitration, simply extract the first
                         byte from the packet header and use it to directly select the output port. No routing
                         tables are implemented, so the intelligence is in the network interface cards (NICs).
                         The NICs are responsible for providing support for efficient communication and
                         for implementing a distributed protocol for network (re)configuration. InfiniBand
                         takes a hybrid approach by offering lower-cost, less sophisticated interface cards
                         called target channel adapters (or TCAs) for less demanding devices such as
                         disks—in the hope that it can be included within some I/O devices—and by offer-
                         ing more expensive, powerful interface cards for hosts called host channel adapters
                         (or HCAs). The switches implement routing tables.

                                Switch
                                             Small-scale                         Large-scale
                                           Ethernet switch                     Ethernet switch
                                              Myrinet

                                             InfiniBand

                              Interface
                                   card       Ethernet                           Myrinet

                                          InfiniBand target                   InfiniBand host
                                           channel adapter                   channel adapter

                                                                                                     More
                                                                                                  intelligence

                         Figure F.39 Intelligence in a network: switch versus network interface card. Note
                         that Ethernet switches come in two styles, depending on the size of the network,
                         and that InfiniBand network interfaces come in two styles, depending on whether they
                         are attached to a computer or to a storage device. Myrinet is a proprietary system area
                         network.
                                   F.10      Crosscutting Issues for Interconnection Networks                                                                                           ■    F-91

Protection and User Access to the Network
A challenge is to ensure safe communication across a network without invoking
the operating system in the common case. The Cray Research T3D supercomputer
offers an interesting case study. Like the more recent Cray X1E, the T3D supports a
global address space, so loads and stores can access memory across the network.
Protection is ensured because each access is checked by the TLB. To support trans-
fer of larger objects, a block transfer engine (BLT) was added to the hardware. Pro-
tection of access requires invoking the operating system before using the BLT to
check the range of accesses to be sure there will be no protection violations.
    Figure F.40 compares the bandwidth delivered as the size of the object varies
for reads and writes. For very large reads (e.g., 512 KB), the BLT achieves the
highest performance: 140 MB/sec. But simple loads get higher performance for
8 KB or less. For the write case, both achieve a peak of 90 MB/sec, presumably
because of the limitations of the memory bus. But, for writes, the BLT can only
match the performance of simple stores for transfers of 2 MB; anything smaller
and it’s faster to send stores. Clearly, a BLT that can avoid invoking the operating
system in the common case would be more useful.

Efficient Interface to the Memory Hierarchy versus the Network
Traditional evaluations of processor performance, such as SPECint and SPECfp,
encourage integration of the memory hierarchy with the processor as the efficiency
of the memory hierarchy translates directly into processor performance. Hence,

                            160

                            140                                                                                                                    BLT read

                            120
                                                                CPU write
       Bandwidth (MB/sec)

                            100

                            80
                                                                                                                                                 BLT write
                            60

                            40
                                                                                                                                                   CPU read

                            20

                             0
                                  8     6     2     24     48      96     92        84        68        36          2          4          8         76          52          04          08
                              12      25    51    10     20      40     81       ,3        ,7        ,5           07         14         28        ,5          ,1          ,3          ,6
                                                                               16        32        65          1,         2,         4,       48           97          94          88
                                                                                                             13         26         52        0            0           1           3
                                                                                                                                          1,           2,          4,          8,
                                                                             Transfer size (bytes)

Figure F.40 Bandwidth versus transfer size for simple memory access instructions
versus a block transfer device on the Cray Research T3D. (From Arpaci et al. [1995].)
F-92   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         microprocessors have multiple levels of caches on chip along with buffers for
                         writes. Because benchmarks such as SPECint and SPECfp do not reward good
                         interfaces to interconnection networks, many machines make the access time to
                         the network delayed by the full memory hierarchy. Writes must lumber their
                         way through full write buffers, and reads must go through the cycles of first-,
                         second-, and often third-level cache misses before reaching the interconnection
                         network. This hierarchy results in newer systems having higher latencies to the
                         interconnect than older machines.
                             Let’s compare three machines from the past: a 40-MHz SPARCstation-2, a 50-
                         MHz SPARCstation-20 without an external cache, and a 50-MHz SPARCstation-
                         20 with an external cache. According to SPECint95, this list is in order of increas-
                         ing performance. The time to access the I/O bus (S-bus), however, increases in this
                         sequence: 200 ns, 500 ns, and 1000 ns. The SPARCstation-2 is fastest because it
                         has a single bus for memory and I/O, and there is only one level to the cache. The
                         SPARCstation-20 memory access must first go over the memory bus (M-bus) and
                         then to the I/O bus, adding 300 ns. Machines with a second-level cache pay an
                         extra penalty of 500 ns before accessing the I/O bus.

                         Compute-Optimized Processors versus Receiver Overhead
                         The overhead to receive a message likely involves an interrupt, which bears the
                         cost of flushing and then restarting the processor pipeline, if not offloaded. As
                         mentioned earlier, reading network status and receiving data from the network
                         interface likely operate at cache miss speeds. If microprocessors become more
                         superscalar and go to even faster clock rates, the number of missed instruction
                         issue opportunities per message reception will likely rise to unacceptable
                         levels.

               F.11      Fallacies and Pitfalls
                         Myths and hazards are widespread with interconnection networks. This section
                         mentions several warnings, so proceed carefully.
               Fallacy   The interconnection network is very fast and does not need to be improved
                         The interconnection network provides certain functionality to the system, very
                         much like the memory and I/O subsystems. It should be designed to allow proces-
                         sors to execute instructions at the maximum rate. The interconnection network sub-
                         system should provide high enough bandwidth to keep from continuously entering
                         saturation and becoming an overall system bottleneck.
                             In the 1980s, when wormhole switching was introduced, it became feasible
                         to design large-diameter topologies with single-chip switches so that the band-
                         width capacity of the network was not the limiting factor. This led to the
                         flawed belief that interconnection networks need no further improvement.
                                                      F.11   Fallacies and Pitfalls   ■   F-93

           Since the 1980s, much attention has been placed on improving processor per-
           formance, but comparatively less has been focused on interconnection net-
           works. As technology advances, the interconnection network tends to
           represent an increasing fraction of system resources, cost, power consumption,
           and various other attributes that impact functionality and performance. Scaling
           the bandwidth simply by overdimensioning certain network parameters is no
           longer a cost-viable option. Designers must carefully consider the end-to-
           end interconnection network design in concert with the processor, memory,
           and I/O subsystems in order to achieve the required cost, power, functionality,
           and performance objectives of the entire system. An obvious case in point is
           multicore processors with on-chip networks.
Fallacy    Bisection bandwidth is an accurate cost constraint of a network
           Despite being very popular, bisection bandwidth has never been a practical con-
           straint on the implementation of an interconnection network, although it may be
           one in future designs. It is more useful as a performance measure than as a cost
           measure. Chip pin-outs are the more realistic bandwidth constraint.
 Pitfall   Using bandwidth (in particular, bisection bandwidth) as the only measure of
           network performance
           It seldom is the case that aggregate network bandwidth (likewise, network bisec-
           tion bandwidth) is the end-to-end bottlenecking point across the network. Even if it
           were the case, networks are almost never 100% efficient in transporting packets
           across the bisection (i.e., ρ < 100%) nor at receiving them at network endpoints
           (i.e., σ < 100%). The former is highly dependent upon routing, switching, arbitra-
           tion, and other such factors while both the former and the latter are highly depen-
           dent upon traffic characteristics. Ignoring these important factors and
           concentrating only on raw bandwidth can give very misleading performance pre-
           dictions. For example, it is perfectly conceivable that a network could have higher
           aggregate bandwidth and/or bisection bandwidth relative to another network but
           also have lower measured performance!
                Apparently, given sophisticated protocols like TCP/IP that maximize delivered
           bandwidth, many network companies believe that there is only one figure of merit
           for networks. This may be true for some applications, such as video streaming,
           where there is little interaction between the sender and the receiver. Many appli-
           cations, however, are of a request-response nature, and so for every large message
           there must be one or more small messages. One example is NFS.
                Figure F.41 compares a shared 10-Mbit/sec Ethernet LAN to a switched 155-
           Mbit/sec ATM LAN for NFS traffic. Ethernet drivers were better tuned than the
           ATM drivers, such that 10-Mbit/sec Ethernet was faster than 155-Mbit/sec
           ATM for payloads of 512 bytes or less. Figure F.41 shows the overhead time, trans-
           mission time, and total time to send all the NFS messages over Ethernet and ATM.
           The peak link speed of ATM is 15 times faster, and the measured link speed for 8-
           KB messages is almost 9 times faster. Yet, the higher overheads offset the benefits
           so that ATM would transmit NFS traffic only 1.2 times faster.
F-94    ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                                                                               Transmission
                                 Overhead (sec)                                (sec)               Total time (sec)
             Number of                                  Number of data
Size         messages            ATM     Ethernet          bytes               ATM     Ethernet    ATM     Ethernet
   32            771,060          532       389              33,817,052           4         48       536       436
   64             56,923           39         29              4,101,088           0           5       40        34
   96          4,082,014         2817      2057            428,346,316           46       475      2863       2532
 128           5,574,092         3846      2809            779,600,736           83       822      3929       3631
 160             328,439          227       166              54,860,484           6         56       232       222
 192              16,313           11          8              3,316,416           0           3       12        12
 224                4820             3         2              1,135,380           0           1        3         4
 256              24,766           17         12              9,150,720           1           9       18        21
 512              32,159           22         16             25,494,920           3         23        25        40
1024              69,834           48         35             70,578,564           8         72        56       108
1536                8842             6         4             15,762,180           2         14         8        19
2048                9170             6         5             20,621,760           2         19         8        23
2560              20,206           14         10             56,319,740           6         51        20        61
3072              13,549             9         7             43,184,992           4         39        14        46
3584                4200             3         2             16,152,228           2         14         5        17
4096              67,808           47         34           285,606,596           29       255         76       290
5120                6143             4         3             35,434,680           4         32         8        35
6144                5858             4         3             37,934,684           4         34         8        37
7168                4140             3         2             31,769,300           3         28         6        30
8192             287,577          198       145           2,390,688,480         245      2132        444      2277
Total         11,387,913         7858      5740           4,352,876,316         452      4132      8310       9872

Figure F.41 Total time on a 10-Mbit Ethernet and a 155-Mbit ATM, calculating the total overhead and transmis-
sion time separately. Note that the size of the headers needs to be added to the data bytes to calculate transmission
time. The higher overhead of the software driver for ATM offsets the higher bandwidth of the network. These mea-
surements were performed in 1994 using SPARCstation 10s, the ForeSystems SBA-200 ATM interface card, and the
Fore Systems ASX-200 switch. (NFS measurements taken by Mike Dahlin of the University of California–Berkeley.)

                   Pitfall   Not providing sufficient reception link bandwidth, which causes the network end
                             nodes to become even more of a bottleneck to performance
                             Unless the traffic pattern is a permutation, several packets will concurrently
                             arrive at some destinations when most source devices inject traffic, thus pro-
                             ducing contention. If this problem is not addressed, contention may turn into
                             congestion that will spread across the network. This can be dealt with by ana-
                             lyzing traffic patterns and providing extra reception bandwidth. For example, it
                             is possible to implement more reception bandwidth than injection bandwidth.
                             The IBM Blue Gene/L, for example, implements an on-chip switch with 7-bit
                                                      F.11    Fallacies and Pitfalls   ■   F-95

           injection and 12-bit reception links, where the reception BW equals the aggre-
           gate switch input link BW.
 Pitfall   Using high-performance network interface cards but forgetting about the I/O sub-
           system that sits between the network interface and the host processor
           This issue is related to the previous one. Messages are usually composed in user
           space buffers and later sent by calling a send function from the communications
           library. Alternatively, a cache controller implementing a cache coherence protocol
           may compose a message in some SANs and in OCNs. In both cases, messages have
           to be copied to the network interface memory before transmission. If the I/O band-
           width is lower than the link bandwidth or introduces significant overhead, this is
           going to affect communication performance significantly. As an example, the first
           10-Gigabit Ethernet cards in the market had a PCI-X bus interface for the system
           with a significantly lower bandwidth than 10 Gbps.
Fallacy    Zero-copy protocols do not require copying messages or fragments from one
           buffer to another
           Traditional communication protocols for computer networks allow access to com-
           munication devices only through system calls in supervisor mode. As a conse-
           quence of this, communication routines need to copy the corresponding
           message from the user buffer to a kernel buffer when sending a message. Note that
           the communication protocol may need to keep a copy of the message for retrans-
           mission in case of error, and the application may modify the contents of the user
           buffer once the system call returns control to the application. This buffer-to-buffer
           copy is eliminated in zero-copy protocols because the communication routines are
           executed in user space and protocols are much simpler.
               However, messages still need to be copied from the application buffer to
           the memory in the network interface card (NIC) so that the card hardware
           can transmit it from there through to the network. Although it is feasible to
           eliminate this copy by allocating application message buffers directly in the
           NIC memory (and, indeed, this is done in some protocols), this may not be
           convenient in current systems because access to the NIC memory is usually
           performed through the I/O subsystem, which usually is much slower than
           accessing main memory. Thus, it is generally more efficient to compose the
           message in main memory and let DMA devices take care of the transfer to
           the NIC memory.
               Moreover, what few people count is the copy from where the message frag-
           ments are computed (usually the ALU, with results stored in some processor reg-
           ister) to main memory. Some systolic-like architectures in the 1980s, like the
           iWarp, were able to directly transmit message fragments from the processor to
           the network, effectively eliminating all the message copies. This is the approach
           taken in the Cray X1E shared-memory multiprocessor supercomputer.
               Similar comments can be made regarding the reception side; however, this
           does not mean that zero-copy protocols are inefficient. These protocols represent
           the most efficient kind of implementation used in current systems.
F-96   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                Pitfall   Ignoring software overhead when determining performance
                          Low software overhead requires cooperation with the operating system as well
                          as with the communication libraries, but even with protocol offloading it con-
                          tinues to dominate the hardware overhead and must not be ignored.
                          Figures F.32 and F.41 give two examples, one for a SAN standard and the
                          other for a WAN standard. Other examples come from proprietary SANs for
                          supercomputers. The Connection Machine CM-5 supercomputer in the early
                          1990s had a software overhead of 20 μs to send a message and a hardware
                          overhead of only 0.5 μs. The first Intel Paragon supercomputer built in the
                          early 1990s had a hardware overhead of just 0.2 μs, but the initial release of
                          the software had an overhead of 250 μs. Later releases reduced this overhead
                          down to 25 μs and, more recently, down to only a few microseconds, but this
                          still dominates the hardware overhead. The IBM Blue Gene/L has an MPI
                          sending/receiving overhead of approximately 3 μs, only a third of which (at
                          most) is attributed to the hardware.
                               This pitfall is simply Amdahl’s law applied to networks: Faster network
                          hardware is superfluous if there is not a corresponding decrease in software
                          overhead. The software overhead is much reduced these days with OS
                          bypass, lightweight protocols, and protocol offloading down to a few micro-
                          seconds or less, typically, but it remains a significant factor in determining
                          performance.
               Fallacy    MINs are more cost-effective than direct networks
                          A MIN is usually implemented using significantly fewer switches than the number
                          of devices that need to be connected. On the other hand, direct networks usually
                          include a switch as an integral part of each node, thus requiring as many switches as
                          nodes to interconnect. However, nothing prevents the implementation of nodes
                          with multiple computing devices on it (e.g., a multicore processor with an on-chip
                          switch) or with several devices attached to each switch (i.e., bristling). In these
                          cases, a direct network may be as (or even more) cost-effective as a MIN. Note
                          that, for a MIN, several network interfaces may be required at each node to match
                          the bandwidth delivered by the multiple links per node provided by the direct
                          network.
               Fallacy    Low-dimensional direct networks achieve              higher    performance      than
                          high-dimensional networks such as hypercubes
                          This conclusion was drawn by several studies that analyzed the optimal number of
                          dimensions under the main physical constraint of bisection bandwidth. However,
                          most of those studies did not consider link pipelining, considered only very short
                          links, and/or did not consider switch architecture design constraints. The misplaced
                          assumption that bisection bandwidth serves as the main limit did not help matters.
                          Nowadays, most researchers and designers believe that high-radix switches are
                          more cost-effective than low-radix switches, including some who concluded the
                          opposite before.
                                                     F.11    Fallacies and Pitfalls   ■   F-97

Fallacy   Wormhole switching achieves better performance than other switching
          techniques
          Wormhole switching delivers the same no-load latency as other pipelined switch-
          ing techniques, like virtual cut-through switching. The introduction of wormhole
          switches in the late 1980s coinciding with a dramatic increase in network band-
          width led many to believe that wormhole switching was the main reason for the
          performance boost. Instead, most of the performance increase came from a drastic
          increase in link bandwidth, which, in turn, was enabled by the ability of wormhole
          switching to buffer packet fragments using on-chip buffers, instead of using the
          node’s main memory or some other off-chip source for that task. More recently,
          much larger on-chip buffers have become feasible, and virtual cutthrough achieved
          the same no-load latency as wormhole while delivering much higher throughput.
          This did not mean that wormhole switching was dead. It continues to be the switch-
          ing technique of choice for applications in which only small buffers should be used
          (e.g., perhaps for on-chip networks).
Fallacy   Implementing a few virtual channels always increases throughput by allowing
          packets to pass through blocked packets ahead
          In general, implementing a few virtual channels in a wormhole switch is a
          good idea because packets are likely to pass blocked packets ahead of them,
          thus reducing latency and significantly increasing throughput. However, the
          improvements are not as dramatic for virtual cut-through switches. In virtual
          cut-through, buffers should be large enough to store several packets. As a con-
          sequence, each virtual channel may introduce HOL blocking, possibly degrad-
          ing performance at high loads. Adding virtual channels increases cost, but it
          may deliver little additional performance unless there are as many virtual chan-
          nels as switch ports and packets are mapped to virtual channels according to
          their destination (i.e., virtual output queueing). It is certainly the case that vir-
          tual channels can be useful in virtual cut-through networks to segregate differ-
          ent traffic classes, which can be very beneficial. However, multiplexing the
          packets over a physical link on a flit-by-flit basis causes all the packets from
          different virtual channels to get delayed. The average packet delay is signifi-
          cantly shorter if multiplexing takes place on a packet-by-packet basis, but in
          this case packet size should be bounded to prevent any one packet from
          monopolizing the majority of link bandwidth.
Fallacy   Adaptive routing causes out-of-order packet delivery, thus introducing too much
          overhead needed to reorder packets at the destination device
          Adaptive routing allows packets to follow alternative paths through the network
          depending on network traffic; therefore, adaptive routing usually introduces
          outof-order packet delivery. However, this does not necessarily imply that reorder-
          ing packets at the destination device is going to introduce a large overhead, making
          adaptive routing not useful. For example, the most efficient adaptive routing algo-
          rithms to date support fully adaptive routing in some virtual channels but required
F-98   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         deterministic routing to be implemented in some other virtual channels in order to
                         prevent deadlocks (à la the IBM Blue Gene/L). In this case, it is very easy to select
                         between adaptive and deterministic routing for each individual packet. A single bit
                         in the packet header can indicate to the switches whether all the virtual channels
                         can be used or only those implementing deterministic routing. This hardware sup-
                         port can be used as indicated below to eliminate packet reordering overhead at the
                         destination.
                             Most communication protocols for parallel computers and clusters implement
                         two different protocols depending on message size. For short messages, an eager
                         protocol is used in which messages are directly transmitted, and the receiving
                         nodes use some preallocated buffer to temporarily store the incoming message.
                         On the other hand, for long messages, a rendezvous protocol is used. In this case,
                         a control message is sent first, requesting the destination node to allocate a buffer
                         large enough to store the entire message. The destination node confirms buffer
                         allocation by returning an acknowledgment, and the sender can proceed with frag-
                         menting the message into bounded-size packets, transmitting them to the
                         destination.
                             If eager messages use only deterministic routing, it is obvious that they do
                         not introduce any reordering overhead at the destination. On the other hand,
                         packets belonging to a long message can be transmitted using adaptive routing.
                         As every packet contains the sequence number within the message (or the off-
                         set from the beginning of the message), the destination node can store every
                         incoming packet directly in its correct location within the message buffer, thus
                         incurring no overhead with respect to using deterministic routing. The only
                         thing that differs is the completion condition. Instead of checking that the last
                         packet in the message has arrived, it is now necessary to count the arrived
                         packets, notifying the end of reception when the count equals the message size.
                         Taking into account that long messages, even if not frequent, usually consume
                         most of the network bandwidth, it is clear that most packets can benefit from
                         adaptive routing without introducing reordering overhead when using the pro-
                         tocol described above.
               Fallacy   Adaptive routing by itself always improves network fault tolerance because it
                         allows packets to follow alternative paths
                         Adaptive routing by itself is not enough to tolerate link and/or switch failures.
                         Some mechanism is required to detect failures and notify them, so that the routing
                         logic could exclude faulty paths and use the remaining ones. Moreover, while a
                         given link or switch failure affects a certain number of paths when using determin-
                         istic routing, many more source/destination pairs could be affected by the same
                         failure when using adaptive routing. As a consequence of this, some switches
                         implementing adaptive routing transition to deterministic routing in the presence
                         of failures. In this case, failures are usually tolerated by sending messages through
                         alternative paths from the source node. As an example, the Cray T3E implements
                         direction-order routing to tolerate a few failures. This fault-tolerant routing
                         technique avoids cycles in the use of resources by crossing directions in order
                                                     F.11    Fallacies and Pitfalls   ■   F-99

          (e.g., X+, Y+, Z+, Z?, Y?, then X?). At the same time, it provides an easy way to
          send packets through nonminimal paths, if necessary, to avoid crossing faulty com-
          ponents. For instance, a packet can be initially forwarded a few hops in the X+
          direction even if it has to go in the X? direction at some point later.
Pitfall   Trying to provide features only within the network versus end-to-end
          The concern is that of providing at a lower level the features that can only be
          accomplished at the highest level, thus only partially satisfying the communication
          demand. Saltzer, Reed, and Clark [1984] gave the end-to-end argument as follows:
          The function in question can completely and correctly be specified only with
          the knowledge and help of the application standing at the endpoints of the
          communication system. Therefore, providing that questioned function as a fea-
          ture of the communication system itself is not possible. [page 278]
          Their example of the pitfall was a network at MIT that used several gateways, each
          of which added a checksum from one gateway to the next. The programmers of the
          application assumed that the checksum guaranteed accuracy, incorrectly believing
          that the message was protected while stored in the memory of each gateway. One
          gateway developed a transient failure that swapped one pair of bytes per million
          bytes transferred. Over time, the source code of one operating system was repeat-
          edly passed through the gateway, thereby corrupting the code. The only solution
          was to correct infected source files by comparing them to paper listings and repair-
          ing code by hand! Had the checksums been calculated and checked by the appli-
          cation running on the end systems, safety would have been ensured.
               There is a useful role for intermediate checks at the link level, however, pro-
          vided that end-to-end checking is available. End-to-end checking may show that
          something is broken between two nodes, but it doesn’t point to where the problem
          is. Intermediate checks can discover the broken component.
               A second issue regards performance using intermediate checks. Although it is
          sufficient to retransmit the whole in case of failures from the end point, it can be
          much faster to retransmit a portion of the message at an intermediate point rather
          than wait for a time-out and a full message retransmit at the end point.
Pitfall   Relying on TCP/IP for all networks, regardless of latency, bandwidth, or software
          requirements
          The network designers on the first workstations decided it would be elegant to use a
          single protocol stack no matter where the destination of the message: Across a
          room or across an ocean, the TCP/IP overhead must be paid. This might have been
          a wise decision back then, especially given the unreliability of early Ethernet hard-
          ware, but it sets a high software overhead barrier for commercial systems of today.
          Such an obstacle lowers the enthusiasm for low-latency network interface hard-
          ware and low-latency interconnection networks if the software is just going to
          waste hundreds of microseconds when the message must travel only dozens of
          meters or less. It also can use significant processor resources. One rough rule of
F-100   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                        thumb is that each Mbit/sec of TCP/IP bandwidth needs about 1 MHz of processor
                        speed, so a 1000-Mbit/sec link could saturate a processor with an 800- to 1000-
                        MHz clock.
                            The flip side is that, from a software perspective, TCP/IP is the most desirable
                        target since it is the most connected and, hence, provides the largest number of
                        opportunities. The downside of using software optimized to a particular LAN or
                        SAN is that it is limited. For example, communication from a Java program
                        depends on TCP/IP, so optimization for another protocol would require creation
                        of glue software to interface Java to it.
                            TCP/IP advocates point out that the protocol itself is theoretically not as bur-
                        densome as current implementations, but progress has been modest in commercial
                        systems. There are also TCP/IP offloading engines in the market, with the hope of
                        preserving the universal software model while reducing processor utilization and
                        message latency. If processors continue to improve much faster than network
                        speeds, or if multiple processors become ubiquitous, software TCP/IP may become
                        less significant for processor utilization and message latency.

              F.12      Concluding Remarks
                        Interconnection network design is one of the most exciting areas of computer archi-
                        tecture development today. With the advent of new multicore processor paradigms
                        and advances in traditional multiprocessor/cluster systems and the Internet, many
                        challenges and opportunities exist for interconnect architecture innovation. These
                        apply to all levels of computer systems: communication between cores on a chip,
                        between chips on a board, between boards in a system, and between computers in a
                        machine room, over a local area and across the globe. Irrespective of their domain
                        of application, interconnection networks should transfer the maximum amount of
                        information within the least amount of time for given cost and power constraints so
                        as not to bottleneck the system. Topology, routing, arbitration, switching, and flow
                        control are among some of the key concepts in realizing such high-performance
                        designs.
                            The design of interconnection networks is end-to-end: It includes injection
                        links, reception links, and the interfaces at network end points as much as it
                        does the topology, switches, and links within the network fabric. It is often
                        the case that the bandwidth and overhead at the end node interfaces are the
                        bottleneck, yet many mistakenly think of the interconnection network to mean
                        only the network fabric. This is as bad as processor designers thinking of com-
                        puter architecture to mean only the instruction set architecture or only the
                        microarchitecture! End-to-end issues and understanding of the traffic charac-
                        teristics make the design of interconnection networks challenging and very
                        much relevant even today. For instance, the need for low end-to-end latency
                        is driving the development of efficient network interfaces located closer to
                        the processor/memory controller. We may soon see most multicore processors
                        used in multiprocessor systems implementing network interfaces on-chip,
                               F.13   Historical Perspective and References     ■   F-101

       devoting some core(s) to execute communication tasks. This is already the case
       for the IBM Blue Gene/L supercomputer, which uses one of its two cores on
       each processor chip for this purpose.
            Networking has a long way to go from its humble shared-media beginnings. It
       is in “catch-up” mode, with switched-media point-to-point networks only recently
       displacing traditional bus-based networks in many networking domains, including
       on chip, I/O, and the local area. We are not near any performance plateaus, so we
       expect rapid advancement of WANs, LANs, SANs, and especially OCNs in the
       near future. Greater interconnection network performance is key to the
       information- and communication-centric vision of the future of our field, which,
       so far, has benefited many millions of people around the world in various ways.
       As the quotes at the beginning of this appendix suggest, this revolution in two-
       way communication is at the heart of changes in the form of our human associa-
       tions and actions.

       Acknowledgments
       We express our sincere thanks to the following persons who, in some way, have
       contributed to the contents of the previous edition of the appendix: Lei Chai, Scott
       Clark, Jos?e Flich, Jose Manuel Garcia, Paco Gilabert, Rama Govindaraju, Manish
       Gupta, Wai Hong Ho, Siao Jer, Steven Keckler, Dhabaleswar (D.K.) Panda, Fab-
       rizio Petrini, Steve Scott, Jeonghee Shin, Craig Stunkel, Sayantan Sur, Michael B.
       Taylor, and Bilal Zafar. We especially appreciate the new contributions of Jose
       Flich to this edition of the appendix.

F.13   Historical Perspective and References
       This appendix has taken the perspective that interconnection networks for very
       different domains—from on-chip networks within a processor chip to wide
       area networks connecting computers across the globe—share many of the same
       concerns. With this, interconnection network concepts are presented in a uni-
       fied way, irrespective of their application; however, their histories are vastly
       different, as evidenced by the different solutions adopted to address similar
       problems. The lack of significant interaction between research communities
       from the different domains certainly contributed to the diversity of implemen-
       ted solutions. Highlighted below are relevant readings on each topic. In addi-
       tion, good general texts featuring WAN and LAN networking have been
       written by Davie, Peterson, and Clark [1999] and by Kurose and Ross
       [2001]. Good texts focused on SANs for multiprocessors and clusters have
       been written by Duato, Yalamanchili, and Ni [2003] and by Dally and
       Towles [2004]. An informative chapter devoted to dead-lock resolution in
       interconnection networks was written by Pinkston [2004]. Finally, an edited
       work by Jantsch and Tenhunen [2003] on OCNs for multicore processors
       and system-on-chips is also interesting reading.
F-102   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                        Wide Area Networks
                        Wide area networks are the earliest of the data interconnection networks. The fore-
                        runner of the Internet is the ARPANET, which in 1969 connected computer sci-
                        ence departments across the United States that had research grants funded by the
                        Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA), a U.S. government agency. It was
                        originally envisioned as using reliable communications at lower levels. Practical
                        experience with failures of the underlying technology led to the failure-tolerant
                        TCP/IP, which is the basis for the Internet today. Vint Cerf and Robert Kahn
                        are credited with developing the TCP/IP protocols in the mid-1970s, winning
                        the ACM Software Award in recognition of that achievement. Kahn [1972] is
                        an early reference on the ideas of ARPANET. For those interested in learning more
                        about TPC/IP, Stevens [1994–1996] has written classic books on the topic.
                             In 1975, there were roughly 100 networks in the ARPANET; in 1983, only
                        200. In 1995, the Internet encompassed 50,000 networks worldwide, about half
                        of which were in the United States. That number is hard to calculate now, but
                        the number of IP hosts grew by a factor of 15 from 1995 to 2000, reaching 100
                        million Internet hosts by the end of 2000. It has grown much faster since then. With
                        most service providers assigning dynamic IP addresses, many local area networks
                        using private IP addresses, and with most networks allowing wireless connections,
                        the total number of hosts in the Internet is nearly impossible to compute. In July
                        2005, the Internet Systems Consortium (www.isc.org) estimated more than 350
                        million Internet hosts, with an annual increase of about 25% projected. Although
                        key government networks made the Internet possible (i.e., ARPANET and
                        NSFNET), these networks have been taken over by the commercial sector, allow-
                        ing the Internet to thrive. But major innovations to the Internet are still likely to
                        come from government-sponsored research projects rather than from the commer-
                        cial sector. The National Science Foundation’s Global Environment for Network
                        Innovation (GENI) initiative is an example of this.
                             The most exciting application of the Internet is the World Wide Web, devel-
                        oped in 1989 by Tim Berners-Lee, a programmer at the European Center for Par-
                        ticle Research (CERN), for information access. In 1992, a young programmer at
                        the University of Illinois, Marc Andreessen, developed a graphical interface for the
                        Web called Mosaic. It became immensely popular. He later became a founder of
                        Netscape, which popularized commercial browsers. In May 1995, at the time of the
                        second edition of this book, there were over 30,000 Web pages, and the number
                        was doubling every two months. During the writing of the third edition of this text,
                        there were more than 1.3 billion Web pages. In December 2005, the number of
                        Web servers approached 75 million, having increased by 30% during that
                        same year.
                             Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) was an attempt to design the definitive
                        communication standard. It provided good support for data transmission as well as
                        digital voice transmission (i.e., phone calls). From a technical point of view, it
                        combined the best from packet switching and circuit switching, also providing
                        excellent support for providing quality of service (QoS). Alles [1995] offers a good
                        F.13    Historical Perspective and References      ■   F-103

survey on ATM. In 1995, no one doubted that ATM was going to be the future for
this community. Ten years later, the high equipment and personnel training costs
basically killed ATM, and we returned back to the simplicity of TCP/IP. Another
important blow to ATM was its defeat by the Ethernet family in the LAN domain,
where packet switching achieved significantly lower latencies than ATM, which
required establishing a connection before data transmission. ATM connectionless
servers were later introduced in an attempt to fix this problem, but they were expen-
sive and represented a central bottleneck in the LAN.
    Finally, WANs today rely on optical fiber. Fiber technology has made so
many advances that today WAN fiber bandwidth is often underutilized. The
main reason for this is the commercial introduction of wavelength division
multiplexing (WDM), which allows each fiber to transmit many data streams
simultaneously over different wavelengths, thus allowing three orders of mag-
nitude bandwidth increase in just one generation, that is, 3 to 5 years (a good
text by Senior [1993] discusses optical fiber communications). However, IP
routers may still become a bottleneck. At 10- to 40-Gbps link rates, and with
thousands of ports in large core IP routers, packets must be processed very
quickly—that is, within a few tens of nanoseconds. The most time-consuming
operation is routing. The way IP addresses have been defined and assigned to
Internet hosts makes routing very complicated, usually requiring a complex
search in a tree structure for every packet. Network processors have become
popular as a cost-effective solution for implementing routing and other
packet-filtering operations. They usually are RISC-like and highly multi-
threaded and implement local stores instead of caches.

Local Area Networks
ARPA’s success with wide area networks led directly to the most popular local area
networks. Many researchers at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center had been funded
by ARPA while working at universities, so they all knew the value of networking.
In 1974, this group invented the Alto, the forerunner of today’s desktop computers
[Thacker et al. 1982], and the Ethernet [Metcalfe and Boggs 1976], today’s LAN.
This group—David Boggs, Butler Lampson, Ed McCreight, Bob Sprowl, and
Chuck Thacker—became luminaries in computer science and engineering, collect-
ing a treasure chest of awards among them.
    This first Ethernet provided a 3-Mbit/sec interconnection, which seemed like
an unlimited amount of communication bandwidth with computers of that era. It
relied on the interconnect technology developed for the cable television industry.
Special microcode support gave a round-trip time of 50 μs for the Alto over Ether-
net, which is still a respectable latency. It was Boggs’ experience as a ham radio
operator that led to a design that did not need a central arbiter, but instead listened
before use and then varied back-off times in case of conflicts.
    The announcement by Digital Equipment Corporation, Intel, and Xerox of a
standard for 10-Mbit/sec Ethernet was critical to the commercial success of
F-104   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                        Ethernet. This announcement short-circuited a lengthy IEEE standards effort,
                        which eventually did publish IEEE 802.3 as a standard for Ethernet.
                            There have been several unsuccessful candidates that have tried to replace the
                        Ethernet. The Fiber Data Distribution Interconnect (FDDI) committee, unfortu-
                        nately, took a very long time to agree on the standard, and the resulting interfaces
                        were expensive. It was also a shared medium when switches were becoming
                        affordable. ATM also missed the opportunity in part because of the long time
                        to standardize the LAN version of ATM, and in part because of the high latency
                        and poor behavior of ATM connectionless servers, as mentioned above. Infini-
                        Band for the reasons discussed below has also faltered. As a result, Ethernet con-
                        tinues to be the absolute leader in the LAN environment, and it remains a strong
                        opponent in the high-performance computing market as well, competing against
                        the SANs by delivering high bandwidth at low cost. The main drawback of Ether-
                        net for high-end systems is its relatively high latency and lack of support in most
                        interface cards to implement the necessary protocols.
                            Because of failures of the past, LAN modernization efforts have been centered
                        on extending Ethernet to lower-cost media such as unshielded twisted pair (UTP),
                        switched interconnects, and higher link speeds as well as to new domains such as
                        wireless communication. Practically all new PC motherboards and laptops imple-
                        ment a Fast/Gigabit Ethernet port (100/1000 Mbps), and most laptops implement a
                        54 Mbps Wireless Ethernet connection. Also, home wired or wireless LANs con-
                        necting all the home appliances, set-top boxes, desktops, and laptops to a shared
                        Internet connection are very common. Spurgeon [2006] has provided a nice online
                        summary of Ethernet technology, including some of its history.

                        System Area Networks
                        One of the first nonblocking multistage interconnection networks was proposed by
                        Clos [1953] for use in telephone exchange offices. Building on this, many early
                        inventions for system area networks came from their use in massively parallel pro-
                        cessors (MPPs). One of the first MPPs was the Illiac IV, a SIMD array built in the
                        early 1970s with 64 processing elements (“massive” at that time) interconnected
                        using a topology based on a 2D torus that provided neighbor-to-neighbor commu-
                        nication. Another representative of early MPP was the Cosmic Cube, which used
                        Ethernet interface chips to connect 64 processors in a 6-cube. Communication
                        between nonneighboring nodes was made possible by store-and-forwarding of
                        packets at intermediate nodes toward their final destination. A much larger and
                        truly “massive” MPP built in the mid-1980s was the Connection Machine, a SIMD
                        multiprocessor consisting of 64 K 1-bit processing elements, which also used a
                        hypercube with store-and-forwarding. Since these early MPP machines, intercon-
                        nection networks have improved considerably.
                            In the 1970s through the 1990s, considerable research went into trying to opti-
                        mize the topology and, later, the routing algorithm, switching, arbitration, and flow
                        control techniques. Initially, research focused on maximizing performance with
                       F.13   Historical Perspective and References    ■   F-105

little attention paid to implementation constraints or crosscutting issues. Many
exotic topologies were proposed having very interesting properties, but most of
them complicated the routing. Rising from the fray was the hypercube, a very pop-
ular network in the 1980s that has all but disappeared from MPPs since the 1990s.
What contributed to this shift was a performance model by Dally [1990] that
showed that if the implementation is wire limited, lower-dimensional topologies
achieve better performance than higher-dimensional ones because of their wider
links for a given wire budget. Many designers followed that trend assuming their
designs to be wire limited, even though most implementations were (and still are)
pin limited. Several supercomputers since the 1990s have implemented low-
dimensional topologies, including the Intel Paragon, Cray T3D, Cray T3E, HP
AlphaServer, Intel ASCI Red, and IBM Blue Gene/L.
     Meanwhile, other designers followed a very different approach, implementing
bidirectional MINs in order to reduce the number of required switches below the
number of network nodes. The most popular bidirectional MIN was the fat tree
topology, originally proposed by Leiserson [1985] and first used in the Connection
Machine CM-5 supercomputer and, later, the IBM ASCI White and ASC Purple
supercomputers. This indirect topology was also used in several European parallel
computers based on the Transputer. The Quadrics network has inherited character-
istics from some of those Transputer-based networks. Myrinet has also evolved
significantly from its first version, with Myrinet 2000 incorporating the fat tree
as its principal topology. Indeed, most current implementations of SANs, including
Myrinet, InfiniBand, and Quadrics as well as future implementations such as PCI-
Express Advanced Switching, are based on fat trees.
     Although the topology is the most visible aspect of a network, other features
also have a significant impact on performance. A seminal work that raised aware-
ness of deadlock properties in computer systems was published by Holt [1972].
Early techniques for avoiding deadlock in store-and-forward networks were pro-
posed by Merlin and Schweitzer [1980] and by Gunther [1981]. Pipelined switch-
ing techniques were first introduced by Kermani and Kleinrock [1979] (virtual cut-
through) and improved upon by Dally and Seitz [1986] (wormhole), which signif-
icantly reduced low-load latency and the topology’s impact on message latency
over previously proposed techniques. Wormhole switching was initially better
than virtual cut-through largely because flow control could be implemented at a
granularity smaller than a packet, allowing high-bandwidth links that were not
as constrained by available switch memory bandwidth. Today, virtual cut-through
is usually preferred over wormhole because it achieves higher throughput due to
less HOL blocking effects and is enabled by current integration technology that
allows the implementation of many packet buffers per link.
     Tamir and Frazier [1992] laid the groundwork for virtual output queuing with
the notion of dynamically allocated multiqueues. Around this same time, Dally
[1992] contributed the concept of virtual channels, which was key to the develop-
ment of more efficient deadlock-free routing algorithms and congestion-reducing
flow control techniques for improved network throughput. Another highly relevant
contribution to routing was a new theory proposed by Duato [1993] that allowed
F-106   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                        the implementation of fully adaptive routing with just one “escape” virtual channel
                        to avoid deadlock. Previous to this, the required number of virtual channels to
                        avoid deadlock increased exponentially with the number of network dimensions.
                        Pinkston and Warnakulasuriya [1997] went on to show that deadlock actually can
                        occur very infrequently, giving credence to deadlock recovery routing approaches.
                        Scott and Goodman [1994] were among the first to analyze the usefulness of pipe-
                        lined channels for making link bandwidth independent of the time of flight. These
                        and many other innovations have become quite popular, finding use in most high-
                        performance interconnection networks, both past and present. The IBM Blue
                        Gene/L, for example, implements virtual cut-through switching, four virtual chan-
                        nels per link, fully adaptive routing with one escape channel, and pipelined links.
                            MPPs represent a very small (and currently shrinking) fraction of the informa-
                        tion technology market, giving way to bladed servers and clusters. In the United
                        States, government programs such as the Advanced Simulation and Computing
                        (ASC) program (formerly known as the Accelerated Strategic Computing Initia-
                        tive, or ASCI) have promoted the design of those machines, resulting in a series
                        of increasingly powerful one-of-a-kind MPPs costing $50 million to $100 million.
                        These days, many are basically lower-cost clusters of symmetric multiprocessors
                        (SMPs) (see Pfister [1998] and Sterling [2001] for two perspectives on clustering).
                        In fact, in 2005, nearly 75% of the TOP500 supercomputers were clusters. Nev-
                        ertheless, the design of each generation of MPPs and even clusters pushes inter-
                        connection network research forward to confront new problems arising due to
                        shear size and other scaling factors. For instance, source-based routing—the sim-
                        plest form of routing—does not scale well to large systems. Likewise, fat trees
                        require increasingly longer links as the network size increases, which led IBM Blue
                        Gene/L designers to adopt a 3D torus network with distributed routing that can be
                        implemented with bounded-length links.

                        Storage Area Networks
                        System area networks were originally designed for a single room or single floor
                        (thus their distances are tens to hundreds of meters) and were for use in MPPs
                        and clusters. In the intervening years, the acronym SAN has been co-opted to also
                        mean storage area networks, whereby networking technology is used to connect
                        storage devices to compute servers. Today, many refer to “storage” when they
                        say SAN. The most widely used SAN example in 2006 was Fibre Channel
                        (FC), which comes in many varieties, including various versions of Fibre Channel
                        Arbitrated Loop (FC-AL) and Fibre Channel Switched (FC-SW). Not only are disk
                        arrays attached to servers via FC links, but there are even some disks with FC links
                        attached to switches so that storage area networks can enjoy the benefits of greater
                        bandwidth and interconnectivity of switching.
                            In October 2000, the InfiniBand Trade Association announced the version 1.0
                        specification of InfiniBand [InfiniBand Trade Association 2001]. Led by Intel, HP,
                        IBM, Sun, and other companies, it was targeted to the high-performance
                        F.13    Historical Perspective and References      ■   F-107

computing market as a successor to the PCI bus by having point-to-point links and
switches with its own set of protocols. Its characteristics are desirable potentially
both for system area networks to connect clusters and for storage area networks to
connect disk arrays to servers. Consequently, it has had strong competition from
both fronts. On the storage area networking side, the chief competition for Infini-
Band has been the rapidly improving Ethernet technology widely used in LANs.
The Internet Engineering Task Force proposed a standard called iSCSI to send
SCSI commands over IP networks [Satran et al. 2001]. Given the cost advantages
of the higher-volume Ethernet switches and interface cards, Gigabit Ethernet dom-
inates the low-end and medium range for this market. What’s more, the slow intro-
duction of InfiniBand and its small market share delayed the development of chip
sets incorporating native support for InfiniBand. Therefore, network interface
cards had to be plugged into the PCI or PCI-X bus, thus never delivering on the
promise of replacing the PCI bus.
     It was another I/O standard, PCI-Express, that finally replaced the PCI bus.
Like InfiniBand, PCI-Express implements a switched network but with point-
to-point serial links. To its credit, it maintains software compatibility with the
PCI bus, drastically simplifying migration to the new I/O interface. Moreover,
PCI-Express benefited significantly from mass market production and has found
application in the desktop market for connecting one or more high-end graphics
cards, making gamers very happy. Every PC motherboard now implements one
or more 16x PCI-Express interfaces. PCI-Express absolutely dominates the I/O
interface, but the current standard does not provide support for interprocessor
communication.
     Yet another standard, Advanced Switching Interconnect (ASI), may emerge as
a complementary technology to PCI-Express. ASI is compatible with PCI-Express,
thus linking directly to current motherboards, but it also implements support for
interprocessor communication as well as I/O. Its defenders believe that it will even-
tually replace both SANs and LANs with a unified network in the data center mar-
ket, but ironically this was also said of InfiniBand. The interested reader is referred
to Pinkston et al. [2003] for a detailed discussion on this. There is also a new disk
interface standard called Serial Advanced Technology Attachment (SATA) that is
replacing parallel Integrated Device Electronics (IDE) with serial signaling tech-
nology to allow for increased bandwidth. Most disks in the market use this new
interface, but keep in mind that Fibre Channel is still alive and well. Indeed, most
of the promises made by InfiniBand in the SAN market were satisfied by Fibre
Channel first, thus increasing their share of the market.
     Some believe that Ethernet, PCI-Express, and SATA have the edge in the
LAN, I/O interface, and disk interface areas, respectively. But the fate of the
remaining storage area networking contenders depends on many factors. A won-
derful characteristic of computer architecture is that such issues will not remain
endless academic debates, unresolved as people rehash the same arguments repeat-
edly. Instead, the battle is fought in the marketplace, with well-funded and talented
groups giving their best efforts at shaping the future. Moreover, constant changes
to technology reward those who are either astute or lucky. The best combination of
F-108   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                        technology and follow-through has often determined commercial success. Time
                        will tell us who will win and who will lose, at least for the next round!

                        On-Chip Networks
                        Relative to the other network domains, on-chip networks are in their infancy. As
                        recently as the late 1990s, the traditional way of interconnecting devices such as
                        caches, register files, ALUs, and other functional units within a chip was to use
                        dedicated links aimed at minimizing latency or shared buses aimed at simplicity.
                        But with subsequent increases in the volume of interconnected devices on a single
                        chip, the length and delay of wires to cross a chip, and chip power consumption, it
                        has become important to share on-chip interconnect bandwidth in a more struc-
                        tured way, giving rise to the notion of a network on-chip. Among the first to rec-
                        ognize this were Agarwal [Waingold et al. 1997] and Dally [Dally 1999; Dally and
                        Towles 2001]. They and others argued that on-chip networks that route packets
                        allow efficient sharing of burgeoning wire resources between many communica-
                        tion flows and also facilitate modularity to mitigate chip-crossing wire delay prob-
                        lems identified by Ho, Mai, and Horowitz [2001]. Switched on-chip networks were
                        also viewed as providing better fault isolation and tolerance. Challenges in
                        designing these networks were later described by Taylor et al. [2005], who also
                        proposed a 5-tuple model for characterizing the delay of OCNs. A design process
                        for OCNs that provides a complete synthesis flow was proposed by Bertozzi et al.
                        [2005]. Following these early works, much research and development has gone
                        into on-chip network design, making this a very hot area of microarchitecture
                        activity.
                            Multicore and tiled designs featuring on-chip networks have become very pop-
                        ular since the turn of the millennium. Pinkston and Shin [2005] provide a survey of
                        on-chip networks used in early multicore/tiled systems. Most designs exploit the
                        reduced wiring complexity of switched OCNs as the paths between cores/tiles can
                        be precisely defined and optimized early in the design process, thus enabling
                        improved power and performance characteristics. With typically tens of thousands
                        of wires attached to the four edges of a core or tile as “pinouts,” wire resources can
                        be traded off for improved network performance by having very wide channels
                        over which data can be sent broadside (and possibly scaled up or down according
                        to the power management technique), as opposed to serializing the data over fixed
                        narrow channels.
                            Rings, meshes, and crossbars are straightforward to implement in planar chip
                        technology and routing is easily defined on them, so these were popular topolog-
                        ical choices in early switched OCNs. It will be interesting to see if this trend con-
                        tinues in the future when several tens to hundreds of heterogeneous cores and tiles
                        will likely be interconnected within a single chip, possibly using 3D integration
                        technology. Considering that processor microarchitecture has evolved signifi-
                        cantly from its early beginnings in response to application demands and technolog-
                        ical advancements, we would expect to see vast architectural improvements to on-
                        chip networks as well.
                              F.13     Historical Perspective and References               ■    F-109

References
Agarwal, A., 1991. Limits on interconnection network performance. IEEE Trans. on Parallel and Dis-
    tributed Systems 2 (4 (April)), 398–412.
Alles, A., 1995. “ATM internetworking” (May). www.cisco.com/warp/public/614/12.html.
Anderson, T.E., Culler, D.E., Patterson, D., 1995. A case for NOW (networks of workstations). IEEE
    Micro 15 (1 (February)), 54–64.
Anjan, K.V., Pinkston, T.M., 1995. An efficient, fully-adaptive deadlock recovery scheme: Disha.
    In: Proc. 22nd Annual Int’l. Symposium on Computer Architecture, June 22–24, 1995. Santa Mar-
    gherita Ligure, Italy.
Arpaci, R.H., Culler, D.E., Krishnamurthy, A., Steinberg, S.G., Yelick, K., 1995. Empirical evaluation
    of the Cray-T3D: A compiler perspective. In: Proc. 22nd Annual Int’l. Symposium on Computer
    Architecture, June 22–24, 1995. Santa Margherita Ligure, Italy.
Bell, G., Gray, J., 2001. Crays, Clusters and Centers. Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, Wash. MSR-
    TR-2001-76.
Benes, V.E., 1962. Rearrangeable three stage connecting networks. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 41, 1481–1492.
Bertozzi, D., Jalabert, A., Murali, S., Tamhankar, R., Stergiou, S., Benini, L., De Micheli, G., 2005.
    NoC synthesis flow for customized domain specific multiprocessor systems-on-chip. IEEE Trans.
    on Parallel and Distributed Systems 16 (2 (February)), 113–130.
Bhuyan, L.N., Agrawal, D.P., 1984. Generalized hypercube and hyperbus structures for a computer
    network. IEEE Trans. on Computers 32 (4 (April)), 322–333.
Brewer, E.A., Kuszmaul, B.C., 1994. How to get good performance from the CM-5 data network.
    In: Proc. Eighth Int’l Parallel Processing Symposium, April 26–29, 1994. Cancun, Mexico.
Clos, C., 1953. A study of non-blocking switching networks. Bell Systems Technical Journal
    32 (March), 406–424.
Dally, W.J., 1990. Performance analysis of k-ary n-cube interconnection networks. IEEE Trans. on
    Computers 39 (6 (June)), 775–785.
Dally, W.J., 1992. Virtual channel flow control. IEEE Trans. on Parallel and Distributed Systems 3 (2
    (March)), 194–205.
Dally, W.J., 1999. Interconnect limited VLSI architecture. In: Proc. of the Int’l. Interconnect Technol-
    ogy Conference, May 24–26, 1999. San Francisco, Calif.
Dally, W.J., Seitz, C.I., 1986. The torus routing chip. Distributed Computing 1 (4), 187–196.
Dally, W.J., Towles, B., 2001. Route packets, not wires: On-chip interconnection networks. In: Proc. of
    the 38th Design Automation Conference, June 18–22, 2001. Las Vegas, Nev.
Dally, W.J., Towles, B., 2004. Principles and Practices of Interconnection Networks. Morgan Kauf-
    mann Publishers, San Francisco.
Davie, B.S., Peterson, L.L., Clark, D., 1999. Computer Networks: A Systems Approach, second ed.
    Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco.
Duato, J., 1993. A new theory of deadlock-free adaptive routing in wormhole networks. IEEE Trans. on
    Parallel and Distributed Systems 4 (12 (December)), 1320–1331.
Duato, J., Pinkston, T.M., 2001. A general theory for deadlock-free adaptive routing using a mixed set of
    resources. IEEE Trans. on Parallel and Distributed Systems 12 (12 (December)), 1219–1235.
Duato, J., Yalamanchili, S., Ni, L., 2003. Interconnection Networks: An Engineering Approach. Mor-
    gan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco. 2nd printing.
Duato, J., Johnson, I., Flich, J., Naven, F., Garcia, P., Nachiondo, T., 2005a. A new scalable and cost-
    effective congestion management strategy for lossless multistage interconnection networks.
    In: Proc. 11th Int’l. Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture, February 12–16,
    2005 San Francisco.
Duato, J., Lysne, O., Pang, R., Pinkston, T.M., 2005b. Part I: A theory for deadlock-free dynamic recon-
    figuration of interconnection networks. IEEE Trans. on Parallel and Distributed Systems 16 (5
    (May)), 412–427.
Flich, J., Bertozzi, D., 2010. Designing Network-on-Chip Architectures in the Nanoscale Era. CRC
    Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Glass, C.J., Ni, L.M., 1992. The Turn Model for adaptive routing. In: Proc. 19th Int’l. Symposium on
    Computer Architecture. May, Gold Coast, Australia.
Gunther, K.D., 1981. Prevention of deadlocks in packet-switched data transport systems. IEEE Trans.
    on Communications, 512–524. COM–29:4 (April).
Ho, R., Mai, K.W., Horowitz, M.A., 2001. The future of wires. In: Proc. of the IEEE 89:4 (April),
    pp. 490–504.
Holt, R.C., 1972. Some deadlock properties of computer systems. ACM Computer Surveys
    4 (3 (September)), 179–196.
F-110   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                        Hoskote, Y., Vangal, S., Singh, A., Borkar, N., Borkar, S., 2007. A 5-ghz mesh interconnect for a tera-
                            flops processor. IEEE Micro 27 (5), 51–61.
                        Howard, J., Dighe, S., Hoskote, Y., Vangal, S., Finan, S., Ruhl, G., Jenkins, D., Wilson, H., Borka, N.,
                            Schrom, G., Pailet, F., Jain, S., Jacob, T., Yada, S., Marella, S., Salihundam, P., Erraguntla, V.,
                            Konow, M., Riepen, M., Droege, G., Lindemann, J., Gries, M., Apel, T., Henriss, K., Lund-
                            Larsen, T., Steibl, S., Borkar, S., De, V., Van Der Wijngaart, R., Mattson, T., 2010. A 48-core
                            IA-32 message-passing processor with DVFS in 45 nm CMOS. In: IEEE International Solid-State
                            Circuits Conference Digest of Technical Papers, pp. 58–59.
                        InfiniBand Trade Association, 2001. InfiniBand Architecture Specifications Release 1.0.a. www.
                            infinibandta.org.
                        Jantsch, A., Tenhunen, H. (Eds.), 2003. Networks on Chips. Kluwer Academic Publishers, The
                            Netherlands.
                        Kahn, R.E., 1972. Resource-sharing computer communication networks. In: Proc. IEEE 60:11 (Novem-
                            ber), pp. 1397–1407.
                        Kermani, P., Kleinrock, L., 1979. Virtual cut-through: A new computer communication switching tech-
                            nique. Computer Networks 3 (January), 267–286.
                        Kurose, J.F., Ross, K.W., 2001. Computer Networking: A Top-Down Approach Featuring the Internet.
                            Addison-Wesley, Boston.
                        Leiserson, C.E., 1985. Fat trees: Universal networks for hardware-efficient supercomputing. IEEE
                            Trans. on Computers, 892–901. C–34:10 (October).
                        Merlin, P.M., Schweitzer, P.J., 1980. Deadlock avoidance in store-and-forward networks. I. Store-and-
                            forward deadlock. IEEE Trans. on Communications, 345–354. COM–28:3 (March).
                        Metcalfe, R.M., 1993. Computer/network interface design: Lessons from Arpanet and Ethernet. IEEE J.
                            on Selected Areas in Communications 11 (2 (February)), 173–180.
                        Metcalfe, R.M., Boggs, D.R., 1976. Ethernet: Distributed packet switching for local computer networks.
                            Comm. ACM 19 (7 (July)), 395–404.
                        Partridge, C., 1994. Gigabit Networking. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.
                        Peh, L.S., Dally, W.J., 2001. A delay model and speculative architecture for pipelined routers. In: Proc.
                            7th Int’l. Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture, January 20–24, 2001. Monter-
                            rey, Mexico.
                        Pfister, G.F., 1998. In Search of Clusters, second ed. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J.
                        Pinkston, T.M., 2004. Deadlock characterization and resolution in interconnection networks.
                            In: Zhu, M.C., Fanti, M.P. (Eds.), Deadlock Resolution in Computer-Integrated Systems. CRC
                            Press, Boca Raton, Fl, pp. 445–492.
                        Pinkston, T.M., Shin, J., 2005. Trends toward on-chip networked microsystems. Int’l. J. of High Per-
                            formance Computing and Networking 3 (1), 3–18.
                        Pinkston, T.M., Warnakulasuriya, S., 1997. On deadlocks in interconnection networks. In: Proc. 24th
                            Int’l. Symposium on Computer Architecture, June 2–4, 1997. Denver, Colo.
                        Pinkston, T.M., Benner, A., Krause, M., Robinson, I., Sterling, T., 2003. InfiniBand: The ‘de facto’
                            future standard for system and local area networks or just a scalable replacement for PCI buses?”
                            Special Issue on Communication Architecture for Clusters 6:2 (April). Cluster Computing, 95–104.
                        Puente, V., Beivide, R., Gregorio, J.A., Prellezo, J.M., Duato, J., Izu, C., 1999. Adaptive bubble router:
                            A design to improve performance in torus networks. In: Proc. 28th Int’l. Conference on Parallel
                            Processing, September 21–24, 1999. Aizu-Wakamatsu, Japan.
                        Rodrigo, S., Flich, J., Duato, J., Hummel, M., 2008. Efficient unicast and multicast support for CMPs.
                            In: Proc. 41st Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO-41),
                            November 8–12, 2008. Lake Como, Italy, pp. 364–375.
                        Saltzer, J.H., Reed, D.P., Clark, D.D., 1984. End-to-end arguments in system design. ACM Trans. on
                            Computer Systems 2 (4 (November)), 277–288.
                        Satran, J., Smith, D., Meth, K., Sapuntzakis, C., Wakeley, M., Von Stamwitz, P., Haagens, R.,
                            Zeidner, E., Dalle Ore, L., Klein, Y., 2001. “iSCSI”, IPS working group of IETF, Internet draft.
                            www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-ips-iscsi-07.txt.
                        Scott, S.L., Goodman, J., 1994. The impact of pipelined channels on k-ary n-cube networks. IEEE
                            Trans. on Parallel and Distributed Systems 5 (1 (January)), 1–16.
                        Senior, J.M., 1993. Optical Fiber Commmunications: Principles and Practice, second ed. Prentice Hall,
                            Hertfordshire, U.K..
                        Spurgeon, C., 2006. Charles Spurgeon’s Ethernet Web Site. www.etherman-age.com/ethernet/ethernet.
                            html.
                                                                                 Exercises       ■   F-111

        Sterling, T., 2001. Beowulf PC Cluster Computing with Windows and Beowulf PC Cluster Computing
            with Linux. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
        Stevens, W.R., 1994–1996. TCP/IP Illustrated (three volumes). Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.
        Tamir, Y., Frazier, G., 1992. Dynamically-allocated multi-queue buffers for VLSI communication
            switches. IEEE Trans. on Computers 41 (6 (June)), 725–734.
        Tanenbaum, A.S., 1988. Computer Networks, second ed. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
        Taylor, M.B., Lee, W., Amarasinghe, S.P., Agarwal, A., 2005. Scalar operand networks. IEEE Trans. on
            Parallel and Distributed Systems 16 (2 (February)), 145–162.
        Thacker, C.P., McCreight, E.M., Lampson, B.W., Sproull, R.F., Boggs, D.R., 1982. Alto: A personal
            computer. In: Siewiorek, D.P., Bell, C.G., Newell, A. (Eds.), Computer Structures: Principles and
            Examples. McGraw-Hill, New York, pp. 549–572.
        TILE-GX, http://www.tilera.com/sites/default/files/productbriefs/PB025_TILE-Gx_Processor_A_v3.
            pdf.
        Vaidya, A.S., Sivasubramaniam, A., Das, C.R., 1997. Performance benefits of virtual channels and
            adaptive routing: An application-driven study. In: Proc. 11th ACM Int’l Conference on Supercom-
            puting, July 7–11, 1997. Vienna, Austria.
        Van Leeuwen, J., Tan, R.B., 1987. Interval Routing. The Computer Journal 30 (4), 298–307.
        von Eicken, T., Culler, D.E., Goldstein, S.C., Schauser, K.E., 1992. Active messages: A mechanism for
            integrated communication and computation. In: Proc. 19th Annual Int’l. Symposium on Computer
            Architecture, May 19–21, 1992. Gold Coast, Australia.
        Waingold, E., Taylor, M., Srikrishna, D., Sarkar, V., Lee, W., Lee, V., Kim, J., Frank, M., Finch, P.,
            Barua, R., Babb, J., Amarasinghe, S., Agarwal, A., 1997. Baring it all to software: Raw Machines.
            IEEE Computer 30 (September), 86–93.
        Yang, Y., Mason, G., 1991. Nonblocking broadcast switching networks. IEEE Trans. on Computers
            40 (9 (September)), 1005–1015.

        Exercises
        Solutions to “starred” exercises are available for instructors who register at text-
        books.elsevier.com.

✪ F.1   [15] < F.2, F.3 > Is electronic communication always faster than nonelectronic
        means for longer distances? Calculate the time to send 1000 GB using 25 8-mm
        tapes and an overnight delivery service versus sending 1000 GB by FTP over
        the Internet. Make the following four assumptions:
        ■   The tapes are picked up at 4 P.M. Pacific time and delivered 4200 km away at
            10 A.M. Eastern time (7 A.M. Pacific time).
        ■   On one route the slowest link is a T3 line, which transfers at 45 Mbits/sec.
        ■   On another route the slowest link is a 100-Mbit/sec Ethernet.
        ■   You can use 50% of the slowest link between the two sites.
        Will all the bytes sent by either Internet route arrive before the overnight delivery
        person arrives?
✪ F.2   [10] < F.2, F.3 > For the same assumptions as Exercise F.1, what is the bandwidth
        of overnight delivery for a 1000-GB package?
✪ F.3   [10] < F.2, F.3 > For the same assumptions as Exercise F.1, what is the minimum
        bandwidth of the slowest link to beat overnight delivery? What standard network
        options match that speed?
F-112   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                ✪ F.4   [15] < F.2, F.3 > The original Ethernet standard was for 10 Mbits/sec and a max-
                        imum distance of 2.5 km. How many bytes could be in flight in the original Ether-
                        net? Assume you can use 90% of the peak bandwidth.
                ✪ F.5   [15] < F.2, F.3 > Flow control is a problem for WANs due to the long time of
                        flight, as the example on page F-14 illustrates. Ethernet did not include flow
                        control when it was first standardized at 10 Mbits/sec. Calculate the number of
                        bytes in flight for a 10-Gbit/sec Ethernet over a 100 meter link, assuming you
                        can use 90% of peak bandwidth. What does your answer mean for network
                        designers?
                ✪ F.6   [15] < F.2, F.3 > Assume the total overhead to send a zero-length data packet on an
                        Ethernet is 100 μs and that an unloaded network can transmit at 90% of the peak
                        1000-Mbit/sec rating. For the purposes of this question, assume that the size of the
                        Ethernet header and trailer is 56 bytes. Assume a continuous stream of packets of
                        the same size. Plot the delivered bandwidth of user data in Mbits/sec as the payload
                        data size varies from 32 bytes to the maximum size of 1500 bytes in 32-byte
                        increments.
                ✪ F.7   [10] < F.2, F.3 > Exercise F.6 suggests that the delivered Ethernet bandwidth to a
                        single user may be disappointing. Making the same assumptions as in that exercise,
                        by how much would the maximum payload size have to be increased to deliver half
                        of the peak bandwidth?
                ✪ F.8   [10] < F.2, F.3 > One reason that ATM has a fixed transfer size is that when a
                        short message is behind a long message, a node may need to wait for an entire
                        transfer to complete. For applications that are time sensitive, such as when
                        transmitting voice or video, the large transfer size may result in transmission
                        delays that are too long for the application. On an unloaded interconnection,
                        what is the worstcase delay in microseconds if a node must wait for one
                        full-size Ethernet packet versus an ATM transfer? See Figure F.30 (page F-
                        78) to find the packet sizes. For this question assume that you can transmit
                        at 100% of the 622-Mbits/sec ATM network and 100% of the 1000-Mbit/
                        sec Ethernet.
                ✪ F.9   [10] < F.2, F.3 > Exercise F.7 suggests the need for expanding the maximum
                        pay-load to increase the delivered bandwidth, but Exercise F.8 suggests the
                        impact on worst-case latency of making it longer. What would be the impact
                        on latency of increasing the maximum payload size by the answer to Exercise
                        F.7?
               ✪ F.10   [12/12/20] < F.4 > The Omega network shown in Figure F.11 on page F-31 con-
                        sists of three columns of four switches, each with two inputs and two outputs. Each
                        switch can be set to straight, which connects the upper switch input to the upper
                        switch output and the lower input to the lower output, and to exchange, which con-
                        nects the upper input to the lower output and vice versa for the lower input. For
                        each column of switches, label the inputs and outputs 0, 1, …, 7 from top to bottom,
                        to correspond with the numbering of the processors.
                                                                     Exercises    ■   F-113

         a. [12] < F.4 > When a switch is set to exchange and a message passes through,
            what is the relationship between the label values for the switch input and output
            used by the message? (Hint: Think in terms of operations on the digits of the
            binary representation of the label number.)
         b. [12] < F.4 > Between any two switches in adjacent columns that are connected
            by a link, what is the relationship between the label of the output connected to
            the input?
         c. [20] < F.4 > Based on your results in parts (a) and (b), design and describe a
            simple routing scheme for distributed control of the Omega network. A message
            will carry a routing tag computed by the sending processor. Describe how the
            processor computes the tag and how each switch can set itself by examining a bit
            of the routing tag.
✪ F.11   [12/12/12/12/12/12] < F.4 > Prove whether or not it is possible to realize the fol-
         lowing permutations (i.e., communication patterns) on the eight-node Omega net-
         work shown in Figure F.11 on page F-31:
         a. [12] < F.4 > Bit-reversal permutation—the node with binary coordinates an?1,
            an?2, …, a1, a0 communicates with the node a0, a1, …, an?2, an?1.
         b. [12] < F.4 > Perfect shuffle permutation—the node with binary coordinates
            an?1, an?2, …, a1, a0 communicates with the node an?2, an?3, …, a0, an?1
            (i.e., rotate left 1 bit).
         c. [12] < F.4 > Bit-complement permutation—the node with binary coordinates
            an?1, an?2, …, a1, a0 communicates with the node an?1 , an?2 , …, a1 , a0
            (i.e., complement each bit).
         d. [12] < F.4 > Butterfly permutation—the node with binary coordinates an?1,
            an?2, …, a1, a0 communicates with the node a0, an?2, …, a1, an?1 (i.e., swap
            the most and least significant bits).
         e. [12] < F.4 > Matrix transpose permutation—the node with binary coordinates
            an?1, an?2, …, a1, a0 communicates with the node an/2?1, …, a0, an?1, …,
            an/2 (i.e., transpose the bits in positions approximately halfway around).
         f. [12] < F.4 > Barrel-shift permutation—node i communicates with node i + 1
            modulo N ? 1, where N is the total number of nodes and 0 ? i.
✪ F.12   [12] < F.4 > Design a network topology using 18-port crossbar switches that has
         the minimum number of switches to connect 64 nodes. Each switch port supports
         communication to and from one device.
✪ F.13   [15] < F.4 > Design a network topology that has the minimum latency through the
         switches for 64 nodes using 18-port crossbar switches. Assume unit delay in the
         switches and zero delay for wires.
✪ F.14   [15] < F.4 > Design a switch topology that balances the bandwidth required for all
         links for 64 nodes using 18-port crossbar switches. Assume a uniform traffic
         pattern.
F-114   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

               ✪ F.15   [15] < F.4 > Compare the interconnection latency of a crossbar, Omega network,
                        and fat tree with eight nodes. Use Figure F.11 on page F-31, Figure F.12 on page F-
                        33, and Figure F.14 on page F-37. Assume that the fat tree is built entirely from
                        two-input, two-output switches so that its hardware resources are more comparable
                        to that of the Omega network. Assume that each switch costs a unit time delay.
                        Assume that the fat tree randomly picks a path, so give the best case and worst
                        case for each example. How long will it take to send a message from node 0 to
                        node 6? How long will it take node 1 and node 7 to communicate?
               ✪ F.16   [15] < F.4 > Draw the topology of a 6-cube after the same manner of the 4-cube in
                        Figure F.14 on page F-37. What is the maximum and average number of hops
                        needed by packets assuming a uniform distribution of packet destinations?
               ✪ F.17   [15] < F.4 > Complete a table similar to Figure F.15 on page F-40 that captures the
                        performance and cost of various network topologies, but do it for the general case
                        of N nodes using k ? k switches instead of the specific case of 64 nodes.
               ✪ F.18   [20] < F.4 > Repeat the example given on page F-41, but use the bit-complement
                        communication pattern given in Exercise F.11 instead of NEWS communication.
               ✪ F.19   [15] < F.5 > Give the four specific conditions necessary for deadlock to exist in an
                        interconnection network. Which of these are removed by dimension-order routing?
                        Which of these are removed in adaptive routing with the use of “escape” routing
                        paths? Which of these are removed in adaptive routing with the technique of dead-
                        lock recovery (regressive or progressive)? Explain your answer.
               ✪ F.20   [12/12/12/12] < F.5 > Prove whether or not the following routing algorithms based
                        on prohibiting dimensional turns are suitable to be used as escape paths for 2D
                        meshes by analyzing whether they are both connected and deadlock-free. Explain
                        your answer. (Hint: You may wish to refer to the Turn Model algorithm and/or to
                        prove your answer by drawing a directed graph for a 4 ? 4 mesh that depicts depen-
                        dencies between channels and verifying the channel dependency graph is free of
                        cycles.) The routing algorithms are expressed with the following abbreviations:
                        W ¼ west, E ¼ east, N ¼ north, and S ¼ south.
                        a. [12] < F.5 > Allowed turns are from W to N, E to N, S to W, and S to E.
                        b. [12] < F.5 > Allowed turns are from W to S, E to S, N to E, and S to E.
                        c. [12] < F.5 > Allowed turns are from W to S, E to S, N to W, S to E, W to N, and
                           S to W.
                        d. [12] < F.5 > Allowed turns are from S to E, E to S, S to W, N to W, N to E, and E
                           to N.
               ✪ F.21   [15] < F.5 > Compute and compare the upper bound for the efficiency factor, ρ, for
                        dimension-order routing and up*/down* routing assuming uniformly distributed
                        traffic on a 64-node 2D mesh network. For up*/down* routing, assume optimal
                        placement of the root node (i.e., a node near the middle of the mesh). (Hint:
                        You will have to find the loading of links across the network bisection that carries
                        the global load as determined by the routing algorithm.)
                                                                     Exercises    ■   F-115

✪ F.22   [15] < F.5 > For the same assumptions as Exercise F.21, find the efficiency factor
         for up*/down* routing on a 64-node fat tree network using 4 ? 4 switches. Com-
         pare this result with the ρ found for up*/down* routing on a 2D mesh. Explain.
✪ F.23   [15] < F.5 > Calculate the probability of matching two-phased arbitration requests
         from all k input ports of a switch simultaneously to the k output ports assuming a
         uniform distribution of requests and grants to/from output ports. How does this
         compare to the matching probability for three-phased arbitration in which each
         of the k input ports can make two simultaneous requests (again, assuming a uni-
         form random distribution of requests and grants)?
✪ F.24   [15]< F.5 > The equation on page F-52 shows the value of cut-through switching.
         Ethernet switches used to build clusters often do not support cut-through switching.
         Compare the time to transfer 1500 bytes over a 1000-Mbit/sec Ethernet with and
         without cut-through switching for a 64-node cluster. Assume that each Ethernet
         switch takes 1.0 μs and that a message goes through seven intermediate switches.
✪ F.25   [15] < F.5 > Making the same assumptions as in Exercise F.24, what is the differ-
         ence between cut-through and store-and-forward switching for 32 bytes?
✪ F.26   [15] < F.5 > One way to reduce latency is to use larger switches. Unlike Exercise
         F.24, let’s assume we need only three intermediate switches to connect any two
         nodes in the cluster. Make the same assumptions as in Exercise F.24 for the remain-
         ing parameters. What is the difference between cut-through and store-and-forward
         for 1500 bytes? For 32 bytes?
✪ F.27   [20] < F.5 > Using FlexSim 1.2 (http://ceng.usc.edu/smart/FlexSim/flexsim.html)
         or some other cycle-accurate network simulator, simulate a 256-node 2D torus net-
         work assuming wormhole routing, 32-flit packets, uniform (random) communica-
         tion pattern, and four virtual channels. Compare the performance of deterministic
         routing using DOR, adaptive routing using escape paths (i.e., Duato’s Protocol),
         and true fully adaptive routing using progressive deadlock recovery (i.e., Disha
         routing). Do so by plotting latency versus applied load and through-put versus
         applied load for each, as is done in Figure F.19 for the example on page F-53. Also
         run simulations and plot results for two and eight virtual channels for each. Com-
         pare and explain your results by addressing how/why the number and use of virtual
         channels by the various routing algorithms affect network performance. (Hint: Be
         sure to let the simulation reach steady state by allowing a warm-up period of a sev-
         eral thousand network cycles before gathering results.)
✪ F.28   [20] < F.5 > Repeat Exercise F.27 using bit-reversal communication instead of the
         uniform random communication pattern. Compare and explain your results by
         addressing how/why the communication pattern affects network performance.
✪ F.29   [40] < F.5 > Repeat Exercises F.27 and F.28 using 16-flit packets and 128-flit
         packets. Compare and explain your results by addressing how/why the packet size
         along with the other design parameters affect network performance.
  F.30   [20] < F.2, F.4, F.5, F.8 > Figures F.7, F.16, and F.20 show interconnection
         network characteristics of several of the top 500 supercomputers by machine type
F-116   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         as of the publication of the fourth edition. Update that figure to the most recent top
                         500. How have the systems and their networks changed since the data in the orig-
                         inal figure? Do similar comparisons for OCNs used in microprocessors and SANs
                         targeted for clusters using Figures F.29 and F.31.
               ✪ F.31    [12/12/12/15/15/18] < F.8 > Use the M/M/1 queuing model to answer this exer-
                         cise. Measurements of a network bridge show that packets arrive at 200 packets
                         per second and that the gateway forwards them in about 2 ms.
                         a. [12] < F.8 > What is the utilization of the gateway?
                         b. [12] < F.8 > What is the mean number of packets in the gateway?
                         c. [12] < F.8 > What is the mean time spent in the gateway?
                         d. [15] < F.8 > Plot response time versus utilization as you vary the arrival rate.
                         e. [15] < F.8 > For an M/M/1 queue, the probability of finding n or more tasks in
                            the system is Utilizationn. What is the chance of an overflow of the FIFO if it can
                            hold 10 messages?
                         f. [18] < F.8 > How big must the gateway be to have packet loss due to FIFO over-
                            flow less than one packet per million?
               ✪ F.32    [20] < F.8 > The imbalance between the time of sending and receiving can cause
                         problems in network performance. Sending too fast can cause the network to back
                         up and increase the latency of messages, since the receivers will not be able to pull
                         out the message fast enough. A technique called bandwidth matching proposes a
                         simple solution: Slow down the sender so that it matches the performance of the
                         receiver [Brewer and Kuszmaul 1994]. If two machines exchange an equal number
                         of messages using a protocol like UDP, one will get ahead of the other, causing it to
                         send all its messages first. After the receiver puts all these messages away, it will
                         then send its messages. Estimate the performance for this case versus a bandwidth-
                         matched case. Assume that the send overhead is 200 μs, the receive overhead is
                         300 μs, time of flight is 5 μs, latency is 10 μs, and that the two machines want
                         to exchange 100 messages.
                  F.33   [40] < F.8 > Compare the performance of UDP with and without bandwidth
                         matching by slowing down the UDP send code to match the receive code as
                         advised by bandwidth matching [Brewer and Kuszmaul 1994]. Devise an exper-
                         iment to see how much performance changes as a result. How should you change
                         the send rate when two nodes send to the same destination? What if one sender
                         sends to two destinations?
               ✪ F.34    [40] < F.6, F.8 > If you have access to an SMP and a cluster, write a program to
                         measure latency of communication and bandwidth of communication between pro-
                         cessors, as was plotted in Figure F.32 on page F-80.
                  F.35   [20/20/20] < F.9 > If you have access to a UNIX system, use ping to explore the
                         Internet. First read the manual page. Then use ping without option flags to be sure
                         you can reach the following sites. It should say that X is alive. Depending on
                         your system, you may be able to see the path by setting the flags to verbose mode
                                                                     Exercises   ■   F-117

         (-v) and trace route mode (-R) to see the path between your machine and the
         example machine. Alternatively, you may need to use the program trace route
         to see the path. If so, try its manual page. You may want to use the UNIX command
         script to make a record of your session.
         a. [20] < F.9 > Trace the route to another machine on the same local area network.
            What is the latency?
         b. [20] < F.9 > Trace the route to another machine on your campus that is not on
            the same local area network.What is the latency?
         c. [20] < F.9 > Trace the route to another machine off campus. For example, if you
            have a friend you send email to, try tracing that route. See if you can discover
            what types of networks are used along that route.What is the latency?
  F.36   [15] < F.9 > Use FTP to transfer a file from a remote site and then between local
         sites on the same LAN. What is the difference in bandwidth for each transfer? Try
         the transfer at different times of day or days of the week. Is the WAN or LAN the
         bottleneck?
✪ F.37   [10/10] < F.9, F.11 > Figure F.41 on page F-93 compares latencies for a high-
         bandwidth network with high overhead and a low-bandwidth network with low
         overhead for different TCP/IP message sizes.
         a. [10] < F.9, F.11 > For what message sizes is the delivered bandwidth higher for
            the high-bandwidth network?
         b. [10] < F.9, F.11 > For your answer to part (a), what is the delivered bandwidth
            for each network?
✪ F.38   [15] < F.9, F.11 > Using the statistics in Figure F.41 on page F-93, estimate the
         per-message overhead for each network.
✪ F.39   [15] < F.9, F.11 > Exercise F.37 calculates which message sizes are faster for two
         networks with different overhead and peak bandwidth. Using the statistics in
         Figure F.41 on page F-93, what is the percentage of messages that are transmitted
         more quickly on the network with low overhead and bandwidth? What is the per-
         centage of data transmitted more quickly on the network with high overhead and
         bandwidth?
✪ F.40   [15] < F.9, F.11 > One interesting measure of the latency and bandwidth of an
         inter-connection is to calculate the size of a message needed to achieve one-half
         of the peak bandwidth. This halfway point is sometimes referred to as n1/2, taken
         from the terminology of vector processing. Using Figure F.41 on page F-93, esti-
         mate n1/2 for TCP/IP message using 155-Mbit/sec ATM and 10-Mbit/sec Ethernet.
  F.41   [Discussion] < F.10 > The Google cluster used to be constructed from 1 rack unit
         (RU) PCs, each with one processor and two disks. Today there are considerably
         denser options. How much less floor space would it take if we were to replace
         the 1 RU PCs with modern alternatives? Go to the Compaq or Dell Web sites
         to find the densest alternative. What would be the estimated impact on cost of
         the equipment? What would be the estimated impact on rental cost of floor space?
F-118   ■   Appendix F Interconnection Networks

                         What would be the impact on interconnection network design for achieving power/
                         performance efficiency?
                  F.42   [Discussion] < F.13 > At the time of the writing of the fourth edition, it was unclear
                         what would happen with Ethernet versus InfiniBand versus Advanced Switching
                         in the machine room. What are the technical advantages of each? What are the eco-
                         nomic advantages of each? Why would people maintaining the system prefer one
                         to the other? How popular is each network today? How do they compare to
                         proprietary commercial networks such as Myrinet and Quadrics?
