E
    Embedded Systems

    By Thomas M. Conte
    North Carolina State University

    Where a calculator on the ENIAC is equipped with 18,000 vacuum
    tubes and weighs 30 tons, computers in the future may have only
    1,000 vacuum tubes and perhaps weigh 1 1/2 tons.
                                          Popular Mechanics
                                                March 1949
E-2   ■   Appendix E Embedded Systems

               E.1      Introduction
                        Embedded computer systems—computers lodged in other devices where the pres-
                        ence of the computers is not immediately obvious—are the fastest-growing portion
                        of the computer market. These devices range from everyday machines (most
                        microwaves, most washing machines, printers, network switches, and automobiles
                        contain simple to very advanced embedded microprocessors) to handheld digital
                        devices (such as PDAs, cell phones, and music players) to video game consoles
                        and digital set-top boxes. Although in some applications (such as PDAs) the com-
                        puters are programmable, in many embedded applications the only programming
                        occurs in connection with the initial loading of the application code or a later soft-
                        ware upgrade of that application. Thus, the application is carefully tuned for the
                        processor and system. This process sometimes includes limited use of assembly
                        language in key loops, although time-to-market pressures and good software engi-
                        neering practice restrict such assembly language coding to a fraction of the
                        application.
                            Compared to desktop and server systems, embedded systems have a much
                        wider range of processing power and cost—from systems containing low-end 8-
                        bit and 16-bit processors that may cost less than a dollar, to those containing full
                        32-bit microprocessors capable of operating in the 500 MIPS range that cost
                        approximately 10 dollars, to those containing high-end embedded processors that
                        cost hundreds of dollars and can execute several billions of instructions per second.
                        Although the range of computing power in the embedded systems market is very
                        large, price is a key factor in the design of computers for this space. Performance
                        requirements do exist, of course, but the primary goal is often meeting the perfor-
                        mance need at a minimum price, rather than achieving higher performance at a
                        higher price.
                            Embedded systems often process information in very different ways from
                        general-purpose processors. Typically these applications include deadline-driven
                        constraints—so-called real-time constraints. In these applications, a particular
                        computation must be completed by a certain time or the system fails (there are other
                        constraints considered real time, discussed in the next subsection).
                            Embedded systems applications typically involve processing information as
                        signals. The lay term “signal” often connotes radio transmission, and that is true
                        for some embedded systems (e.g., cell phones). But a signal may be an image, a
                        motion picture composed of a series of images, a control sensor measurement, and
                        so on. Signal processing requires specific computation that many embedded pro-
                        cessors are optimized for. We discuss this in depth below. A wide range of bench-
                        mark requirements exist, from the ability to run small, limited code segments to the
                        ability to perform well on applications involving tens to hundreds of thousands of
                        lines of code.
                            Two other key characteristics exist in many embedded applications: the need to
                        minimize memory and the need to minimize power. In many embedded applica-
                        tions, the memory can be a substantial portion of the system cost, and it is important
                        to optimize memory size in such cases. Sometimes the application is expected to fit
                                                         E.1   Introduction    ■   E-3

entirely in the memory on the processor chip; other times the application needs to
fit in its entirety in a small, off-chip memory. In either case, the importance of
memory size translates to an emphasis on code size, since data size is dictated
by the application. Some architectures have special instruction set capabilities
to reduce code size. Larger memories also mean more power, and optimizing
power is often critical in embedded applications. Although the emphasis on low
power is frequently driven by the use of batteries, the need to use less expensive
packaging (plastic versus ceramic) and the absence of a fan for cooling also limit
total power consumption. We examine the issue of power in more detail later in this
appendix.
     Another important trend in embedded systems is the use of processor cores
together with application-specific circuitry—so-called “core plus ASIC” or “sys-
tem on a chip” (SOC), which may also be viewed as special-purpose multiproces-
sors (see Section E.4). Often an application’s functional and performance
requirements are met by combining a custom hardware solution together with soft-
ware running on a standardized embedded processor core, which is designed to
interface to such special-purpose hardware. In practice, embedded problems are
usually solved by one of three approaches:

1. The designer uses a combined hardware/software solution that includes some
   custom hardware and an embedded processor core that is integrated with the
   custom hardware, often on the same chip.
2. The designer uses custom software running on an off-the-shelf embedded
   processor.
3. The designer uses a digital signal processor and custom software for the proces-
   sor. Digital signal processors are processors specially tailored for signal-
   processing applications. We discuss some of the important differences between
   digital signal processors and general-purpose embedded processors below.

Figure E.1 summarizes these three classes of computing environments and their
important characteristics.

Real-Time Processing
Often, the performance requirement in an embedded application is a real-time
requirement. A real-time performance requirement is one where a segment of
the application has an absolute maximum execution time that is allowed. For exam-
ple, in a digital set-top box the time to process each video frame is limited, since the
processor must accept and process the frame before the next frame arrives (typi-
cally called hard real-time systems). In some applications, a more sophisticated
requirement exists: The average time for a particular task is constrained as well
as is the number of instances when some maximum time is exceeded. Such
approaches (typically called soft real-time) arise when it is possible to occasionally
miss the time constraint on an event, as long as not too many are missed. Real-time
E-4    ■   Appendix E Embedded Systems

Feature                          Desktop                   Server                       Embedded
Price of system                  $1000–$10,000             $10,000–$10,000,000          $10–$100,000 (including
                                                                                        network routers at the high end)
Price of microprocessor          $100–$1000                $200–$2000                   $0.20–$200 (per processor)
module                                                     (per processor)
Microprocessors sold per         150,000,000               4,000,000                    300,000,000 (32-bit and 64-bit
year (estimates for 2000)                                                               processors only)
Critical system design issues    Price-performance,        Throughput, availability,    Price, power consumption,
                                 graphics performance      scalability                  application-specific performance

Figure E.1 A summary of the three computing classes and their system characteristics. Note the wide range in
system price for servers and embedded systems. For servers, this range arises from the need for very large-scale mul-
tiprocessor systems for high-end transaction processing and Web server applications. For embedded systems, one
significant high-end application is a network router, which could include multiple processors as well as lots of mem-
ory and other electronics. The total number of embedded processors sold in 2000 is estimated to exceed 1 billion, if
you include 8-bit and 16-bit microprocessors. In fact, the largest-selling microprocessor of all time is an 8-bit micro-
controller sold by Intel! It is difficult to separate the low end of the server market from the desktop market, since low-
end servers—especially those costing less than $5000—are essentially no different from desktop PCs. Hence, up to a
few million of the PC units may be effectively servers.

                                performance tends to be highly application dependent. It is usually measured using
                                kernels either from the application or from a standardized benchmark (see
                                Section E.3).
                                     The construction of a hard real-time system involves three key variables. The
                                first is the rate at which a particular task must occur. Coupled to this are the hard-
                                ware and software required to achieve that real-time rate. Often, structures that are
                                very advantageous on the desktop are the enemy of hard real-time analysis. For
                                example, branch speculation, cache memories, and so on introduce uncertainty
                                into code. A particular sequence of code may execute either very efficiently or very
                                inefficiently, depending on whether the hardware branch predictors and caches “do
                                their jobs.” Engineers must analyze code assuming the worst-case execution time
                                (WCET). In the case of traditional microprocessor hardware, if one assumes that
                                all branches are mispredicted and all caches miss, the WCET is overly pessimistic.
                                Thus, the system designer may end up overdesigning a system to achieve a given
                                WCET, when a much less expensive system would have sufficed.
                                     In order to address the challenges of hard real-time systems, and yet still exploit
                                such well-known architectural properties as branch behavior and access locality, it
                                is possible to change how a processor is designed. Consider branch prediction:
                                Although dynamic branch prediction is known to perform far more accurately than
                                static “hint bits” added to branch instructions, the behavior of static hints is much
                                more predictable. Furthermore, although caches perform better than software-
                                managed on-chip memories, the latter produces predictable memory latencies.
                                In some embedded processors, caches can be converted into software-managed
                                on-chip memories via line locking. In this approach, a cache line can be locked
                                in the cache so that it cannot be replaced until the line is unlocked
E.2   Signal Processing and Embedded Applications: The Digital Signal Processor             ■   E-5

 E.2       Signal Processing and Embedded Applications:
           The Digital Signal Processor
           A digital signal processor (DSP) is a special-purpose processor optimized for
           executing digital signal processing algorithms. Most of these algorithms, from
           time-domain filtering (e.g., infinite impulse response and finite impulse response
           filtering), to convolution, to transforms (e.g., fast Fourier transform, discrete cosine
           transform), to even forward error correction (FEC) encodings, all have as their
           kernel the same operation: a multiply-accumulate operation. For example, the
           discrete Fourier transform has the form:

                               X
                               N?1                                 ?     ?        ?     ?
                                                           2πkn        kn             kn
                    X ðk Þ ¼       xðnÞWNkn where WNkn ¼ ej N ¼ cos 2π     + j sin 2π
                               n¼0
                                                                       N              N

           The discrete cosine transform is often a replacement for this because it does not
           require complex number operations. Either transform has as its core the sum of
           a product. To accelerate this, DSPs typically feature special-purpose hardware
           to perform multiply-accumulate (MAC). A MAC instruction of “MAC A,B,C”
           has the semantics of “A ¼ A + B * C.” In some situations, the performance of this
           operation is so critical that a DSP is selected for an application based solely upon its
           MAC operation throughput.
               DSPs often employ fixed-point arithmetic. If you think of integers as having a
           binary point to the right of the least-significant bit, fixed point has a binary point
           just to the right of the sign bit. Hence, fixed-point data are fractions between ?1
           and +1.

Example    Here are three simple 16-bit patterns:

               0100 0000 0000 0000
               0000 1000 0000 0000
               0100 1000 0000 1000

           What values do they represent if they are two’s complement integers? Fixedpoint
           numbers?

 Answer    Number representation tells us that the ith digit to the left of the binary point
           represents 2i?1 and the ith digit to the right of the binary point represents 2?i. First
           assume these three patterns are integers. Then the binary point is to the far right,
           so they represent 214, 211, and (214+ 211+ 23), or 16,384, 2048, and 18,440.
              Fixed point places the binary point just to the right of the sign bit, so as fixed
           point these patterns represent 2?1, 2?4, and (2?1 + 2?4 + 2?12). The fractions are
           1/2, 1/16, and (2048 + 256 + 1)/4096 or 2305/4096, which represents about
           0.50000, 0.06250, and 0.56274. Alternatively, for an n-bit two’s complement,
E-6   ■   Appendix E Embedded Systems

                        fixed-point number we could just divide the integer presentation by 2n?1 to derive
                        the same results:
                            16,384=32, 768 ¼ 1=2, 2048=32,768 ¼ 1=16, and 18,440=32,768 ¼ 2305=4096:

                             Fixed point can be thought of as a low-cost floating point. It doesn’t include an
                        exponent in every word and doesn’t have hardware that automatically aligns and
                        normalizes operands. Instead, fixed point relies on the DSP programmer to keep
                        the exponent in a separate variable and ensure that each result is shifted left or right
                        to keep the answer aligned to that variable. Since this exponent variable is often
                        shared by a set of fixed-point variables, this style of arithmetic is also called
                        blocked floating point, since a block of variables has a common exponent.
                             To support such manual calculations, DSPs usually have some registers that are
                        wider to guard against round-off error, just as floating-point units internally have
                        extra guard bits. Figure E.2 surveys four generations of DSPs, listing data sizes and
                        width of the accumulating registers. Note that DSP architects are not bound by the
                        powers of 2 for word sizes. Figure E.3 shows the size of data operands for the TI
                        TMS320C55 DSP.
                             In addition to MAC operations, DSPs often also have operations to accelerate
                        portions of communications algorithms. An important class of these algorithms
                        revolve around encoding and decoding forward error correction codes—codes
                        in which extra information is added to the digital bit stream to guard against errors
                        in transmission. A code of rate m/n has m information bits for (m + n) check bits.
                        So, for example, a 1/2 rate code would have 1 information bit per every 2 bits. Such
                        codes are often called trellis codes because one popular graphical flow diagram of

                        Generation      Year      Example DSP              Data width       Accumulator width
                             1          1982      TI TMS32010                 16 bits              32 bits
                             2          1987      Motorola DSP56001           24 bits              56 bits
                             3          1995      Motorola DSP56301           24 bits              56 bits
                             4          1998      TI TMS320C6201              16 bits              40 bits

                        Figure E.2 Four generations of DSPs, their data width, and the width of the registers
                        that reduces round-off error.

                        Data size      Memory operand in operation           Memory operand in data transfer
                        16 bits                     89.3%                                  89.0%
                        32 bits                     10.7%                                  11.0%

                        Figure E.3 Size of data operands for the TMS320C55 DSP. About 90% of operands are
                        16 bits. This DSP has two 40-bit accumulators. There are no floating-point operations, as
                        is typical of many DSPs, so these data are all fixed-point integers.
E.2   Signal Processing and Embedded Applications: The Digital Signal Processor             ■       E-7

            their encoding resembles a garden trellis. A common algorithm for decoding trellis
            codes is due to Viterbi. This algorithm requires a sequence of compares and selects
            in order to recover a transmitted bit’s true value. Thus DSPs often have compare-
            select operations to support Viterbi decode for FEC codes.
                To explain DSPs better, we will take a detailed look at two DSPs, both pro-
            duced by Texas Instruments. The TMS320C55 series is a DSP family targeted
            toward battery-powered embedded applications. In stark contrast to this, the
            TMS VelociTI 320C6x series is a line of powerful, eight-issue VLIW processors
            targeted toward a broader range of applications that may be less power sensitive.

            The TI 320C55
            At one end of the DSP spectrum is the TI 320C55 architecture. The C55 is opti-
            mized for low-power, embedded applications. Its overall architecture is shown in
            Figure E.4. At the heart of it, the C55 is a seven-staged pipelined CPU. The stages
            are outlined below:

            ■    Fetch stage reads program data from memory into the instruction buffer queue.
            ■    Decode stage decodes instructions and dispatches tasks to the other primary
                 functional units.
            ■    Address stage computes addresses for data accesses and branch addresses for
                 program discontinuities.
            ■    Access 1/Access 2 stages send data read addresses to memory.
            ■    Read stage transfers operand data on the B bus, C bus, and D bus.
            ■    Execute stage executes operation in the A unit and D unit and performs writes
                 on the E bus and F bus.

          Data read buses BB, CB, DB (3 x 16)

          Data read address buses BAB, CAB, DAB (3 x 24)

          Program address bus PAB (24)

                                                CPU

                                                  Instruction   Program   Address        Data
          Program read bus PB (32)                  buffer        flow    data flow   computation
                                                      unit         unit      unit         unit
                                                      (IU)        (PU)      (AU)         (DU)

          Data write address buses EAB, FAB (2 x 24)

          Data write buses EB, FB (2 x 16)

         Figure E.4 Architecture of the TMS320C55 DSP. The C55 is a seven-stage pipelined pro-
         cessor with some unique instruction execution facilities. (Courtesy Texas Instruments.)
E-8   ■   Appendix E Embedded Systems

                        The C55 pipeline performs pipeline hazard detection and will stall on write after
                        read (WAR) and read after write (RAW) hazards.
                            The C55 does have a 24 KB instruction cache, but it is configurable to support
                        various workloads. It may be configured to be two-way set associative, direct-
                        mapped, or as a “ramset.” This latter mode is a way to support hard realtime appli-
                        cations. In this mode, blocks in the cache cannot be replaced.
                            The C55 also has advanced power management. It allows dynamic power man-
                        agement through software-programmable “idle domains.” Blocks of circuitry on
                        the device are organized into these idle domains. Each domain can operate nor-
                        mally or can be placed in a low-power idle state. A programmer-accessible Idle
                        Control Register (ICR) determines which domains will be placed in the idle state
                        when the execution of the next IDLE instruction occurs. The six domains are CPU,
                        direct memory access (DMA), peripherals, clock generator, instruction cache, and
                        external memory interface. When each domain is in the idle state, the functions of
                        that particular domain are not available. However, in the peripheral domain, each
                        peripheral has an Idle Enable bit that controls whether or not the peripheral will
                        respond to the changes in the idle state. Thus, peripherals can be individually con-
                        figured to idle or remain active when the peripheral domain is idled.
                            Since the C55 is a DSP, the central feature is its MAC units. The C55 has two
                        MAC units, each comprised of a 17-bit by 17-bit multiplier coupled to a 40-bit
                        dedicated adder. Each MAC unit performs its work in a single cycle; thus, the
                        C55 can execute two MACs per cycle in full pipelined operation. This kind of
                        capability is critical for efficiently performing signal processing applications.
                        The C55 also has a compare, select, and store unit (CSSU) for the add/compare
                        section of the Viterbi decoder.

                        The TI 320C6x
                        In stark contrast to the C55 DSP family is the high-end Texas Instruments VelociTI
                        320C6x family of processors. The C6x processors are closer to traditional very
                        long instruction word (VLIW) processors because they seek to exploit the high
                        levels of instruction-level parallelism (ILP) in many signal processing algorithms.
                        Texas Instruments is not alone in selecting VLIW for exploiting ILP in the embed-
                        ded space. Other VLIW DSP vendors include Ceva, StarCore, Philips/TriMedia,
                        and STMicroelectronics. Why do these vendors favor VLIW over superscalar? For
                        the embedded space, code compatibility is less of a problem, and so new applica-
                        tions can be either hand tuned or recompiled for the newest generation of proces-
                        sor. The other reason superscalar excels on the desktop is because the compiler
                        cannot predict memory latencies at compile time. In embedded, however, memory
                        latencies are often much more predictable. In fact, hard real-time constraints force
                        memory latencies to be statically predictable. Of course, a superscalar would also
                        perform well in this environment with these constraints, but the extra hardware to
                        dynamically schedule instructions is both wasteful in terms of precious chip area
                        and in terms of power consumption. Thus VLIW is a natural choice for high-
                        performance embedded.
E.2   Signal Processing and Embedded Applications: The Digital Signal Processor                      ■   E-9

               The C6x family employs different pipeline depths depending on the family
           member. For the C64x, for example, the pipeline has 11 stages. The first four stages
           of the pipeline perform instruction fetch, followed by two stages for instruction
           decode, and finally four stages for instruction execution. The overall architecture
           of the C64x is shown below in Figure E.5.
               The C6x family’s execution stage is divided into two parts, the left or “1” side
           and the right or “2” side. The L1 and L2 units perform logical and arithmetic oper-
           ations. D units in contrast perform a subset of logical and arithmetic operations but
           also perform memory accesses (loads and stores). The two M units perform multi-
           plication and related operations (e.g., shifts). Finally the S units perform compari-
           sons, branches, and some SIMD operations (see the next subsection for a detailed
           explanation of SIMD operations). Each side has its own 32-entry, 32-bit register file
           (the A file for the 1 side, the B file for the 2 side). A side may access the other side’s
           registers, but with a 1- cycle penalty. Thus, an instruction executing on side 1 may
           access B5, for example, but it will take 1- cycle extra to execute because of this.
               VLIWs are traditionally very bad when it comes to code size, which runs con-
           trary to the needs of embedded systems. However, the C6x family’s approach
           “compresses” instructions, allowing the VLIW code to achieve the same density
           as equivalent RISC (reduced instruction set computer) code. To do so, instruction
           fetch is carried out on an “instruction packet,” shown in Figure E.6. Each instruc-
           tion has a p bit that specifies whether this instruction is a member of the current

                                              Program cache/program memory
                                                      32-bit address
                                                       256-bit data

                                                                             C6000 CPU

                           Power                      Program fetch
                           down                   Instruction dispatch                    Control
                                                                                         registers
                                                  Instruction decode
                  EDMA,
                                        Data path A                   Data path B        Control
                   EMIF
                                       Register file A            Register file B         logic

                                                                                           Test
                                                                                     Emulation
                                     .L1 .S1 .M1 .D1            .D2 .M2 .S2 .L2
                                                                                     Interrupts

                                                                                     Additional
                                                                                    peripherals:
                                Data cache/data memory                                timers,
                                      32-bit address                                serial ports,
                                 8-, 16-, 32-, 64-bit data                              etc.

           Figure E.5 Architecture of the TMS320C64x family of DSPs. The C6x is an eight-issue
           traditional VLIW processor. (Courtesy Texas Instruments.)
E-10   ■   Appendix E Embedded Systems

                         31        0 31          0 31          0 31          0 31          0 31          0 31          0 31          0
                                   p             p             p             p             p             p             p             p

                         Instruction   Instruction   Instruction   Instruction   Instruction   Instruction   Instruction   Instruction
                              A             B             C             D             E             F             G             H

                        Figure E.6 Instruction packet of the TMS320C6x family of DSPs. The p bits determine
                        whether an instruction begins a new VLIW word or not. If the p bit of instruction i is 1,
                        then instruction i + 1 is to be executed in parallel with (in the same cycle as) instruction i.
                        If the p bit of instruction i is 0, then instruction i + 1 is executed in the cycle after instruc-
                        tion i. (Courtesy Texas Instruments.)

                        VLIW word or the next VLIW word (see the figure for a detailed explanation).
                        Thus, there are now no NOPs that are needed for VLIW encoding.
                            Software pipelining is an important technique for achieving high performance
                        in a VLIW. But software pipelining relies on each iteration of the loop having an
                        identical schedule to all other iterations. Because conditional branch instructions
                        disrupt this pattern, the C6x family provides a means to conditionally execute
                        instructions using predication. In predication, the instruction performs its work.
                        But when it is done executing, an additional register, for example A1, is checked.
                        If A1 is zero, the instruction does not write its results. If A1 is nonzero, the instruc-
                        tion proceeds normally. This allows simple if-then and if-then-else structures to be
                        collapsed into straight-line code for software pipelining.

                        Media Extensions
                        There is a middle ground between DSPs and microcontrollers: media extensions.
                        These extensions add DSP-like capabilities to microcontroller architectures at rela-
                        tively low cost. Because media processing is judged by human perception, the data
                        for multimedia operations are often much narrower than the 64-bit data word of mod-
                        ern desktop and server processors. For example, floating-point operations for
                        graphics are normally in single precision, not double precision, and often at a pre-
                        cision less than is required by IEEE 754. Rather than waste the 64-bit arithmetic-
                        logical units (ALUs) when operating on 32-bit, 16-bit, or even 8-bit integers, mul-
                        timedia instructions can operate on several narrower data items at the same time.
                        Thus, a partitioned add operation on 16-bit data with a 64-bit ALU would perform
                        four 16-bit adds in a single clock cycle. The extra hardware cost is simply to prevent
                        carries between the four 16-bit partitions of the ALU. For example, such instructions
                        might be used for graphical operations on pixels. These operations are commonly
                        called single-instruction multiple-data (SIMD) or vector instructions.
                            Most graphics multimedia applications use 32-bit floating-point operations.
                        Some computers double peak performance of single-precision, floating-point oper-
                        ations; they allow a single instruction to launch two 32-bit operations on operands
                        found side by side in a double-precision register. The two partitions must be insu-
                        lated to prevent operations on one half from affecting the other. Such floating-point
                        operations are called paired single operations. For example, such an operation
                   E.2   Signal Processing and Embedded Applications: The Digital Signal Processor                 ■   E-11

                                  might be used for graphical transformations of vertices. This doubling in perfor-
                                  mance is typically accomplished by doubling the number of floating-point units,
                                  making it more expensive than just suppressing carries in integer adders.
                                      Figure E.7 summarizes the SIMD multimedia instructions found in several
                                  recent computers.
                                      DSPs also provide operations found in the first three rows of Figure E.7, but
                                  they change the semantics a bit. First, because they are often used in real-time
                                  applications, there is not an option of causing an exception on arithmetic overflow
                                  (otherwise it could miss an event); thus, the result will be used no matter what the
                                  inputs. To support such an unyielding environment, DSP architectures use saturat-
                                  ing arithmetic: If the result is too large to be represented, it is set to the largest rep-
                                  resentable number, depending on the sign of the result. In contrast, two’s
                                  complement arithmetic can add a small positive number to a large positive.

                                               HP PA-RISC      Intel Pentium      PowerPC
Instruction category         Alpha MAX         MAX2            MMX                AltiVec                 SPARC VIS
Add/subtract                                   4H              8B, 4H, 2W         16B, 8H, 4W             4H, 2W
Saturating add/subtract                        4H              8B, 4H             16B, 8H, 4W
Multiply                                                       4H                 16B, 8H
Compare                      8B (>¼)                           8B, 4H, 2W         16B, 8H, 4W             4H, 2W
                                                               (¼, >)             (¼, >, > ¼, <, <¼)      (¼, not ¼, >, <¼)
Shift right/left                               4H              4H, 2W             16B, 8H, 4W
Shift right arithmetic                         4H                                 16B, 8H, 4W
Multiply and add                                                                  8H
Shift and add                                  4H
(saturating)
AND/OR/XOR                   8B, 4H, 2W        8B, 4H, 2W      8B, 4H, 2W         16B, 8H, 4W             8B, 4H, 2W
Absolute difference          8B                                                   16B, 8H, 4W             8B
Maximum/minimum              8B, 4W                                               16B, 8H, 4W
Pack (2n bits ! n bits)      2W ! 2B,          2*4H ! 8B       4H ! 4B,           4W ! 4B,                2W ! 2H,
                             4H ! 4B                           2W ! 2H            8H ! 8B                 2W ! 2B,
                                                                                                          4H ! 4B
Unpack/merge                 2B ! 2W,                          2B ! 2W,           4B ! 4W,                4B ! 4H,
                             4B ! 4H                           4B ! 4H            8B ! 8H                 2*4B ! 8B
Permute/shuffle                                4H                                 16B, 8H, 4W

Figure E.7 Summary of multimedia support for desktop processors. Note the diversity of support, with little in
common across the five architectures. All are fixed-width operations, performing multiple narrow operations on
either a 64-bit or 128-bit ALU. B stands for byte (8 bits), H for half word (16 bits), and W for word (32 bits). Thus,
8B means an operation on 8 bytes in a single instruction. Note that AltiVec assumes a 128-bit ALU, and the rest
assume 64 bits. Pack and unpack use the notation 2*2W to mean 2 operands each with 2 words. This table is a sim-
plification of the full multimedia architectures, leaving out many details. For example, HP MAX2 includes an instruc-
tion to calculate averages, and SPARC VIS includes instructions to set registers to constants. Also, this table does not
include the memory alignment operation of AltiVec, MAX, and VIS.
E-12    ■   Appendix E Embedded Systems

                    E.3    Embedded Benchmarks
                           It used to be the case just a couple of years ago that in the embedded market, many
                           manufacturers quoted Dhrystone performance, a benchmark that was criticized and
                           given up by desktop systems more than 20 years ago! As mentioned earlier, the
                           enormous variety in embedded applications, as well as differences in performance
                           requirements (hard real time, soft real time, and overall cost-performance), make
                           the use of a single set of benchmarks unrealistic. In practice, many designers of
                           embedded systems devise benchmarks that reflect their application, either as ker-
                           nels or as stand-alone versions of the entire application.
                               For those embedded applications that can be characterized well by kernel per-
                           formance, the best standardized set of benchmarks appears to be a new benchmark
                           set: the EDN Embedded Microprocessor Benchmark Consortium (or EEMBC,
                           pronounced “embassy”). The EEMBC benchmarks fall into six classes (called
                           “subcommittees” in the parlance of EEMBC): automotive/industrial, consumer,
                           telecommunications, digital entertainment, networking (currently in its second ver-
                           sion), and office automation (also the second version of this subcommittee).
                           Figure E.8 shows the six different application classes, which include 50
                           benchmarks.
                               Although many embedded applications are sensitive to the performance of
                           small kernels, remember that often the overall performance of the entire application
                           (which may be thousands of lines) is also critical. Thus, for many embedded sys-
                           tems, the EMBCC benchmarks can only be used to partially assess performance.

Benchmark type            Number of
(“subcommittee”)           kernels     Example benchmarks
Automotive/industrial        16        6 microbenchmarks (arithmetic operations, pointer chasing, memory
                                       performance, matrix arithmetic, table lookup, bit manipulation), 5 automobile
                                       control benchmarks, and 5 filter or FFT benchmarks
Consumer                      5        5 multimedia benchmarks (JPEG compress/decompress, filtering, and RGB
                                       conversions)
Telecommunications            5        Filtering and DSP benchmarks (autocorrelation, FFT, decoder, encoder)
Digital entertainment        12        MP3 decode, MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 encode and decode (each of which is
                                       applied to five different datasets), MPEG Encode Floating Point, 4 benchmark
                                       tests for common cryptographic standards and algorithms (AES, DES, RSA,
                                       and Huffman decoding for data decompression), and enhanced JPEG and
                                       color-space conversion tests
Networking version 2          6        IP Packet Check (borrowed from the RFC1812 standard), IP Reassembly, IP
                                       Network Address Translator (NAT), Route Lookup, OSPF, Quality of Service
                                       (QOS), and TCP
Office automation             6        Ghostscript, text parsing, image rotation, dithering, B?ezier
version 2

Figure E.8 The EEMBC benchmark suite, consisting of 50 kernels in six different classes. See www.eembc.org for
more information on the benchmarks and for scores.
                                                                        E.3        Embedded Benchmarks   ■   E-13

Power Consumption and Efficiency as the Metric
Cost and power are often at least as important as performance in the embedded
market. In addition to the cost of the processor module (which includes any
required interface chips), memory is often the next most costly part of an embedded
system. Unlike a desktop or server system, most embedded systems do not have
secondary storage; instead, the entire application must reside in either FLASH or
DRAM. Because many embedded systems, such as PDAs and cell phones, are con-
strained by both cost and physical size, the amount of memory needed for the appli-
cation is critical. Likewise, power is often a determining factor in choosing a
processor, especially for battery-powered systems.
    EEMBC EnergyBench provides data on the amount of energy a processor con-
sumes while running EEMBC’s performance benchmarks. An EEMBC-certified
Energymark score is an optional metric that a device manufacturer may choose
to supply in conjunction with certified scores for device performance as a way
of indicating a processor’s efficient use of power and energy. EEMBC has stan-
dardized on the use of National Instruments’ LabVIEW graphical development
environment and data acquisition hardware to implement EnergyBench.
    Figure E.9 shows the relative performance per watt of typical operating power.
Compare this figure to Figure E.10, which plots raw performance, and notice how
different the results are. The NEC VR 4122 has a clear advantage in performance
per watt, but is the second-lowest performing processor! From the viewpoint of
power consumption, the NEC VR 4122, which was designed for battery-based sys-
tems, is the big winner. The IBM PowerPC displays efficient use of power to
achieve its high performance, although at 6 W typical, it is probably not suitable
for most battery-based devices.

                                                                 AMD ElanSC520
                                                   4.0
                                                                 AMD K6-2E+
                                                   3.5           IBM PowerPC 750CX
                   Relative performance per watt

                                                                 NEC VR 5432
                                                   3.0           NEC VR 4122

                                                   2.5

                                                   2.0

                                                   1.5

                                                   1.0

                                                   0.5

                                                    0
                                                         Automotive       Office        Telecomm

Figure E.9 Relative performance per watt for the five embedded processors. The
power is measured as typical operating power for the processor and does not include
any interface chips.
E-14   ■   Appendix E Embedded Systems

                                                              14.0

                                Performance relative to AMD
                                                              12.0
                                                                                                      AMD Elan SC520
                                                              10.0
                                                                                                      AMD K6-2E+

                                       Elan SC520
                                                               8.0                                    IBM PowerPC 750CX
                                                                                                      NEC VR 5432
                                                               6.0                                    NEC VR 4122
                                                               4.0

                                                               2.0

                                                                0
                                                                     Automotive   Office   Telecomm

                        Figure E.10 Raw performance for the five embedded processors. The performance is
                        presented as relative to the performance of the AMD ElanSC520.

               E.4      Embedded Multiprocessors
                        Multiprocessors are now common in server environments, and several desktop
                        multiprocessors are available from vendors, such as Sun, Compaq, and Apple.
                        In the embedded space, a number of special-purpose designs have used customized
                        multiprocessors, including the Sony PlayStation 2 (see Section E.5).
                            Many special-purpose embedded designs consist of a general-purpose pro-
                        grammable processor or DSP with special-purpose, finite-state machines that
                        are used for stream-oriented I/O. In applications ranging from computer graphics
                        and media processing to telecommunications, this style of special-purpose multi-
                        processor is becoming common. Although the interprocessor interactions in such
                        designs are highly regimented and relatively simple—consisting primarily of a
                        simple communication channel—because much of the design is committed to sil-
                        icon, ensuring that the communication protocols among the input/output proces-
                        sors and the general-purpose processor are correct is a major challenge in such
                        designs.
                            More recently, we have seen the first appearance, in the embedded space, of
                        embedded multiprocessors built from several general-purpose processors. These
                        multiprocessors have been focused primarily on the high-end telecommunications
                        and networking market, where scalability is critical. An example of such a design is
                        the MXP processor designed by empowerTel Networks for use in voice-over-IP
                        systems. The MXP processor consists of four main components:

                        ■   An interface to serial voice streams, including support for handling jitter
                        ■   Support for fast packet routing and channel lookup
                        ■   A complete Ethernet interface, including the MAC layer
                        ■   Four MIPS32 R4000-class processors, each with its own cache (a total of
                            48 KB or 12 KB per processor)
         E.5    Case Study: The Emotion Engine of the Sony PlayStation 2            ■   E-15

      The MIPS processors are used to run the code responsible for maintaining the
      voice-over-IP channels, including the assurance of quality of service, echo cancel-
      lation, simple compression, and packet encoding. Since the goal is to run as many
      independent voice streams as possible, a multiprocessor is an ideal solution.
           Because of the small size of the MIPS cores, the entire chip takes only 13.5 M
      transistors. Future generations of the chip are expected to handle more voice chan-
      nels, as well as do more sophisticated echo cancellation, voice activity detection,
      and more sophisticated compression.
           Multiprocessing is becoming widespread in the embedded computing arena for
      two primary reasons. First, the issues of binary software compatibility, which pla-
      gue desktop and server systems, are less relevant in the embedded space. Often
      software in an embedded application is written from scratch for an application
      or significantly modified (note that this is also the reason VLIW is favored over
      superscalar in embedded instruction-level parallelism). Second, the applications
      often have natural parallelism, especially at the high end of the embedded space.
      Examples of this natural parallelism abound in applications such as a settop box, a
      network switch, a cell phone (see Section E.7) or a game system (see Section E.5).
      The lower barriers to use of thread-level parallelism together with the greater sen-
      sitivity to die cost (and hence efficient use of silicon) are leading to widespread
      adoption of multiprocessing in the embedded space, as the application needs grow
      to demand more performance.

E.5   Case Study: The Emotion Engine of the Sony
      PlayStation 2
      Desktop computers and servers rely on the memory hierarchy to reduce average
      access time to relatively static data, but there are embedded applications where data
      are often a continuous stream. In such applications there is still spatial locality, but
      temporal locality is much more limited.
           To give another look at memory performance beyond the desktop, this section
      examines the microprocessor at the heart of the Sony PlayStation 2. As we will see,
      the steady stream of graphics and audio demanded by electronic games leads to a
      different approach to memory design. The style is high bandwidth via many ded-
      icated independent memories.
           Figure E.11 shows a block diagram of the Sony PlayStation 2 (PS2). Not sur-
      prisingly for a game machine, there are interfaces for video, sound, and a DVD
      player. Surprisingly, there are two standard computer I/O buses, USB and IEEE
      1394, a PCMCIA slot as found in portable PCs, and a modem. These additions
      show that Sony had greater plans for the PS2 beyond traditional games. Although
      it appears that the I/O processor (IOP) simply handles the I/O devices and the game
      console, it includes a 34 MHz MIPS processor that also acts as the emulation com-
      puter to run games for earlier Sony PlayStations. It also connects to a standard PC
      audio card to provide the sound for the games.
E-16    ■   Appendix E Embedded Systems

                                           Emotion Engine                                                         Graphics Synthesizer

                                                                             Graphics I/F
                           300 MHz
                                                   Vector    Vector                          64-bit                 16 parallel pixel
                         Superscalar
                                                    Unit 0    Unit 1                        150 MHz                   processors
                          CPU Core
                                                                                                                      (150 MHz)

                                                                                                                                             NTSC, PAL, DTV, VESA
                                                   (VPU0)    (VPU1)
                        w/128-bit SIMD

                                                                                                                        1024-bit
                                                                                                       1024-bit

                                                                                                                                      512
                                        128-bit/150-MHz bus

                                           10-          IPU
                       Memory            channel      (MPEG          I/O                                            Video memory
                       control            DMA        decoder)        I/F                                          (4 MB multiported
                                                                                                                  embedded DRAM)

                                       400 MHz                               37.5 MHz
                                                                    32-bit
                                                                                                       48-channel
                                                                                                                                   DVD-ROM
                                                                                                       sound chip
                     16-bit
                              16-bit

                                                    I/O processor

                                                               34 MHz                                                 Local bus
                                                              MIPS CPU                         I/O
                                                             (PlayStation                   circuits
                         Main memory                                                                   USB
                        32 MB DRDRAM                         compatible)
                                                                                                       IEEE-1394                   PCMCIA

                                                                                                                                    Modem

Figure E.11 Block diagram of the Sony PlayStation 2. The 10 DMA channels orchestrate the transfers between all
the small memories on the chip, which when completed all head toward the Graphics Interface so as to be rendered
by the Graphics Synthesizer. The Graphics Synthesizer uses DRAM on chip to provide an entire frame buffer plus
graphics processors to perform the rendering desired based on the display commands given from the Emotion
Engine. The embedded DRAM allows 1024-bit transfers between the pixel processors and the display buffer. The
Superscalar CPU is a 64-bit MIPS III with two-instruction issue, and comes with a two-way, set associative, 16 KB
instruction cache; a two-way, set associative, 8 KB data cache; and 16 KB of scratchpad memory. It has been extended
with 128-bit SIMD instructions for multimedia applications (see Section E.2). Vector Unit 0 is primarily a DSP-like
coprocessor for the CPU (see Section E.2), which can operate on 128-bit registers in SIMD manner between 8 bits
and 32 bits per word. It has 4 KB of instruction memory and 4 KB of data memory. Vector Unit 1 has similar functions
to VPU0, but it normally operates independently of the CPU and contains 16 KB of instruction memory and 16 KB of
data memory. All three units can communicate over the 128-bit system bus, but there is also a 128-bit dedicated path
between the CPU and VPU0 and a 128-bit dedicated path between VPU1 and the Graphics Interface. Although VPU0
and VPU1 have identical microarchitectures, the differences in memory size and units to which they have direct con-
nections affect the roles that they take in a game. At 0.25-micron line widths, the Emotion Engine chip uses 13.5M
transistors and is 225 mm2, and the Graphics Synthesizer is 279 mm2. To put this in perspective, the Alpha 21264
microprocessor in 0.25-micron technology is about 160 mm2 and uses 15M transistors. (This figure is based on
Figure 1 in “Sony’s Emotionally Charged Chip,” Microprocessor Report 13:5.)

                                            Thus, one challenge for the memory system of this embedded application is to act
                                        as source or destination for the extensive number of I/O devices. The PS2 designers
                                        met this challenge with two PC800 (400 MHz) DRDRAM chips using two channels,
                                        offering 32 MB of storage and a peak memory bandwidth of 3.2 GB/sec.
                                            What’s left in the figure are basically two big chips: the Graphics Synthesizer
                                        and the Emotion Engine.
   E.5   Case Study: The Emotion Engine of the Sony PlayStation 2            ■   E-17

     The Graphics Synthesizer takes rendering commands from the Emotion Engine
in what are commonly called display lists. These are lists of 32-bit commands that
tell the renderer what shape to use and where to place them, plus what colors and
textures to fill them.
     This chip also has the highest bandwidth portion of the memory system. By
using embedded DRAM on the Graphics Synthesizer, the chip contains the full
video buffer and has a 2048-bit-wide interface so that pixel filling is not a bottle-
neck. This embedded DRAM greatly reduces the bandwidth demands on the
DRDRAM. It illustrates a common technique found in embedded applications:
separate memories dedicated to individual functions to inexpensively achieve
greater memory bandwidth for the entire system.
     The remaining large chip is the Emotion Engine, and its job is to accept inputs
from the IOP and create the display lists of a video game to enable 3D video trans-
formations in real time. A major insight shaped the design of the Emotion Engine:
Generally, in a racing car game there are foreground objects that are constantly
changing and background objects that change less in reaction to the events,
although the background can be most of the screen. This observation led to a split
of responsibilities.
     The CPU works with VPU0 as a tightly coupled coprocessor, in that every
VPU0 instruction is a standard MIPS coprocessor instruction, and the addresses
are generated by the MIPS CPU. VPU0 is called a vector processor, but it is similar
to 128-bit SIMD extensions for multimedia found in several desktop processors
(see Section E.2).
     VPU1, in contrast, fetches its own instructions and data and acts in parallel with
CPU/VPU0, acting more like a traditional vector unit. With this split, the more
flexible CPU/VPU0 handles the foreground action and the VPU1 handles the back-
ground. Both deposit their resulting display lists into the Graphics Interface to send
the lists to the Graphics Synthesizer.
     Thus, the programmers of the Emotion Engine have three processor sets to
choose from to implement their programs: the traditional 64-bit MIPS architecture
including a floating-point unit, the MIPS architecture extended with multimedia
instructions (VPU0), and an independent vector processor (VPU1). To accelerate
MPEG decoding, there is another coprocessor (Image Processing Unit) that can act
independent of the other two.
     With this split of function, the question then is how to connect the units
together, how to make the data flow between units, and how to provide the
memory bandwidth needed by all these units. As mentioned earlier, the Emo-
tion Engine designers chose many dedicated memories. The CPU has a 16 KB
scratch pad memory (SPRAM) in addition to a 16 KB instruction cache and an
8 KB data cache. VPU0 has a 4 KB instruction memory and a 4 KB data
memory, and VPU1 has a 16 KB instruction memory and a 16 KB data mem-
ory. Note that these are four memories, not caches of a larger memory else-
where. In each memory the latency is just 1 clock cycle. VPU1 has more
memory than VPU0 because it creates the bulk of the display lists and because
it largely acts independently.
E-18   ■   Appendix E Embedded Systems

                             The programmer organizes all memories as two double buffers, one pair for the
                        incoming DMA data and one pair for the outgoing DMA data. The programmer
                        then uses the various processors to transform the data from the input buffer to
                        the output buffer. To keep the data flowing among the units, the programmer next
                        sets up the 10 DMA channels, taking care to meet the real-time deadline for real-
                        istic animation of 15 frames per second.
                             Figure E.12 shows that this organization supports two main operating modes:
                        serial, where CPU/VPU0 acts as a preprocessor on what to give VPU1 for it to
                        create for the Graphics Interface using the scratchpad memory as the buffer,
                        and parallel, where both the CPU/VPU0 and VPU1 create display lists. The display
                        lists and the Graphics Synthesizer have multiple context identifiers to distinguish
                        the parallel display lists to produce a coherent final image.
                             All units in the Emotion Engine are linked by a common 150 MHz, 128-bit-
                        wide bus. To offer greater bandwidth, there are also two dedicated buses: a
                        128-bit path between the CPU and VPU0 and a 128-bit path between VPU1
                        and the Graphics Interface. The programmer also chooses which bus to use when
                        setting up the DMA channels.
                             Looking at the big picture, if a server-oriented designer had been given the
                        problem, we might see a single common bus with many local caches and cache-
                        coherent mechanisms to keep data consistent. In contrast, the PlayStation 2 fol-
                        lowed the tradition of embedded designers and has at least nine distinct
                        memory modules. To keep the data flowing in real time from memory to the dis-
                        play, the PS2 uses dedicated memories, dedicated buses, and DMA channels.
                        Coherency is the responsibility of the programmer, and, given the continuous flow
                        from main memory to the graphics interface and the real-time requirements,
                        programmer-controlled coherency works well for this application.

                                                              Serial connection
                                            VPU0
                                                         SPRAM          VPU1
                                            CPU                                    Rendering
                                                                                    engine

                                                             Parallel connection

                                                          Main
                                                                           VPU1
                                                         memory
                                            VPU0                                       Rendering
                                                         SPRAM                          engine
                                            CPU

                        Figure E.12 Two modes of using Emotion Engine organization. The first mode
                        divides the work between the two units and then allows the Graphics Interface to prop-
                        erly merge the display lists. The second mode uses CPU/VPU0 as a filter of what to send
                        to VPU1, which then does all the display lists. It is up to the programmer to choose
                        between serial and parallel data flow. SPRAM is the scratchpad memory.
                     E.6   Case Study: Sanyo VPC-SX500 Digital Camera          ■   E-19

E.6   Case Study: Sanyo VPC-SX500 Digital Camera
      Another very familiar embedded system is a digital camera. Here we consider the
      Sanyo VPC-SX500. When powered on, the microprocessor of the camera first
      runs diagnostics on all components and writes any error messages to the liquid
      crystal display (LCD) on the back of the camera. This camera uses a 1.8-inch
      low-temperature polysilicon thin-film transistor (TFT) color LCD. When a pho-
      tographer takes a picture, he first holds the shutter halfway so that the micropro-
      cessor can take a light reading. The microprocessor then keeps the shutter open to
      get the necessary light, which is captured by a charge-coupled device (CCD) as
      red, green, and blue pixels. The CCD is a 1/2-inch, 1360 ? 1024-pixel,
      progressive-scan chip. The pixels are scanned out row by row; passed through
      routines for white balance, color, and aliasing correction; and then stored in a
      4 MB frame buffer. The next step is to compress the image into a standard format,
      such as JPEG, and store it in the removable Flash memory. The photographer
      picks the compression, in this camera called either fine or normal, with a com-
      pression ratio of 10 to 20 times. A 512 MB Flash memory can store at least 1200
      fine-quality compressed images or approximately 2000 normal-quality com-
      pressed images. The microprocessor then updates the LCD display to show that
      there is room for one less picture.
          Although the previous paragraph covers the basics of a digital camera, there
      are many more features that are included: showing the recorded images on the
      color LCD display, sleep mode to save battery life, monitoring battery energy,
      buffering to allow recording a rapid sequence of uncompressed images, and,
      in this camera, video recording using MPEG format and audio recording using
      WAV format.
          The electronic brain of this camera is an embedded computer with several
      special functions embedded on the chip [Okada et al. 1999]. Figure E.13 shows
      the block diagram of a chip similar to the one in the camera. As mentioned in
      Section E.1, such chips have been called systems on a chip (SOCs) because
      they essentially integrate into a single chip all the parts that were found on
      a small printed circuit board of the past. A SOC generally reduces size and
      lowers power compared to less integrated solutions. Sanyo claims their SOC
      enables the camera to operate on half the number of batteries and to offer a
      smaller form factor than competitors’ cameras. For higher performance, it
      has two buses. The 16-bit bus is for the many slower I/O devices: SmartMedia
      interface, program and data memory, and DMA. The 32-bit bus is for the
      SDRAM, the signal processor (which is connected to the CCD), the Motion
      JPEG encoder, and the NTSC/PAL encoder (which is connected to the
      LCD). Unlike desktop microprocessors, note the large variety of I/O buses that
      this chip must integrate. The 32-bit RISC MPU is a proprietary design and runs
      at 28.8 MHz, the same clock rate as the buses. This 700 mW chip contains
      1.8M transistors in a 10.5 ? 10.5 mm die implemented using a 0.35-micron
      process.
E-20    ■     Appendix E Embedded Systems

                                                                                                                 2-channel
                                                                                                                               LCD/TV
                                                                                                                 video D/A

                              10 bits
             CCD                                               Signal                        NTSC/PAL       16 bits
                                                                               MJPEG
                                                             processor                        encoder
                          16 bits       SDRAM
                                       controller          32 bits                                                Signal bus
            SDRAM

                                                                         Bus bridge

             Smart                   SSFDC                                                                    Audio              MIC
                                                                                           RISC                                Speaker
             Media                  controller   16 bits                                                     D/A, A/D
              Flash                                                                          SIO                  CPU bus
                                        DRAM          UART                    PCMCIA                  DMA
            (program)                                                IrDA                    PIO
                                       controller      x2                     controller            controller
                                                                                            PWM

             DRAM

                                                     RS-232          IrDA     PCMCIA       Others
                                                                     port      card

Figure E.13 The system on a chip (SOC) found in Sanyo digital cameras. This block diagram, found in Okada et al.
[1999], is for the predecessor of the SOC in the camera described in the text. The successor SOC, called Super Advanced
IC, uses three buses instead of two, operates at 60 MHz, consumes 800 mW, and fits 3.1M transistors in a 10.2 ?
10.2 mm die using a 0.35-micron process. Note that this embedded system has twice as many transistors as the
state-of-the-art, high-performance microprocessor in 1990! The SOC in the figure is limited to processing 1024 ?
768 pixels, but its successor supports 1360 ? 1024 pixels.

                        E.7            Case Study: Inside a Cell Phone
                                       Although gaming consoles and digital cameras are familiar embedded systems,
                                       today the most familiar embedded system is the cell phone. In 1999, there were
                                       76 million cellular subscribers in the United States, a 25% growth rate from the
                                       year before. That growth rate is almost 35% per year worldwide, as developing
                                       countries find it much cheaper to install cellular towers than copper-wire-based
                                       infrastructure. Thus, in many countries, the number of cell phones in use exceeds
                                       the number of wired phones in use.
                                           Not surprisingly, the cellular handset market is growing at 35% per year, with
                                       about 280 million cellular phone handsets sold worldwide in 1999. To put that in
                                       perspective, in the same year sales of personal computers were 120 million. These
                                       numbers mean that tremendous engineering resources are available to improve cell
                                       phones, and cell phones are probably leaders in engineering innovation per cubic
                                       inch [Grice and Kanellos 2000].
                                           Before unveiling the anatomy of a cell phone, let’s try a short introduction to
                                       wireless technology.
                                                                 E.7    Case Study: Inside a Cell Phone        ■   E-21

                             Background on Wireless Networks
                             Networks can be created out of thin air as well as out of copper and glass, creating
                             wireless networks. Much of this section is based on a report from the National
                             Research Council [1997].
                                 A radio wave is an electromagnetic wave propagated by an antenna. Radio
                             waves are modulated, which means that the sound signal is superimposed on
                             the stronger radio wave that carries the sound signal, and hence is called the carrier
                             signal. Radio waves have a particular wavelength or frequency: They are measured
                             either as the length of the complete wave or as the number of waves per second.
                             Long waves have low frequencies, and short waves have high frequencies. FM
                             radio stations transmit on the band of 88 MHz to 108 MHz using frequency mod-
                             ulations (FM) to record the sound signal.
                                 By tuning in to different frequencies, a radio receiver can pick up a specific
                             signal. In addition to AM and FM radio, other frequencies are reserved for citizens
                             band radio, television, pagers, air traffic control radar, Global Positioning System,
                             and so on. In the United States, the Federal Communications Commission decides
                             who gets to use which frequencies and for what purpose.
                                 The bit error rate (BER) of a wireless link is determined by the received signal
                             power, noise due to interference caused by the receiver hardware, interference from
                             other sources, and characteristics of the channel. Noise is typically proportional to
                             the radio frequency bandwidth, and a key measure is the signal-to-noise ratio
                             (SNR) required to achieve a given BER. Figure E.14 lists more challenges for wire-
                             less communication.
                                 Typically, wireless communication is selected because the communicating
                             devices are mobile or because wiring is inconvenient, which means the wireless
                             network must rearrange itself dynamically. Such rearrangement makes routing

Challenge          Description                                          Impact
Path loss          Received power divided by transmitted power;         1 W transmit power, 1 GHz transmit frequency,
                   the radio must overcome signal-to-noise ratio        1 Mbit/sec data rate at 10?7 BER, distance
                   (SNR) of noise from interference. Path loss is       between radios can be 728 meters in free space
                   exponential in distance and depends on               vs. 4 meters in a dense jungle.
                   interference if it is above 100 meters.
Shadow fading      Received signal blocked by objects, buildings        If transmitter is moving, need to change transmit
                   outdoors, or walls indoors; increase power to        power to ensure received SNR in region.
                   improve received SNR. It depends on the number
                   of objects and their dielectric properties.
Multipath fading   Interference between multiple versions of signal     900 MHz transmit frequency signal power
                   that arrive at different times, determined by time   changes every 30 cm.
                   between fastest signal and slowest signal relative
                   to signal bandwidth.
Interference       Frequency reuse, adjacent channel, narrow band       Requires filters, spread spectrum.
                   interference.

Figure E.14 Challenges for wireless communication.
E-22   ■   Appendix E Embedded Systems

                        more challenging. A second challenge is that wireless signals are not protected and
                        hence are subject to mutual interference, especially as devices move. Power is
                        another challenge for wireless communication, both because the devices tend to
                        be battery powered and because antennas radiate power to communicate and little
                        of it reaches the receiver. As a result, raw bit error rates are typically a thousand to a
                        million times higher than copper wire.
                             There are two primary architectures for wireless networks: base station archi-
                        tectures and peer-to-peer architectures. Base stations are connected by landlines
                        for longer-distance communication, and the mobile units communicate only with
                        a single local base station. Peer-to-peer architectures allow mobile units to commu-
                        nicate with each other, and messages hop from one unit to the next until delivered
                        to the desired unit. Although peer-to-peer is more reconfigurable, base stations
                        tend to be more reliable since there is only one hop between the device and the
                        station. Cellular telephony, the most popular example of wireless networks, relies
                        on radio with base stations.
                             Cellular systems exploit exponential path loss to reuse the same frequency at
                        spatially separated locations, thereby greatly increasing the number of customers
                        served. Cellular systems will divide a city into nonoverlapping hexagonal cells that
                        use different frequencies if nearby, reusing a frequency only when cells are far
                        enough apart so that mutual interference is acceptable.
                             At the intersection of three hexagonal cells is a base station with transmitters
                        and antennas that is connected to a switching office that coordinates handoffs when
                        a mobile device leaves one cell and goes into another, as well as accepts and places
                        calls over landlines. Depending on topography, population, and so on, the radius of
                        a typical cell is 2 to 10 miles.

                        The Cell Phone
                        Figure E.15 shows the components of a radio, which is the heart of a cell phone.
                        Radio signals are first received by the antenna, amplified, passed through a mixer,
                        then filtered, demodulated, and finally decoded. The antenna acts as the interface
                        between the medium through which radio waves travel and the electronics of the
                        transmitter or receiver. Antennas can be designed to work best in particular direc-
                        tions, giving both transmission and reception directional properties. Modulation
                        encodes information in the amplitude, phase, or frequency of the signal to increase
                        its robustness under impaired conditions. Radio transmitters go through the same
                        steps, just in the opposite order.
                             Originally, all components were analog, but over time most were replaced by
                        digital components, requiring the radio signal to be converted from analog to dig-
                        ital. The desire for flexibility in the number of radio bands led to software routines
                        replacing some of these functions in programmable chips, such as digital signal
                        processors. Because such processors are typically found in mobile devices, empha-
                        sis is placed on performance per joule to extend battery life, performance per
                        square millimeter of silicon to reduce size and cost, and bytes per task to reduce
                        memory size.
                                   E.7      Case Study: Inside a Cell Phone              ■   E-23

            RF amp            Mixer               Filter           Demodulator          Decoder
Antenna

Figure E.15 A radio receiver consists of an antenna, radio frequency amplifier, mixer,
filters, demodulator, and decoder. A mixer accepts two signal inputs and forms an out-
put signal at the sum and difference frequencies. Filters select a narrower band of fre-
quencies to pass on to the next stage. Modulation encodes information to make it more
robust. Decoding turns signals into information. Depending on the application, all elec-
trical components can be either analog or digital. For example, a car radio is all analog
components, but a PC modem is all digital except for the amplifier. Today analog silicon
chips are used for the RF amplifier and first mixer in cellular phones.

                             RF receiver (Rx)
                                                                           Speaker
                                                             DSP
              Antenna
                            RF transmitter (Tx)                            Microphone

                                                                           Display
                                                            Micro-
                                                           controller
                                                                           Keyboard

Figure E.16 Block diagram of a cell phone. The DSP performs the signal processing
steps of Figure E.15, and the microcontroller controls the user interface, battery manage-
ment, and call setup. (Based on Figure 1.3 of Groe and Larson [2000].)

     Figure E.16 shows the generic block diagram of the electronics of a cell phone
handset, with the DSP performing the signal processing and the microcontroller
handling the rest of the tasks. Cell phone handsets are basically mobile computers
acting as a radio. They include standard I/O devices—keyboard and LCD dis-
play—plus a microphone, speaker, and antenna for wireless networking. Battery
efficiency affects sales, both for standby power when waiting for a call and for
minutes of speaking.
     When a cell phone is turned on, the first task is to find a cell. It scans the full
bandwidth to find the strongest signal, which it keeps doing every seven seconds
or if the signal strength drops, since it is designed to work from moving vehicles.
It then picks an unused radio channel. The local switching office registers the cell
phone and records its phone number and electronic serial number, and assigns it
a voice channel for the phone conversation. To be sure the cell phone got the right
channel, the base station sends a special tone on it, which the cell phone sends back to
acknowledge it. The cell phone times out after 5 seconds if it doesn’t hear the super-
visory tone, and it starts the process all over again. The original base station makes a
handoff request to the incoming base station as the signal strength drops offs.
E-24   ■   Appendix E Embedded Systems

                             To achieve a two-way conversation over radio, frequency bands are set aside
                        for each direction, forming a frequency pair or channel. The original cellular base
                        stations transmitted at 869.04 to 893.97 MHz (called the forward path), and cell
                        phones transmitted at 824.04 to 848.97 MHz (called the reverse path), with the
                        frequency gap to keep them from interfering with each other. Cells might have
                        had between 4 and 80 channels. Channels were divided into setup channels for call
                        setup and voice channels to handle the data or voice traffic.
                             The communication is done digitally, just like a modem, at 9600 bits/sec. Since
                        wireless is a lossy medium, especially from a moving vehicle, the handset sends
                        each message five times. To preserve battery life, the original cell phones typically
                        transmit at two signal strengths—0.6 W and 3.0 W—depending on the distance to
                        the cell. This relatively low power not only allows smaller batteries and thus smal-
                        ler cell phones, but it also aids frequency reuse, which is the key to cellular
                        telephony.
                             Figure E.17 shows a circuit board from a Nokia digital phone, with the com-
                        ponents identified. Note that the board contains two processors. A Z-80 microcon-
                        troller is responsible for controlling the functions of the board, I/O with the
                        keyboard and display, and coordinating with the base station. The DSP handles
                        all signal compression and decompression. In addition there are dedicated chips
                        for analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion, amplifiers, power manage-
                        ment, and RF interfaces.
                             In 2001, a cell phone had about 10 integrated circuits, including parts made in
                        exotic technologies like gallium arsinide and silicon germanium as well as standard
                        CMOS. The economics and desire for flexibility have shrunk this to just a few
                        chips. However, these SOCs still contain a separate microcontroller and DSP, with
                        code implementing many of the functions just described.

                                                                   RF and
                                                                   power
                                                                                Audio D/A
                                                                                 and A/D

                                                                                   Battery

                                                              Memory
                                                     Microprocessor
                                                     and control logic

                        Figure E.17 Circuit board from a Nokia cell phone. (Courtesy HowStuffWorks, Inc.)
                                                   E.8   Concluding Remarks       ■   E-25

      Cell Phone Standards and Evolution
      Improved communication speeds for cell phones were developed with multiple
      standards. Code division multiple access (CDMA), as one popular example, uses
      a wider radio frequency band for a path than the original cell phones, called
      advanced mobile phone service (AMPS), a mostly analog system. The wider fre-
      quency makes it more difficult to block and is called spread spectrum. Other stan-
      dards are time division multiple access (TDMA) and global system for mobile
      communication (GSM). These second-generation standards—CDMA, GSM,
      and TDMA—are mostly digital.
           The big difference for CDMA is that all callers share the same channel, which
      operates at a much higher rate, and it then distinguishes the different calls by
      encoding each one uniquely. Each CDMA phone call starts at 9600 bits/sec; it
      is then encoded and transmitted as equal-sized messages at 1.25 Mbits/sec. Rather
      than send each signal five times as in AMPS, each bit is stretched so that it takes 11
      times the minimum frequency, thereby accommodating interference and yet suc-
      cessful transmission. The base station receives the messages, and it separates them
      into the separate 9600 bit/sec streams for each call.
           To enhance privacy, CDMA uses pseudorandom sequences from a set of 64
      predefined codes. To synchronize the handset and base station so as to pick a com-
      mon pseudorandom seed, CDMA relies on a clock from the Global Positioning
      System, which continuously transmits an accurate time signal. By carefully select-
      ing the codes, the shared traffic sounds like random noise to the listener. Hence, as
      more users share a channel there is more noise, and the signal-to-noise ratio grad-
      ually degrades. Thus, the capacity of the CDMA system is a matter of taste,
      depending upon the sensitivity of the listener to background noise.
           In addition, CDMA uses speech compression and varies the rate of data trans-
      ferred depending upon how much activity is going on in the call. Both these tech-
      niques preserve bandwidth, which allows for more calls per cell. CDMA must
      regulate power carefully so that signals near the cell tower do not overwhelm those
      from far away, with the goal of all signals reaching the tower at about the same
      level. The side benefit is that CDMA handsets emit less power, which both helps
      battery life and increases capacity when users are close to the tower.
           Thus, compared to AMPS, CDMA improves the capacity of a system by up to
      an order of magnitude, has better call quality, has better battery life, and enhances
      users’ privacy. After considerable commercial turmoil, there is a new third-
      generation standard called International Mobile Telephony 2000 (IMT-2000),
      based primarily on two competing versions of CDMA and one TDMA. This stan-
      dard may lead to cell phones that work anywhere in the world.

E.8   Concluding Remarks
      Embedded systems are a very broad category of computing devices. This appendix
      has shown just some aspects of this. For example, the TI 320C55 DSP is a rela-
      tively “RISC-like” processor designed for embedded applications, with very
E-26   ■   Appendix E Embedded Systems

                        fine-tuned capabilities. On the other end of the spectrum, the TI 320C64x is a very
                        high-performance, eight-issue VLIW processor for very demanding tasks. Some
                        processors must operate on battery power alone; others have the luxury of being
                        plugged into line current. Unifying all of these is a need to perform some level of
                        signal processing for embedded applications. Media extensions attempt to merge
                        DSPs with some more general-purpose processing abilities to make these proces-
                        sors usable for signal processing applications. We examined several case studies,
                        including the Sony PlayStation 2, digital cameras, and cell phones. The PS2 per-
                        forms detailed three-dimensional graphics, whereas a cell phone encodes and
                        decodes signals according to elaborate communication standards. But both have
                        system architectures that are very different from general-purpose desktop or server
                        platforms. In general, architectural decisions that seem practical for general-
                        purpose applications, such as multiple levels of caching or out-of-order superscalar
                        execution, are much less desirable in embedded applications. This is due to chip
                        area, cost, power, and real-time constraints. The programming model that these
                        systems present places more demands on both the programmer and the compiler
                        for extracting parallelism.
F.1    Introduction                                                 F-2
F.2    Interconnecting Two Devices                                  F-6
F.3    Connecting More Than Two Devices                            F-20
F.4    Network Topology                                            F-30
F.5    Network Routing, Arbitration, and Switching                 F-44
F.6    Switch Microarchitecture                                    F-56
F.7    Practical Issues for Commercial Interconnection Networks    F-66
F.8    Examples of Interconnection Networks                        F-73
F.9    Internetworking                                             F-85
F.10   Crosscutting Issues for Interconnection Networks            F-89
F.11   Fallacies and Pitfalls                                      F-92
F.12   Concluding Remarks                                         F-100
F.13   Historical Perspective and References                      F-101
       References                                                 F-109
       Exercises                                                  F-111
